
Whitesboro, TX, Texas Code of Ordinances


WHITESBORO, TEXAS
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2017 S-6 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 1088, passed 12-13-16










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  http://www.amlegal.com




ADOPTING ORDINANCE



Ordinance 1040



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF WHITESBORO, TEXAS



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2012 S-5 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Whitesboro, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of this City; and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revisions or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make reference to sections of the Texas code; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Texas;



   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE WHITESBORO CITY COUNCIL:x



Section 1.   That the 2012 S-5 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Whitesboro as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation, and
as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as if set
out in its entirety.



Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of
its adoption and approval by the City Council and the Clerk is hereby
authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the copy of the Code of
Ordinances kept on file in the office of the Clerk.



Section 3.   This ordinance shall become effective on the date of its
passage by the City Council.



PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Whitesboro City Council on April 10, 2012.



________________________________________



W.D. Welch, Mayor



Attest:



_______________________________________



Teresa Niño, City Secretary



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Effective date of ordinances



   10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.18   Section histories; statutory references



   10.19   Altering or tampering with Code



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the municipality of
Whitesboro, Texas, shall be designated as the Code of Whitesboro and may be
so cited.



Statutory reference:



   Authority of municipality to codify ordinances, see Tex. Local Gov't
Code Ch. 53



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpreta-



tion of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   CITY, MUNICIPALITY, or MUNICIPAL CORPORATION.  The municipality of
Whitesboro, Texas.



   CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.



   COUNTY.  Grayson County, Texas.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



   OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN
shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT.  An officer,
office, employee, commission, or department of this municipality unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.



   PERSON.  Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver.  Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



   STATE.  The State of Texas.



   SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



   WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.



   YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:



   (A)   AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written "and/or," if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and
such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of such error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this municipality for the transaction of
all municipal business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   (A)   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication, including but not limited to the following types of ordinances:



      (1)   Any ordinance guaranteeing or promising the payment of
money for the municipality or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the
municipality or any evidence of the municipality's indebtedness;



      (2)   Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for
an annual budget or prescribing salaries for municipal officers and employees;



      (3)   Any ordinance annexing territory to the municipality or
discontinuing territory as a part of the municipality;



      (4)   Any ordinance designating or otherwise relating to
municipal depositories;



      (5)   Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit, or other
right;



      (6)   Any ordinance approving, prescribing, or otherwise
relating to rates to be charged by private utility companies;



      (7)   Any ordinance approving, authorizing, or otherwise
relating to any contract or agreement;



      (8)   Any ordinance accepting, dedicating, vacating, or
otherwise relating to any easement;



      (9)   Any ordinance establishing or amending the zoning
designation of land;



   (B)   All such ordinances mentioned in division (A) are hereby
recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if
set out at length herein.



§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided.  Ordinances not requiring publication shall
take effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF  ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.17  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of such chapter or section.  In addition to
such indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance,
a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.18  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending
ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section.



Example:   (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord.
20, passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute. 



Example:   (Tex. Local Gov't Code § 54.001)  (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80;
Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-85)



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory
reference" following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information.



Example:



      § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



         This municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



      Statutory reference:



         For provisions concerning the inspection of public records,
see Tex. Local Gov't Code §§ 552.001 et seq.



§ 10.19  ALTERING OR TAMPERING WITH CODE.



   It shall be an offense for any unauthorized person to change or amend,
by addition or deletion, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or
delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or to tamper with this code in
any manner whatsoever which will cause a law of the city to be misrepresented
thereby.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the municipality
an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of
this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by:



      (1)   A fine not to exceed $2,000 in all cases arising under
municipal ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning and public health and
sanitation;



      (2)   A fine not to exceed $2,000 if a motor vehicle is used
in illegal dumping or if an offense under this code or city ordinance
involves illegal dumping;



      (3)   A fine not to exceed $500 in all other cases.



   (B)   Each day any violation of this code or of any ordinance shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense.



Statutory reference:



   Enforcement authority and municipal penalties,



     see Tex. Local Gov't Code § 54.001



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   FORM OF GOVERNMENT



      31.   MUNICIPAL PROCEDURES AND POLICIES



      32.   COUNCIL; REGULATORY AUTHORITY; MEETINGS



      33.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS



      34.   MUNICIPAL COURT



      35.   MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS



      36.   FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION



      37.   ANNEXATION AND DISANNEXATION



      38.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



      39.   MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



      40.   RECORDS MANAGEMENT



CHAPTER 30:  FORM OF GOVERNMENT



Section



   30.01   Type A general-law municipality



§ 30.01  TYPE A GENERAL-LAW  MUNICIPALITY.



   The municipality of Whitesboro, Texas, has accepted the provisions of a
Type A general-law municipality.



Statutory reference:



   Adoption of Type A General-Law form of government, see Tex. Local Gov't
Code Ch. 6



CHAPTER 31:  MUNICIPAL PROCEDURES AND POLICIES



Section




Official Newspaper




   31.001   Official newspaper




Municipal Map and Boundary Survey




   31.010   Official Municipal map required




Abandoned, Seized, and Surplus Property




   31.020   Disposition of abandoned, seized, or recovered personal
property



   31.021   Disposition of surplus property



   31.022   Proceeds credited to general fund



   31.023   Worthless property



   31.024   Disposition of controlled substances



   31.025   Abandoned, stolen and recovered firearms and weapons



   31.026   Disposition of seized weapons



   31.027   Deposit of money pending disposition of charges




Equal Opportunity Policy




   31.040   Nondiscrimination policy




Identification of Municipal Vehicles And Equipment




   31.050   Municipal vehicles to be marked




Copying Charges for Public Records




   31.060   Fee for copying authorized




Claims for Damages




   31.070   Municipality not liable for claim for damages




Emergency Actions by Officers of the Municipality




   31.080   Emergency actions authorized; city not liable




Municipal Memberships




   31.090   Membership in Texas Municipal League




Incorporation of State Law




   31.100   Incorporation of Local Government Code




Other City Policies




   31.110   Reward for information regarding offenses against city
property



   31.111   Reward for information regarding arson



OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER



§ 31.001  OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER.



   (A)   As soon as practicable after the beginning of each municipal
year, the Council shall contract, as determined by ordinance or resolution,
with a public newspaper of the municipality to be the municipality's official
newspaper until another newspaper is selected.



   (B)   The Council shall publish in the official newspaper each
ordinance, notice, or other matter required by law or ordinance to be
published.



(Tex. Local Gov't Code § 52.004)



CITY MAP AND BOUNDARY SURVEY



§ 31.010  OFFICIAL MUNICIPAL MAP REQUIRED.



   A map showing the boundaries of the municipality, along with the field
notes of the survey, shall be kept in the office of the Municipal
Secretary.  Whenever any territory is annexed into the municipality, the
municipal map shall be immediately updated to include the newly annexed
territory and copies shall be furnished to the County Clerk's office and to
the Secretary of State at the time such annexation becomes effective.



Statutory reference:



   Map required to be designated and displayed, see Tex. Local Gov't Code
§§ 41.001 et seq.



ABANDONED, SEIZED, AND SURPLUS PROPERTY



§ 31.020  DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED, SEIZED, OR RECOVERED PERSONAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   All abandoned, stolen, or recovered personal property of every
kind which shall remain unclaimed with the municipality for a period of at
least 30 days without being claimed or reclaimed by the owners, whether known
or not, shall be delivered to the Mayor.  This section does not apply to
motor vehicles, outboard motors, watercraft, and other vessels as defined in
Tex. Transp. Code § 683.001; to beer, whisky, or wine; to contraband subject
to forfeiture under Tex. Code Crim. Procedure Ch. 59; to property being held
as evidence in a pending case; or when a magistrate orders destruction of the
property.



   (B)   The Mayor shall give notice to the owner of any abandoned,
stolen, or recovered personal property that remains unclaimed for 30 days. 
If the owner is known, notice shall be given by certified mail to the last
known address of the owner of the property and include a description of the
property, the name and address of the officer holding such property, and a
statement indicating that if the owner does not claim the property within six
months from the date of the notice, the property will be sold and the
proceeds of such sale placed in the municipal treasury.  If the owner is
unknown or the owner's address is unknown, then the Mayor shall publish a
notice of the description of the property, name of the owner, if known, the
name and address of the officer holding such property, and a statement
indicating that if the owner does not claim the property within six months
from the date of the notice, the property will be sold and the proceeds of
such sale placed in the municipal treasury.



   (C)   Before selling any unclaimed personal property, the Mayor
shall post a notice of the sale in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality at least 21 days before the date of the sale.  The notice of
the sale shall describe the property, the name of the owner if known, and
designate the time, date, and place of sale.



   (D)   The Mayor or his or her designee shall conduct the sale or
public auction at which unclaimed personal property is to be sold to the
highest bidder.  An accurate description of each piece of property sold, the
sale price, and the name and address of the bidder shall also be kept.  The
Mayor or his or her designee shall provide a copy of such report to the
Municipal Secretary as soon as possible after the close of sale.  A bill of
sale of the property shall be executed by the municipality to the purchaser.



   (E)   The municipality may consider any bid as insufficient and
decline such bid and re-offer the property for sale.



   (F)   The real owner of any personal property sold shall have the
right to file a claim to the proceeds of such sale with the Council.  If the
claim is allowed by the Council, the owner shall be paid such funds as were
paid into the treasury of the municipality as proceeds of the sale, after
deducting the reasonable expense of keeping such property and the costs of
such sale.  If the claim is denied by the Council or the Council fails to
act upon such claim within 90 days, the claimant may sue the municipality in
a court of competent jurisdiction, and upon sufficient proof of ownership
recover judgment against the municipality for recovery of the proceeds of the
sale.



   (G)   If the provisions of this section have been met and the
property is scheduled for sale, the Police Department may have any property
originally seized by the department converted to department use.  The Police
Department shall return the property to the custody of the Mayor for sale
when the Police Department has completed the intended use of the property.



Statutory reference:



   Unclaimed or abandoned property, see Tex. Code Crim. Procedure, Art.
18.17 - 18.19



§ 31.021  DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS  PROPERTY.



   (A)   Property which is owned by the municipality and is determined
to be surplus property may be sold through public auction.  The Mayor or his
or her designee shall conduct the public auction at which such property is to
be sold to the highest bidder.  An accurate description of each piece of
property sold, the sale price, and the name and address of the bidder shall
also be kept.  The Mayor or his or her designee shall provide a copy of such
report to the Municipal Secretary as soon as possible after the close of
sale.  A bill of sale of the property shall be executed by the municipality
to the purchaser.



   (B)   In lieu of selling surplus property of the municipality, the
Mayor may offer the property in trade for other property as he or she
considers to be in the best interest of the municipality.



§ 31.022  PROCEEDS CREDITED TO GENERAL FUND.



   All funds received on account of the sale of unclaimed, seized,
recovered, or surplus property shall be delivered to the Municipal Secretary
who shall deposit the proceeds of the sale in the general fund of the
municipality, after deducting reasonable expenses of keeping such property
and any costs of the sale.



§ 31.023  WORTHLESS PROPERTY.



   Any property which has been listed and offered for sale under the
provisions of this subchapter and for which no price or sum has been offered,
if deemed in the opinion of the Mayor to be worthless and without value,
shall be disposed of in such manner as the Mayor shall prescribe.  A written
description of all property destroyed or disposed of as worthless or without
value shall be filed with the Municipal Secretary, together with the date and
manner of disposal.



§ 31.024  DISPOSITION OF CONTROLLED  SUBSTANCES.



   All controlled substances, marijuana, drug paraphernalia, and money
seized by the Police Department shall be taken into custody and disposed of
in accordance with Tex. Health & Safety Code §§ 481.159 and 481.160.



§ 31.025  ABANDONED, STOLEN, AND  RECOVERED FIREARMS AND WEAPONS.



   (A)   All abandoned, stolen, or recovered firearms or other weapons
and ammunition that have remained unclaimed or unidentified by the rightful
owner thereof for a period of 60 days and which are not being held as
evidence pending a case filed by record shall be destroyed by a police
officer in the presence of the Mayor or Police Chief.  Before any such
firearms or weapons shall be destroyed, any case numbers, make, model, type,
and serial numbers, if available, shall be prepared and kept on record along
with the scheduled time, date, place, and manner of destruction.



   (B)   Any handguns, rifles, or shotguns that have been classified as
antiques or collector's items as may be determined by the Police Chief or by
a firearms expert selected by the Police Chief can be sold in the public
interest in accordance with § 31.020 to any person holding a federal
firearms license, provided that their sale is not restricted by law.



   (C)   Any weapon or ammunition that the Police Chief has determined
to be serviceable or usable may be kept for use by the Police Department.



§ 31.026  DISPOSITION OF SEIZED WEAPONS.



   (A)   Weapons seized in connection with an offense involving the use
of a weapon or an offense committed under Tex. Penal Code Ch. 46 shall be
kept by the Police Department, subject to the following provisions, unless:



      (1)   The weapon is a prohibited weapon identified in Tex.
Penal Code Ch. 46; or



      (2)   The weapon is alleged to be stolen property.



   (B)   When a weapon described in division (A) is seized, and the
seizure is not made pursuant to a search or arrest warrant, the person
seizing the weapon shall prepare and deliver to a magistrate a written
inventory of each weapon seized.



   (C)   If there is no prosecution or conviction for an offense
involving the seized weapon, the magistrate to whom the seizure was reported
shall notify in writing the person found in possession that he is entitled to
the weapon upon request to the court in which he was convicted.  If the
weapon is not requested within 60 days after notification, the magistrate
shall order the weapon destroyed or forfeited to the state for use by the
Police Department.



   (D)   A person convicted under Tex. Penal Code Ch. 46 is entitled to
the seized weapon upon request to the police department.  However, the court
entering the judgment of conviction shall order the weapon destroyed or
forfeited to the state for use by the Police Department if:



      (1)   The person does not request the weapon within 60 days
after the date of the judgment of conviction;



      (2)   The person has been previously convicted under Tex.
Penal Code Ch. 46; or



      (3)   The weapon is defined as a prohibited weapon under Tex.
Penal Code Ch. 46.



   (E)   If the person found in possession of a weapon is convicted of
an offense involving the use of the weapon, the court entering judgment of
conviction shall order destruction of the weapon or forfeiture to the state
for use by the Police Department.



31.027  DEPOSIT OF MONEY PENDING  DISPOSITION OF CHARGES.



   If money is seized by the Police Department in connection with a
violation of Tex. Penal Code Ch. 47, the municipality may deposit the money
in an interest-bearing bank account until a final judgment is rendered
concerning the violation.  If a final judgment is rendered concerning the
alleged violation, the money shall be distributed according to the terms of
Tex. Code Crim. Procedure Ch. 18.



Cross-reference:



   Abandoned motor vehicles and other property, see §§ 95.30 — 95.34



   Procedures on forfeitures and payments relating to criminal
investigatory matters, see § 36.032



EQUAL OPPORTUNITY POLICY



§ 31.040  NONDISCRIMINATION POLICY.



   It is the policy of the municipality or any employee or officer of the
municipality not to discriminate on the basis of race, color, national
origin, sex, religion, age, or handicap status in employment, contracting, or
the provision of services.  Discrimination against any person in the
recruitment, examination, appointment, training, promotion, discipline, or
any other aspect of personnel administration; contracting for construction,
rehabilitation, alteration, conversion, extension, demolition or repair of
municipal facilities; and the provision of municipal services shall be
prohibited unless such discrimination constitutes a bona fide occupational
qualification.  A nondiscriminatory clause shall be provided in all
solicitations or advertisements whenever practicable or feasible.



Statutory reference:



   Discrimination prohibited regarding licenses, permits, 
certificates,  and participation or use of public  programs and
facilities,  see Tex. Civ. Practice & Remedies Code Ch. 106



IDENTIFICATION OF MUNICIPAL VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT



§ 31.050  MUNICIPAL VEHICLES TO BE  MARKED.



   The Mayor shall have printed upon each side of every municipal-owned
motor vehicle (except undercover law enforcement vehicles) and piece of heavy
equipment the name of the municipality in letters that are plainly legible at
a distance of not less than 100 feet.  A decal may be used in lieu of
printing.



Statutory reference:



   Identification of municipal-owned vehicles and heavy equipment, see
Tex. Transp. Code §§ 721.004 - 721.006



COPYING CHARGES FOR PUBLIC RECORDS



§ 31.060  FEE FOR COPYING AUTHORIZED.



   A service fee for copying public records shall be as prescribed in §
1.00 of the Fee Schedule, set forth as Appendix 1 of this code.



CLAIMS FOR DAMAGES



§ 31.070  MUNICIPALITY NOT LIABLE FOR  CLAIM FOR DAMAGES.



   (A)   The municipality shall never be liable for any claim for
property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal injury results
in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his or
her behalf, or in the event the injury results in death, the person or
persons who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death
or injury, shall, within 60 days or within six months for good cause shown
from the date the damage or injury was received, give notice in writing to
the Mayor and Council.



   (B)   Such notice shall consist of the following facts:



      (1)   The date and time when the injury occurred and the place
where the injured person or property was at the time when the injury was
received;



      (2)   The nature of the damage of injury sustained;



      (3)   The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained;



      (4)   A specific and detailed statement of how and under what
circumstances the damage or injury occurred;



      (5)   The amount for which each claimant will settle;



      (6)   The actual place of residence of each claimant by
street, number, municipality, and state on the date the claim is presented;



      (7)   In the case of personal injury or death, the names and
addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of
the claimant witnessed the happening of the injury or any part thereof and
the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is
committed;



      (8)   In the case of property damage, the location of the
damaged property at the time the claim was submitted along with the names and
addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage or any
part thereof.



Cross-reference:



   Emergency actions of municipal officers and employees, see § 31.080



   Liability for damages and injuries, see § 38.08



Statutory reference:



   Immunity of certain governmental functions, see Tex. Civ. Practice &
Remedies Code § 101.055



   Limitation on amount of liability, see Tex. Civ. Practice & Remedies
Code § 101.023



   Tort claim payments, see Tex. Civ. Practice & Remedies Code Ch. 102



   Volunteer firefighters, see Tex. Civ. Practice & Remedies Code § 78.001



EMERGENCY ACTIONS BY OFFICERS, AGENTS,
OR EMPLOYEES OF THE MUNICIPALITY



§ 31.080  EMERGENCY ACTIONS  AUTHORIZED.



   While responding to emergency situations, every officer, agent, or
employee of the municipality is authorized to act in such a manner as to most
effectively deal with the emergency.  This provision shall prevail over
every other ordinance of the municipality and, to the extent to which the
municipality has the authority to so authorize, over any other law
establishing a standard of care in conflict with this section.  Neither the
municipality nor the employee shall be liable for any failure to use ordinary
care in such emergency.



Cross-reference:



   Claims for damages, see § 31.070



   Liability for damages and injuries, see § 38.08



Statutory reference:



   Immunity of certain governmental functions, see Tex. Civ. Practice &
Remedies Code § 101.055



   Volunteer firefighters, see Tex. Civ. Practice & Remedies Code § 78.001



MUNICIPAL MEMBERSHIPS



§ 31.090  MEMBERSHIP IN TEXAS MUNICIPAL LEAGUE.



   The municipality shall be a member of the Texas Municipal League for
the purpose of better representation, information, advice, and other such
services which may be provided.  The Municipal Secretary is hereby
authorized to pay the annual dues required for membership in the Texas
Municipal League.



INCORPORATION OF STATE LAW



§ 31.100  INCORPORATION OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE.



   The provisions of Tex. Local Government Code, insofar as its provisions
are applicable to this municipality, are hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference as if fully set forth herein.



OTHER CITY POLICIES



§ 31.110  REWARD FOR INFORMATION REGARDING OFFENSES AGAINST CITY PROPERTY.



   (A)   The city hereby offers a reward of up to $500 for information
that results in the arrest and conviction of any person or group of persons
found guilty of committing the theft or criminal damage to property owned or
in the care and custody of the city when committed within the corporate
limits of the city.  This reward is a standing offer and shall be paid out
of the general fund of the city.



   (B)   Application for a reward under this section shall be made to
the Chief of Police, who will determine the validity of the claim and report
his or her findings to the City Administrator.



(Ord. 695, passed 6-21-88; Am. Ord. 890, passed 4-8-03)



§ 31.111 REWARD FOR INFORMATION  REGARDING ARSON.



   The city hereby offers a reward of up to $500 for information that
results in the arrest and conviction of any person or group of persons found
guilty of the crime of arson to property owned or in the care and custody of
the city.  This reward is a standing offer and shall be paid out of the
general fund of the city.



(Ord. 414, passed - -64; Am. Ord. 890, passed 4-8-03)



CHAPTER 32:  COUNCIL; REGULATORY AUTHORITY; MEETINGS



Section




Ordinances and Regulations




   32.01   Regulatory authority



   32.02   Style of ordinances and resolutions



   32.03   Introduction and action on ordinances



   32.04   Recording ordinances and resolutions



   32.05   Publication of ordinances



   32.06   Veto power of Mayor



   32.07   Approval of legal documents




Conduct of Meetings




   32.20   Procedures controlled by Robert's Rules



   32.21   Meetings to be recorded



   32.22   Addressing the Council



ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS



§ 32.01  REGULATORY AUTHORITY.



   The Council shall have the power to pass, publish, amend, repeal, and
enforce all ordinances, rules, and police regulations not contrary to the
Constitution and statutes of this state for the good government, peace, and
order of the municipality and the trade and commerce thereof that may be
necessary or proper to carry into effect the powers vested to local
governments.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to adopt ordinances, see Tex. Local Gov't Code Ch. 51 and 52



§ 32.02  STYLE OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.



   (A)   The style of all ordinances shall be as follows:  “BE IT
ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF WHITESBORO, TEXAS.”



   (B)   The style of all resolutions shall be as follows:  “BE IT
RESOLVED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF WHITESBORO, TEXAS.”



§ 32.03  INTRODUCTION AND ACTION ON ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances and resolutions shall be in writing and shall be
introduced by a member of the Council at an open meeting of the Council.  It
shall only be necessary to provide a brief explanation and read the caption
of the ordinance or resolution unless a motion is made by any council member
to read the entire ordinance or resolution.  An ordinance must be adopted by
a majority vote, unless otherwise required by other provisions of this code
or state law.



§ 32.04  RECORDING ORDINANCES AND  RESOLUTIONS.



   Upon passage, all ordinances and resolutions shall be approved by the
Mayor, numbered, attested by the Municipal Secretary, and shall be recorded
by the Municipal Secretary in a book of ordinances or in the minutes for
resolutions, except under conditions pertaining in § 32.06.



§ 32.05  PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES.



   Every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, or forfeiture shall after
passage thereof be published in the official newspaper for a consecutive
two-day period or one issue if the official newspaper is a weekly paper, and
such ordinances shall take effect and be in force from and after the
publication thereof, unless otherwise provided.  Ordinances not required to
be published shall take effect from their passage, unless otherwise
specified.  In lieu of publication of the entire ordinance, the Council may
provide for the publication of a descriptive caption or title, stating in
summary the purpose of the ordinance and penalty for violation thereof.



Statutory reference:



   Publication of ordinances, see Tex. Local Gov't Code § 52.011



§ 32.06  VETO POWER OF MAYOR.



   (A)   Every ordinance or resolution passed by the Council must be
filed with the Municipal Secretary.  The Mayor may either sign or refuse to
sign the ordinance or resolution.



   (B)   If the Mayor does not sign the ordinance or resolution, his or
her objections must be set forth in writing and submitted to the Municipal
Secretary within three days of the time the ordinance or resolution was
filed.  If the Mayor's statement of objections is not filed within three
days, the ordinance or resolution goes into effect without his or her
signature.



   (C)   If the Mayor timely files a statement of objections to the
ordinance or resolution, the Council shall reconsider the vote by which the
ordinance or resolution was adopted.  If a majority of the total number of
council members approves the ordinance or resolution on reconsideration, with
the vote of each council member entered in the minutes of the meeting at
which the vote was taken, the ordinance or resolution shall take effect.



§ 32.07  APPROVAL OF LEGAL DOCUMENTS.



   The Mayor shall sign, the Municipal Secretary shall attest to, and the
Municipal Attorney shall approve as to form all legal instruments requiring
the assent of the municipality, unless otherwise provided for by law or
otherwise stipulated in this code.



Statutory reference:



   Authority of Mayor to veto acts of Council, see Tex. Local Gov't Code
§ 52.003



CONDUCT OF MEETINGS



§ 32.20  PROCEDURES CONTROLLED BY  ROBERT'S RULES.



   Robert's Rules of Order shall control all questions on parliamentary
procedure for Council meetings and meetings of all municipal commissions and
committees.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to determine rules of its proceedings, see Tex. Local Gov't
Code § 22.038(c)



§ 32.21  MEETINGS TO BE RECORDED.



   The Council shall tape record all meetings and keep copies of said
tapes at the Municipal Hall in accordance with provisions of Texas Public
Information Act.  City commissions and committees shall either tape record
or keep written minutes of all meetings and keep copies of such minutes or
tapes in accordance with provisions of the Texas Public Information Act.



Statutory reference:



   Texas Public Information Act, see Tex. Gov't Code §§ 552.001 et seq.



§ 32.22  ADDRESSING THE COUNCIL.



   (A)   The Council shall allot as much as 30 minutes at regular
meetings to hear persons who desire to make comments to the Council.  This
time may be extended at the discretion of the Council.



      (1)   Any person desiring to participate in this portion of
the meeting shall at the beginning of the meeting indicate in writing a
desire to speak and indicate in full the topic on which they desire to
speak.  The person shall limit his or her comments to the topic indicated.



      (2)   No person shall exceed five minutes in his or her
presentation to the Council, unless granted additional time by the presiding
officer.



      (3)   Delegations of more than five persons shall appoint one
person to present their views to the Council.  If the delegation fails to
appoint a spokesperson for the group, the presiding officer shall appoint a
spokesperson for the group.



   (B)   All persons addressing the Council shall do so from the podium
designated by the Council.



   (C)   Public participation is limited to the designated open forum
of a meeting.  At all other times during the Council meeting, the members of
the audience shall not enter into discussion or debate on matters being
considered by the Council, unless recognized by the presiding officer.



   (D)   Specific, factual information or recitation of existing policy
may be furnished in response to inquiries, but the Council shall not
deliberate, discuss, or make any decision on any subject not on the agenda.



CHAPTER 33:  DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS



Section




General Provisions




   33.01   Creation of departments, commissions and committees



   33.02   Preservation Board



   33.03   Library Board



   33.04   Industrial Development Corporation



   33.05   Economic Development Corporation




Police Department




   33.10   Police Department created



   33.11   Oath of office



   33.12   Qualifications



   33.13   Duties generally



   33.14   Uniforms, badges, and armament



   33.15   Police Department policies manual adopted




Police Reserve Force




   33.20   Special police reserve force established



   33.21   Appointment and service of reserve officers



   33.22   Maximum number of reserve officers



   33.23   Authority to carry weapon



   33.24   Compensation; uniforms; and other fringe benefits



   33.25   Qualifications and minimum standards for reserve officers



   33.26   Duties



   33.27   Impersonation



   33.28   Annual report



   33.29   Mayor's powers to summon special police force not affected




Mutual Law Enforcement Aid




   33.40   State mutual aid law adopted



   33.41   Mayor may commission police to other municipalities



   33.42   Municipality to participate in mutual aid law enforcement
task force



   33.43   Police officers commissioned as peace officers of recipient
municipality



Cross-reference:



   Parks and Recreation Department; Parks and Recreation Board, see §
96.20 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 33.01  CREATION OF DEPARTMENTS,  COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES.



   The Council may by ordinance create such departments, commissions and
committees as it determines to be in the best interest of the municipality
and its inhabitants.



§ 33.02  PRESERVATION BOARD.



   (A)   Creation of Board.  There is hereby created the Whitesboro
Preservation Board which shall function according to the laws of the state,
the charter of the city and the provisions of this section.



   (B)   Purpose of Board.  The purpose of the Whitesboro Preservation
Board shall be to:



      (1)   Promote community pride and combat community
deterioration;



      (2)   Preserve, rehabilitate, maintain, manage and promote the
use of buildings of historic and/or architectural significance;



      (3)   Educate the public to the cultural, historic and
economic benefits to the community for the protection and perpetuation of
buildings which reflect elements of the area's cultural, social, economic,
and architectural history; and



      (4)   Advise the city as to the most advantageous use of and
best operation of the property received by the city from the estate of Mona
Sullivan and to make recommendations to the City Council as to the
administration of the Sullivan property, including formulating such rules as
it may deem necessary for the orderly use of the Sullivan property.



   (C)   Appointment of Board members.



      (1)   The Board shall consist of 13 members appointed by the
City Council with one appointee, in so far as possible, from each of the
following seven civic organizations which have expressed interest in the
Board:  Contemporary Woman's Club; History Club; Kiwanis Club of Whitesboro;
Lion's Club of Whitesboro; Modern Arts Club; Peo Chapter A; Rotary Club of
Whitesboro.  If these organizations are unavailable to furnish a
representative to the Board, the City Council may designate a representative
from a similar interested civic organization.



      (2)   There shall be six members who shall consist of: an
appointed representative of the city other than the City Administrator; a
representative of the Whitesboro Area Chamber of Commerce; the City
Administrator; and three at-large members.



   (D)   Terms of Board members.  The terms of the Board members shall
be for three years, with such terms  to be staggered as to one, two, or
three year appointments initially, determined by drawing.



   (E)   Selection of officers.  After initial appointments of the
Board, and thereafter, at least annually, the Board shall select one of its
members to serve as President for a term of one year.  The members shall
also select a Vice-President to serve during the absence of the President, as
well as a Secretary to keep records and correspondence.



   (F)   Authority of Board to seek donations.  The Board shall have
authority to seek gifts, donations and grants to the city for the purpose of
acquiring, restoring, maintaining and operating such buildings or other
properties as the Board may identify as of historic, economic, cultural or
social importance to the city.  Any such funds or services actually received
by the city shall be designated as restricted funds to be used only for the
purposes provided in this section.



   (G)   Meetings and rules of procedure of Board.  The Preservation
Board shall meet at least quarterly, or more often as necessary, in order to
satisfy the purposes of this section.  The President shall preside at all
regular and other meetings of the Board, and in the absence of the President,
the Vice-President shall preside.  The Board shall adopt such rules of
procedure as are consistent with the orderly conduct of business.



   (H)   Quorum.  A quorum of the Preservation Board shall be a
majority of the appointed membership.



   (I)   Limitations.  The Whitesboro Preservation Board shall have no
power to obligate the city except upon recommendation to and approval by the
City Council.



(Ord. 779, passed 6-11-96)



§ 33.03  LIBRARY BOARD.



   (A)   Creation of the Board.  There is hereby created the
Whitesboro Library Board, hereafter called the Board, consisting of five
members.  The members thereof shall be appointed by the City Council.



   (B)   Terms of appointment.  The Whitesboro Library Board shall
consist of five members to be appointed by the City Council for the term of
two years; provided, that of the first five appointments made under this
section, three shall be appointed for two years and two shall be appointed
for one year.  Thereafter, members shall be appointed for two year terms.



   (C)   Chairman of the Board.  The Chairman of the Board shall be
elected by a majority of the members of the Board.  The first Chairman shall
be elected at the beginning of the first meeting held after the members are
appointed and each successive Chairman shall be elected at the first meeting
held after new appointments to the board are made after each council election
in may.



   (D)   Library director to act as Secretary.  The Library Director
or his or her representative shall act as Secretary of the Board and shall
attend and keep the minutes of all meetings except those meetings where
another representative shall be designated by the Library Board.  He or she
shall act only in an advisory capacity and shall participate in its
discussions but shall have no right to vote.



   (E)   Meetings.  The Board shall meet at regular intervals with
advance notice posted in accordance with the Texas Open Meeting Law, as
amended (Tex. Gov't Code §§ 551.001 et seq.).  Additionally, meetings may
be called upon request of the Chairman, or upon written request of three
members, or upon notice from the Library Director that a matter requires the
consideration of the Board.



   (F)   Quorum.  Four members shall constitute a quorum, and action
taken at a meeting shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the
members in attendance.



   (G)   Powers and duties.  The Library Board shall have the
following powers and perform the following duties:



      (1)   It shall follow the rules and regulations prescribed by
the City Council for the conduct of its business.



      (2)   It shall act only in an advisory capacity to the Library
Director in all manners pertaining to the library.



      (3)   It shall encourage the development of adequate library
facilities for the residents of the city.



      (4)   It may solicit for the city gifts, revenues, bequests,
or endowments of money or property as donations or grants from persons,
firms, or corporations.  All gifts, revenues, bequests, or endowments of
money or property as donations or grants from persons, firms, or corporations
are subject to the approval and acceptance by the City Council.



   (H)   Penalty for noncompliance with library rules.



      (1)   Any person who shall willfully cut, mutilate, mark,
tear, write upon, deface, or otherwise destroy or injure in whole or in part,
any book, pamphlet, periodical, map, document, picture, or any  written,
engraved, or printed paper belonging to the public library or shall suffer
such injury to be inflicted while such property is in custody shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided
in § 10.99.



      (2)   Any person who shall take from the public library any
book, pamphlet, periodical, paper, or other property, except in accordance
with the rules of the library, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in § 10.99.



      (3)   A person commits an offense if he or she intentionally
or knowingly fails to return library materials to the public library which
were loaned to the actor's name.  The actor's intent and knowledge shall be
presumed if:



         (a)   Pursuant to agreement, the library materials were
to be returned on a date specified;



         (b)   Actual notice is given or notice in writing is
sent by depositing in the United States mail stating that the library
materials were not returned on the date specified, such notice when mailed is
to be sent to the address shown on the records of the library;



         (c)   The library material is not returned to the owner
within ten days of receipt of such notice;



         (d)   If notice is sent by mail in accordance with
division (H)(3)(b), it is presumed that the notice was received no later than
five days after it was sent;



         (e)   In prosecution under this subsection, it is no
defense that the actor, through the actual borrower, no longer possesses the
library materials.



(Ord. 757, passed 12-13-94)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 33.04  INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION.



   (A)   An economic development corporation shall be created as a
non-profit corporation authorized by the State of Texas for the purpose of
administering the sales and use tax revenues collected for economic
development of the city under Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Art. 5190.6 § 4A.



   (B)   The directors of the non-profit corporation shall be five in
number and shall serve at the pleasure of the governing body.  Three of the
initial members shall be appointed for two year terms and two of the members
shall be appointed for three year terms.  After the initial terms, directors
shall serve for three year terms.  The Board of Directors shall conduct its
meetings within the boundaries of the city.



   (C)   The directors shall be appointed by the City Council and after
such appointment, are authorized to file the proposed articles of
incorporation with the State of Texas which articles are hereby approved, and
to propose to the governing body of the city by- laws for the corporation's
organization.



   (D)   The non-profit corporation created under this section shall
have such authority as provided under Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Art. 5190.6 § 4A
and the Non-Profit Corporation Statutes of the State of Texas, as now
existing or as may be amended.



   (E)   An ex officio member of the Board of Directors, serving in an
advisory capacity, shall be the City Administrator.



(Ord. 815, passed 6-9-98)



§ 33.05  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION.



   (A)   An ecomonic development corporation shall be created as a
non-profit corporation authorized by the State of Texas for the purpose of
administering the sales and use tax revenues collected under Tex. Rev. Civ.
Stat. Art. 5190.6 § 4B, as amended, for economic development of the city.



   (B)   The directors of the non-profit corporation shall be seven in
number, all of whom shall be residents of the city and shall serve at the
pleasure of the governing body.  No more than four of the directors may be
elected city officials or city employees.  Three of the initial members
shall be appointed for one year terms and four of the members shall be
appointed for two year terms.  After the initial terms, directors shall
serve for two year terms.  The Board of Directors shall conduct its meetings
within the boundaries of the city.



   (C)   The directors shall be appointed by the City Council and after
such appointment, are authorized to file the proposed articles of
incorporation with the State of Texas, which articles are hereby approved,
and to propose to the governing body of the city by- laws for the
corporation's organization.



   (D)   The non-profit corporation created under  this section shall
have such authority as provided under Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Art. 5190.6 § 4B,
and the Non-Profit Corporation Statutes of the State of Texas, as now
existing or as may be amended.



   (E)   An ex officio member of the Board of Directors, serving in an
advisory capacity, shall be the City Administrator.



(Ord. 816, passed 6-9-98)



POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 33.10  POLICE DEPARTMENT CREATED.



   (A)   There is hereby created and established a Police Department in
the municipality which shall consist of a Chief of Police and such police
officers as the Council may from time to time deem necessary and proper.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall be the commander and administrative
head of the Police Department.



Cross-reference:



   Chief of Police as officer of city, see § 39.070



Statutory reference:



   Authority to establish and regulate a police force, see Tex. Local
Gov't Code § 341.001



§ 33.11  OATH OF OFFICE.



   All police officers appointed to the Police Department shall take and
subscribe to the official oath prescribed by the Texas Constitution.



§ 33.12  QUALIFICATIONS.



   All police officers shall meet the minimum standards for licensing as a
peace officer as established by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement
Officer Standards and Education and have a current and valid peace officer
license at the time of appointment.  All police officers shall retain such
license during their employment as a police officer with the municipality and
will be subject to discharge if such license is suspended, revoked, or
becomes invalid for any reason.  In addition, all police officers must have
a valid Texas vehicle operator's license and must be insurable as a vehicle
driver by the municipality's automobile insurance carrier.



§ 33.13  DUTIES GENERALLY.



   All police officers and other members of the Police Department shall be
and are hereby invested with all the power and authority given to them as
peace officers under the laws of the state in enforcing the criminal and
traffic laws of the state and the ordinances of this municipality within the
jurisdictional limits of the municipality.  It shall also be the general
duty of all police officers to quell riots, disorders and disturbances of the
peace and to take into custody all persons so offending against the public
peace.  Such officers shall further use their best endeavors to prevent the
commission within the municipality of offenses against the laws of the state
and of the ordinances of the municipality; to observe and enforce all such
laws and ordinances; to detect and arrest offenders against the same; to
preserve the good order of the municipality and to secure the inhabitants
thereof from violence, and the property therein from injury.  Such officers
shall have no power or authority in civil matters, but shall execute any
criminal warrant or warrant of arrest which may be placed in their hands by
the duly constituted authorities of the city.  In addition, all police
officers shall execute all writs and processes issued from the municipal
court of the municipality.



§ 33.14  UNIFORMS, BADGES, AND  ARMAMENT.



   The Chief of Police shall prescribe the uniforms and badges for the
members of the Police Department, and direct the manner in which the members
of the force shall be armed.



§ 33.15  POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICIES  MANUAL ADOPTED.



   The Police Department Manual, as amended, containing the general
policies, procedures, and rules for operation of the Police Department of the
municipality is hereby adopted as the official departmental policy manual of
the police department.



Cross-reference:



   Procedures on forfeitures and payments relating to criminal
investigatory matters, see § 36.032



POLICE RESERVE FORCE



§ 33.20  SPECIAL POLICE RESERVE FORCE  ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established a Police Reserve Force for the municipality.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to establish police reserve force, see  Tex. Local Gov't
Code § 341.012



§ 33.21  APPOINTMENT, REMOVAL, AND  COMMAND OF RESERVE OFFICERS.



   Members of the Police Reserve Force shall be appointed and relieved at
the discretion of the Chief of Police, who shall exercise supervision over
training and utilization of the reserve force membership.  An appointment to
the reserve force must be approved by the Council before the appointed person
may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer.  Members shall be
called into active service at any time the Chief of Police considers it
necessary to have additional officers to preserve the peace and enforce the
law.



§ 33.22  MAXIMUM NUMBER OF RESERVE  OFFICERS.



   The Police Reserve Force shall not exceed in number the total number of
regular police officers, and shall be as determined necessary by the Chief of
Police and as approved by the Mayor.



§ 33.23  AUTHORITY TO CARRY WEAPON.



   Members of the Police Reserve Force may carry a weapon only when
authorized to do so by the Chief of Police and only when discharging official
duties as a police officer.



Cross-reference:



   Council approval as peace officers and to carry weapon required, see §
33.21



§ 33.24  COMPENSATION; UNIFORMS; AND OTHER FRINGE BENEFITS.



   Members of the Police Reserve Force may serve without compensation. 
The municipality may provide hospital and medical assistance to members of
the police reserve force who sustain injury in the course of performing
official duties, in the same manner as provided by the municipality for its
full time police officers, and reserve officers shall be eligible for death
benefits as set out in Tex. Gov't Code §§ 615.001 et seq., except that
nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize or permit a member of
the Police Reserve Force to become eligible for participation in any pension
fund, created pursuant to the state statute, to which regular officers may
become a member by payroll deductions or otherwise.



§ 33.25  QUALIFICATIONS AND MINIMUM  STANDARDS FOR RESERVE OFFICERS.



   Reserve police officers must comply with the minimum training standards
established by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officers Standards and
Education for all reserve law enforcement officers which must be fulfilled
before a person is appointed as a reserve law enforcement officer and may
carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer.  The Chief of Police
shall establish qualifications and standards of training for members of the
Police Reserve Force and shall establish rules and regulations governing
reserve police officers but in no case shall the standards be less than that
established by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officer Standards and
Education.



§ 33.26  DUTIES.



   (A)   Reserve police officers may act only in a supplementary
capacity to the regular police force and may not assume the full-time duties
of regular police officers without complying with the requirements for
regular police officers.



   (B)   The Police Chief may establish rules and regulations to fix
the specific duties of its members and to provide for the maintenance of
discipline.  The Police Chief may change such orders from time to time, and
may command members of the Reserve Police Force to obey the instructions of
regular police officers in carrying out their duties.



   (C)   Members of the Reserve Police Force serve as peace officers
during the actual discharge of official duties.



§ 33.27  IMPERSONATION.



   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to wear, carry, or display a
Reserve Police Force identification card or otherwise represent himself or
herself to be connected with the Reserve Police Force unless he or she is in
fact a member thereof in good standing.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 33.28  ANNUAL REPORT.



   The Police Chief will prepare a report on the status of the Reserve
Police Force, to be submitted to the Council with his or her annual budget
request.



§ 33.29  MAYOR'S POWERS TO SUMMON  SPECIAL POLICE FORCE NOT AFFECTED.



   This chapter does not limit the power of the Mayor to summon into
service a Special Police Force as provided by Tex. Local Gov't Code §
341.011.



MUTUAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AID



§ 33.40  STATE MUTUAL AID LAW ADOPTED.



   The municipality hereby adopts Tex. Local Gov't Code Ch. 362.



§ 33.41  MAYOR MAY COMMISSION POLICE  TO OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.



   The municipality, acting by and through its Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem, or
in their absence or inability to act the Chief of Police, may send or direct
any of its regularly employed law enforcement officers to assist any other
county or municipality when a request is received for assistance from the
Mayor or other officer authorized to declare a state of civil emergency in
such other municipality or county, representing that there exists in such
other county or municipality a need for additional law enforcement officers
to protect health, life and property of such other county or municipality or
its inhabitants and the visitors thereof, by reason of riot, unlawful
assembly characterized by the use of force and violence, or threat by three
or more persons acting together or without lawful authority, or during the
time of natural or human-made calamity.



§ 33.42  MUNICIPALITY TO PARTICIPATE IN  MUTUAL AID LAW ENFORCEMENT TASK 
FORCE.



   The municipality hereby provides that the Police Department shall be
and is hereby designated as a participating member and agency of a mutual aid
law enforcement task force to cooperate in accordance with Tex. Local Gov't
Code § 362.002 with the County Sheriff's Department.  Members of the Police
Department shall have only such additional investigative authority in the
corporate limits of such member cities and the county as shall be from time
to time prescribed by the Mayor or Chief of Police of such cities and the
County Judge or Sheriff.



§ 33.43  POLICE OFFICERS COMMISSIONED AS PEACE OFFICERS OF RECIPIENT
MUNICIPALITY.



   Law enforcement officers sent to another municipality or county shall
be in all things subject to the provisions of Tex. Local Gov't Code Ch. 362,
and such officers shall be and become peace officers of such other county or
municipality under the command of the law enforcement officer who is in
charge in that municipality or county and shall be vested with all the powers
of a regular law enforcement officer in such other county or municipality to
which sent.  Such law enforcement officers of the municipality shall be
entitled to the same wage, salary, pension, and all other compensations while
performing police duties outside of the territorial limits of the
municipality as though the same services were being rendered in the
municipality, and the municipality shall pay to such officers such wages,
salary, pension, and other benefits, together with medical, travel, food,
lodging, and other expenses incurred on account of performing services
outside of the territorial limits of the municipality.  The municipality
shall be reimbursed by the other county or municipality requesting the
services from which such payments and expenses arose, as is provided by Tex.
Local Gov't Code Ch. 362.



Statutory reference:



   Mutual aid law enforcement agreements, see Tex. Local Gov't Code Ch. 362



CHAPTER 34:  MUNICIPAL COURT



Section




Municipal Court




   34.01   Municipal court created



   34.02   Practices and procedures



   34.03   Warrant of arrest fee



   34.04   Dismissal fee




Municipal Judge




   34.20   Office of municipal judge created; appointment;
compensation; oath



   34.21   Vacancy



   34.22   Alternate judge



   34.23   Term of office



   34.24   Removal of judge



   34.25   Mayor as ex officio judge



   34.26   Qualifications




Court Clerk




   34.40   Office of court clerk created; appointment; compensation,
oath



   34.41   Duties of court clerk




Juries




   34.50   Jury duty pay



MUNICIPAL COURT



§ 34.01  MUNICIPAL COURT CREATED.



   There is hereby created a court in and for the municipality which shall
be known as the Municipal Court of the municipality.  This court shall have
exclusive original jurisdiction within the municipality with power to hear
and determine all cases of alleged violations of the ordinances of the
municipality and all other cases over which municipal courts are given
jurisdiction by state law as provided for in Tex. Gov't Code § 29.003.



§ 34.02  PRACTICES AND PROCEDURES.



   The rules prescribed by state law governing trials in the state justice
of the peace courts shall govern the procedures and practices of the
municipal court.  The Council may prescribe such additional rules of
practice and procedure as are not inconsistent with state law.



Statutory reference:



   Municipal courts created and jurisdiction, see Tex. Gov't Code §§
29.002 and 29.003



§ 34.03  WARRANT OF ARREST FEES.



   If any person fails to appear before the court, either in compliance
with a personal bond or as directed by notice from the municipal court
clerk's office, a warrant for his or her arrest shall be issued and a special
expense of $25 shall be charged for the issuance of such warrant, which sum
shall be deposited in the general fund.  The fee shall not be refundable
except on the finding by the court that notice was not properly given.



§ 34.04  DISMISSAL FEE.



   The municipal court shall collect a special expense of $10 from each
defendant as a condition of dismissal of any case against the defendant
because of actions by or on behalf of the defendant subsequent to the date of
the alleged offense, such as the completion by the defendant of a safety
driving course.  Such sum shall be paid into the general funds of the
municipality.



MUNICIPAL JUDGE



§ 34.20  OFFICE OF MUNICIPAL JUDGE CREATED; APPOINTMENT; COMPENSATION; OATH.



   (A)   There is hereby created the office of judge of the municipal
court who shall have all the powers and authority as granted by state law and
the ordinances of this municipality and shall perform all the duties as
prescribed by the laws of the state and the ordinances of this municipality.



   (B)   The office of municipal judge shall be filled by appointment
by the Council.



   (C)   Compensation for the office of municipal judge shall be set
from time to time by the Council.



   (D)   Prior to taking office, the judge of the municipal court shall
take the oath of office required by the Texas Constitution and laws of the
state.



§ 34.21  VACANCY.



   In the event of a vacancy in the office of municipal judge, the Council
may appoint any qualified person temporarily or until the end of the existing
term.



§ 34.22  ALTERNATE JUDGE.



   The Council shall from time to time appoint such qualified individuals
as may be necessary to serve in the office of the judge of the municipal
court if the presiding judge, or Mayor as ex officio judge of the court, is
unavailable, unable, or unwilling to serve, and shall have the power to set
the compensation of the office of acting judge of the municipal court as may
be required.  No alternate or temporary judge shall serve for a term to
exceed 30 days without reappointment.



34.23  TERM OF OFFICE.



   The judge of the municipal court shall be appointed to serve a term
concurrent with that of the office of Mayor and shall assume the duties of
the office as provided under the laws of the state.



§ 34.24  REMOVAL OF JUDGE.



   The judge of the municipal court may be removed by a majority of the
Council for incompetency, corruption, misconduct or malfeasance in office,
after due notice and an opportunity to be heard in his or her defense.  The
judge of the municipal court may also be removed from office by a Council
resolution declaring a lack of confidence in the judge, provided that
two-thirds of the Council vote in favor of such resolution.



§ 34.25  MAYOR AS EX OFFICIO JUDGE.



   The Mayor shall serve as ex officio judge of the municipal court and
shall have and exercise the authority, jurisdiction, and power which are
conferred by law upon the judge.  In case of the absence, disqualification,
or inability of the Mayor, for any cause, to act, then the Mayor Pro Tem
shall act as such judge.



§ 34.26  QUALIFICATIONS.



   Any person appointed to the office of municipal judge shall have the
qualifications required by law for municipal judges by the laws of the state,
as the same may be amended from time to time.



Statutory reference:



   Municipal judges, see Tex. Gov't Code §§ 29.004 - 29.007



COURT CLERK



§ 34.40  OFFICE OF COURT CLERK  CREATED; APPOINTMENT; COMPENSATION, OATH.



   (A)   The office of municipal court clerk is hereby created.



   (B)   The office of municipal court clerk shall be filled by
appointment by the Council.



   (C)   Compensation of the office of municipal court clerk shall be
set from time to time by the Council.



   (D)   Prior to taking office, the municipal court clerk shall take
the oath of office required by the laws of the state.



(Ord. 905, passed 3-16-04)



§ 34.41  DUTIES OF COURT CLERK.



   The clerk, or deputy clerk, shall perform the duties described in Tex.
Gov't Code § 29.010, as the same may be amended from time to time.



Statutory reference:



   Municipal court clerks authorized, duties, see Tex. Gov't Code §§
29.010 and 29.011



JURIES



§ 34.50  JURY DUTY PAY.



   Each person serving as a juror in municipal court is entitled to $10
for each day or fraction of each day served as a juror.



(Ord. 905, passed 3-16-04)



CHAPTER 35:  MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS



Section



   35.01   Governed by state and federal law



   35.02   Election order



   35.03   Adoption of voting system



   35.04   Election officers



   35.05   Application for place on ballot



   35.06   Absentee voting and ballot board



   35.07   Time and place of voting



   35.08   Election notice to be published and posted



   35.09   Eligibility requirements for candidate for mayor and council
member



   35.10   Eligibility requirements for voting



   35.11   Election supplies



   35.12   Voting booths and ballot boxes



   35.13   Write-in candidates



   35.14   General requirements for application



   35.15   Official application form



   35.16   Political contributions and expenditures by candidates to be
filed



   35.17   Canvass of election returns



   35.18   Preservation of election records



   35.19   Recount of ballots



   35.20   Taking office



§ 35.01  GOVERNED BY STATE AND  FEDERAL LAW.



   All municipal elections shall be governed by the election laws of the
state.  Annual elections for municipal officials shall be held on the first
Saturday in May of each year.  The Federal Voting Rights Act is also
applicable to any change affecting voting, including a change of polling
place, annexation, and method of electing Council members.  Proposed changes
affected by the Federal Voting Rights Act must be submitted to the Attorney
General of the United States for approval.



§ 35.02  ELECTION ORDER.



   For all municipal elections, the Mayor shall order the election, give
notice, and appoint election officers to hold the election.  If the Mayor
fails to act, the Council shall order the election.  The election order
shall be issued at least 45 days prior to the election date.



§ 35.03  ADOPTION OF VOTING SYSTEM.



   The voting system to be used in municipal elections shall be the paper
ballot unless otherwise designated by the Council.



§ 35.04  ELECTION OFFICERS.



   (A)   The Municipal Secretary shall be the absentee voting clerk for
all municipal elections.  A deputy absentee voting clerk may be appointed to
assist the absentee voting clerk and shall have the same authority as the
absentee voting clerk in conducting absentee voting, subject to the Municipal
Secretary's supervision.



   (B)   A presiding election judge and an alternate presiding election
judge shall be appointed for each election precinct in which an election is
held.  The appointment of election judges must be made by written order by
the Council.



   (C)   The presiding election judge shall appoint the election clerks
to assist the election judge in the conduct of an election at the polling
place served by the judge.  The Council shall prescribe the maximum number
of clerks that each presiding judge may appoint for each election.



   (D)   An election judge or clerk is entitled to compensation for
services rendered at an hourly rate not to exceed $10.  The election judge
or clerk who delivers the precinct election records, keys to the ballot
boxes, or other election equipment and unused election supplies after an
election is entitled to compensation for that service in an amount not to
exceed $25.



   (E)   An election officer must be a qualified voter and resident of
the city.  An election officer shall not hold a public office or be a
candidate for public office, be employed by an candidate for municipal
office, related to a candidate for municipal office, or serve as a campaign
treasurer of a candidate.



§ 35.05  APPLICATION FOR PLACE ON  BALLOT.



   (A)   Any eligible person may file an application to have his or her
name printed on the official ballot as a candidate for the office of Mayor or
Council member.  Such application must be filed in the office of the
Municipal Secretary no later than 5:00 p.m. of the 45th day before the
election.  An application may not be filed earlier than the 30th day before
the date of the filing deadline.  The municipality shall use application
forms prescribed by the Secretary of State.



   (B)   The Municipal Secretary shall review each application to
determine whether it complies with the requirements as to form, content and
procedure for the candidate's name to be placed on the ballot.  Such review
shall be completed no later than the fifth day after the date the application
is received.  If an application does not comply, the Municipal Secretary
shall reject the application and immediately deliver to the candidate written
notice of the reason for rejection.



   (C)   Any filed candidate for a municipal office may withdraw his or
her candidacy by filing a written, acknowledged withdrawal request with the
Municipal Secretary.  Such request must be



acknowledged before a notary public.  A withdrawal request must be received
by the Municipal Secretary not later than 5:00 p.m. of the 36th day before
the election day.  In a runoff election, the withdrawal deadline is 5:00
p.m. of the third day after the main election.



§ 35.06  ABSENTEE VOTING AND BALLOT  BOARD.



   (A)   Any qualified voter is eligible to vote absentee by personal
appearance.



   (B)   A person is entitled to vote absentee by mail if such person
is:



      (1)   Expected to be absent from the county on election day;



      (2)   Sick or physically disabled which prevents him or her
from appearing at the polling place on election day;



      (3)   65 years of age or older on election day;



      (4)   Confined in jail; or



      (5)   Prevented from attending the polling place because of
religious beliefs.



   (C)   The presiding election judge, or alternate presiding judge if
the person appointed presiding judge cannot serve, and the two election
clerks appointed for the general election shall also serve as the Absentee
Ballot Board for the counting of the absentee ballots.  The alternate judge
shall serve on the Board when the regular presiding judge serves at the
election.  Absentee ballots shall be delivered to the Board by the absentee
voting clerk on or before election day.  The absentee ballot board shall
count the absentee ballots and process the results on election day.  The
ballots and results of such absentee voting shall be kept separate from those
ballots cast on election day.



§ 35.07  TIME AND PLACE OF VOTING.



   (A)   All polling places shall open at 7:00 a.m. and shall close at
7:00 p.m.  The election order shall contain the designated location of all
polling places.  During the absentee voting period, the Municipal Secretary
shall allow absentee voting by personal appearance during regular office
hours each weekday.



   (B)   All polling places shall be located inside a public building
if practicable; however, if a suitable public building is unavailable, the
polling place may be located in a private building.  Each polling place
shall be accessible to and usable by the elderly and physically disabled. 
Such polling place or places must be designated before the election notice is
issued.



§ 35.08  ELECTION NOTICE TO BE POSTED  AND PUBLISHED.



   Notice of an election must be given by publication in a newspaper and
by posting at one or more specified locations.  The Municipal Secretary
shall post properly executed copies of the election notice in three public
places within the municipality. The last day for posting notice shall be the
21st day before the election.  The period for publishing notice in the
official newspaper is no earlier than the 30th day or later than the tenth
day before the election day.



§ 35.09  ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR CANDIDATE FOR MAYOR AND COUNCIL 
MEMBER.



   To be eligible to be a candidate for Mayor or council member, a person
must:



   (A)   Be a United States citizen;



   (B)   Be 18 years of age or older on the first day of the term to be
filled at the election or on the date of appointment, as applicable;



   (C)   Have not been determined mentally incompetent by a final
judgment of a court;



   (D)   Have not been finally convicted of a felony from which the
person has not been pardoned or otherwise released from the resulting
disabilities;



   (E)   Have resided continuously in the state for 12 months and in
the municipality for six months.  A candidate for Mayor must have resided in
the municipality for 12 months next preceding the election.



§ 35.10  ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR  VOTING.



   To be eligible to vote in a municipal election, a person must:



   (A)   Be 18 years of age or older;



   (B)   Be a United States citizen;



   (C)   Have not been determined mentally incompetent by a final
judgment of a court;



   (D)   Have not been convicted of a felony or, if so convicted, have
received a certificate of discharge by the Board of Pardons and Paroles or
completed a period of probation ordered by a court and at least two calendar
years have elapsed from the date of receipt or completion; or been pardoned
or otherwise released from resulting disability to vote;



   (E)   Be a resident of the municipality; and



   (F)   Be registered as a voter in the municipality for at least 30
days before the day of election.



§ 35.11  ELECTION SUPPLIES.



   (A)   The Municipal Secretary shall procure the election supplies
necessary to conduct an election and shall determine the quantity of the
various types of supplies to be provided at each polling place and absentee
polling place.



   (B)   The Municipal Secretary shall provide for each election
precinct a number of ballots equal to at least the percentage of voters who
voted in that precinct in the most recent corresponding election plus 25% of
that number, except that the number of ballots provided may not exceed the
total number of registered voters in the precinct.



   (C)   If paper ballots are used, indelible marking instruments such
as pens shall be provided for marking ballots.



§ 35.12  VOTING BOOTHS AND BALLOT  BOXES.



   Voting booths must provide privacy for voters while marking their
ballots at each polling place.  Four ballot boxes shall be used at each
polling place in an election and shall be marked accordingly.



§ 35.13  WRITE-IN CANDIDATES



   (A)   A write-in vote cast in any election for any office of the
municipality may not be counted unless the name written in appears on the
list of write-in candidates as required in division (I) of this section.



   (B)   To be entitled to a place on the list of write- in candidates,
a candidate must make a declaration of write-in candidacy.  A declaration of
write-in candidacy must satisfy the requirements prescribed by § 35.15 for
an application for a place on the ballot.  A declaration of write-in
candidacy is public information immediately on its filing.



   (C)   A declaration of write-in candidacy must be filed with the
Municipal Secretary not later than 5:00 p.m. of the 30th day before the
election for which the candidate is filing.  A declaration of write-in
candidacy filed by mail is considered to be filed at the time of its receipt
by the Municipal Secretary.



   (D)   The Municipal Secretary shall review the declaration and take
appropriate action in the manner prescribed in division (G) of this section.



   (E)   A declaration of write-in candidacy may not be challenged for
compliance with the applicable requirements after the 15th day before
election day.



   (F)   A declaration of write-in candidacy shall be preserved in the
same manner as the candidate's application for a place on the ballot.



   (G)   Except as provided in division (H) of this section, the
Municipal Secretary with whom a declaration of write-in candidacy is required
to be filed shall certify in writing for placement on the list of write-in
candidates the names of each candidate who filed with the authority a
declaration that complies with §§ 35.14 and 35.15.  Each name shall be
certified in the form indicated on the candidate's declaration of write-in
candidacy.  Not later than the 20th day before election day, the Municipal
Secretary shall deliver the certification to the authority responsible for
having the official ballot prepared in each county in which the office is
sought by the candidates to be voted on.



   (H)   A write-in candidate may not be certified for placement on the
list of write-in candidates if:



      (1)   Any information on the candidate's declaration of
write-in candidacy indicates that the candidate is ineligible for the office;



      (2)   The facts indicate that the candidate is ineligible or
conclusively established by another public record; or



      (3)   The candidate is determined to be ineligible by a final
judgment of the court.



   (I)   The authority responsible for having the official ballot
prepared shall prepare a list containing the name of each write-in candidate
certified to the authority.  Each name must appear in the form in which it
is certified.  Copies of the list shall be distributed to the municipal
officers in the election for use in counting write-in votes. Copies of the
list shall be distributed to each presiding election judge with the other
election supplies.  The copy of the list shall be posted in each polling
place of each place where an instruction poster is required to be posted. 
The authority responsible for having the official ballot prepared shall
retain a copy of the list preserving for the period for preserving the
precinct election records.



   (J)   An officially prescribed form for declaration for write-in
candidacy must include the elements required by § 35.16.



§ 35.14  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION.



   A candidate's application for a place on the ballot must:



   (A)   Be in writing;



   (B)   Be signed and sworn to by the candidate and indicate the date
that the candidate swears to the application;



   (C)   Be timely filed with the Municipal Secretary; and



   (D)   Include:



      (1)   The candidate's name;



      (2)   The candidate's occupation;



      (3)   The office sought, including any place number or other
distinguishing number;



      (4)   An indication of whether the office sought is to be
filled for a full or unexpired term or whether the office sought and another
office to be voted on have the same title but do not have place numbers or
other distinguishing numbers;



      (5)   A statement that the candidate is a United States
citizen;



      (6)   A statement that the candidate has not been determined
mentally incompetent by a final judgment of a court;



      (7)   The candidate's date of birth;



      (8)   The candidate's residence address or, if the residence
has no address, the address at which the candidate receives mail and a
concise description of the location of the candidate's residence;



      (9)   The candidate's length of continuous residence in the
state from which the office sought is elected as of the date the candidate
swears to the application; and

      (10)   The statement:  “I, _________________, of
_________________, Texas, being a candidate for the office of 
_________________, swear that I will support and defend the constitution and
laws of the United States and of the State of Texas.”



§ 35.15  OFFICIAL APPLICATION FORM.



   In addition to the other statements and spaces for entering information
that appear on an officially prescribed form for an application for a place
on the ballot, each official form for an application that a candidate is
required to file under this chapter must include:



   (A)   A space for indicating the form in which the candidate's name
is to appear on the ballot;



   (B)   A space for the candidate's mailing address;



   (C)   Spaces for the candidate's home and office telephone numbers;
and



   (D)   A statement informing candidates that the furnishing of
telephone numbers is optional.



§ 35.16  POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS AND EXPENDITURES BY CANDIDATES TO BE FILED.



   All candidates and office holders shall file campaign expenditure
statements and office holder statements of contributions and expenditures
with the Municipal Secretary as required by the Tex. Election Code.



§ 35.17  CANVASS OF ELECTION RETURNS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by law, the election returns
shall be canvassed by the Council. The Council shall convene to conduct the
local canvass not earlier than the eighth day or later than the eleventh day
after the election day at such time set by the Mayor.



   (B)   After the completion of the canvass, the Mayor shall prepare a
certificate of election for each candidate who is elected to an office for
which the official result is determined by the canvass.



   (C)   When the returns of such election are canvassed, the person
receiving the highest number of votes for each elective office shall be
declared to be elected.  When two candidates are to be elected for council
member, the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall be
elected.  When three candidates are to be elected for council member, the
three candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected, and
so forth.  In elections for Mayor, the person with the highest number of
votes shall be elected.



(Ord. 905, passed 3-16-04)



§ 35.18  PRESERVATION OF ELECTION RECORDS.



   (A)   All election records and returns shall be preserved for a
period of 60 days except for the following:



      (1)   Application for a place on a ballot: two years after
date of election.



      (2)   Appointment of campaign treasurer: two years after the
date the appointment is terminated.



      (3)   Campaign and officeholder reports: two years after the
date of filing.



      (4)   Order appointing election judges: the longer of the term
for which the appointment is made, or the period for preserving precinct
election records in the last election in which an appointee serves under the
order.



   (B)   However, if an election contest or a criminal investigation or
proceeding in connection with an election to which the records pertain is
pending, the records shall be preserved until the contest, investigation, or
proceeding is contemplated and the judgment, if any, becomes final.



§ 35.19  RECOUNT OF BALLOTS.



   A petition requesting a recount in any municipal election must be
submitted to the Mayor not later than 5:00 p.m. of the fifth day after the
election day or 5:00 p.m. after the second day after the day of the original
canvass, whichever is later.  The recount shall be conducted under the
supervision of the Mayor and the recount returns shall be canvassed by the
Council.



§ 35.20  TAKING OFFICE.



   Elected officers may enter upon their duties beginning on the eighth
day after the date of the election and as soon as they take and subscribe to
the official oath of office.  An elected officer is entitled to take office
immediately upon completion of the official canvass and issuance of a
certificate of election to him or her.  If a newly elected officer fails to
qualify for office within 30 days after the date of election, the office
shall be considered vacant.



(Ord. 905, passed 3-16-04)



CHAPTER 36:  FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION



Section




Fiscal Year




   36.001   Fiscal year designated




Municipal Depository




   36.010   Official depository designated




Annual Budget




   36.020   Budget officer



   36.021   Budget required



   36.022   Budget content



   36.023   Cooperation required



   36.024   Time of filing and public inspection



   36.025   Public hearing required



   36.026   Filing adopted budget




Audit of Municipal Funds




   36.030   Annual audit required



   36.031   Financial reporting of agencies funded by city



   36.032   Forfeiture proceedings




Ad Valorem (Property) Tax




   36.040   Authority to levy property tax



   36.041   Participation in appraisal district



   36.042   Tax due date



   36.043   Additional penalty for collection costs of delinquent taxes



   36.044   Tax certificates




Local Sales And Use Taxes




   36.050   Local sales tax authorized



   36.051   Local sales tax on residential gas and electricity retained



   36.052   Telecommunications tax authorized



   36.053   Adoption of 4A and 4B sales and use taxes




Hotel/Motel Tax




   36.060   Definitions



   36.061   Hotel/motel tax levied; exception



   36.062   Tax collection



   36.063   Quarterly reports



   36.064   Penalties



   36.065   Allocation and use of revenue




Bidding Procedures




   36.070   Bidding procedures; exemptions



   36.071   Contractor's bond



   36.072   Trench excavation plan



FISCAL YEAR



§ 36.001  FISCAL YEAR DESIGNATED.



   The fiscal year of the municipality is hereby designated as beginning
with the first day of October of each year and ending the last day of
September next ensuing thereafter.



MUNICIPAL DEPOSITORY



§ 36.010  OFFICIAL DEPOSITORY DESIGNATED.



   Pursuant to Tex. Local Gov't Code Ch. 105, a bank shall be designated
as the official depository of the municipality.  Checking accounts or
savings accounts, as authorized by the Council, shall be established at the
bank with the requirement that all checks written against any such accounts
shall require at least two signatures.  The authorized persons who may sign
city checks are the Mayor, Mayor Pro Tem, Municipal Secretary or Council
member.



(Ord. 905, passed 3-16-04)



Statutory reference:



   Designation of official depository, see Tex. Local Gov't Code Ch. 105



ANNUAL BUDGET



§ 36.020  BUDGET OFFICER.



   The budget officer shall be the Mayor of the municipality.



§ 36.021  BUDGET REQUIRED.



   The Mayor or his or her designated appointee shall annually prepare a
budget to cover all proposed expenditures of the municipality for the
succeeding year.



§ 36.022  BUDGET CONTENT.



   The budget shall show all expenditures proposed and shall be carefully
itemized to make as clear a comparison as practicable between expenditures
included in the proposed budget and actual expendi- tures for the same or
similar purposes for the preceding year.  The budget must also clearly show
each of the various projects for which appropriations are made in the budget
and the budgeted sums for each of such projects.  The budget shall also
contain a complete financial statement of the municipality showing all
outstanding obligations of the municipality, the cash on hand to the credit
of each and every fund, and funds expected to be received from all sources
during the ensuing year, the estimated revenue available to cover the
proposed budget, and the estimated rate of tax, if any, which will be
required.



§ 36.023  COOPERATION REQUIRED.



   The Mayor shall have the authority to require any officer, department
head, or other unit of the municipal government to furnish such information
as may, in the Mayor's discretion, be necessary to properly prepare the
proposed budget.



§ 36.024  TIME OF FILING AND PUBLIC INSPECTION.



   The budget shall be filed with the Municipal Secretary 30 days prior to
the time the Council makes its tax levy for the current fiscal year, or as
close as is practical.  The budget as filed with the Municipal Secretary
shall be available for public inspection during all reasonable business hours.



§ 36.025  PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED.



   The Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed budget.  Such
public hearing shall occur after the 15th day after the proposed budget has
been filed with the Municipal Secretary but before the Council makes its tax
levy.  Public notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be
given in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act, being Tex. Gov't Code
§§ 551.001 et seq., and Tex. Local Gov't Code Ch. 102.



§ 36.026  FILING ADOPTED BUDGET.



   On final approval of the budget by the Council, a copy of the budget
shall be filed with the Municipal Secretary and the County Clerk's office.



Statutory reference:



   Budgets, see Tex. Local Gov't Code Ch. 102



AUDIT OF MUNICIPAL FUNDS



§ 36.030  ANNUAL AUDIT REQUIRED.



   The municipality shall have its records and accounts audited annually
and shall have an annual financial statement prepared.  The audit shall be
performed by a licensed certified public accountant or a public accountant
who holds a permit to practice from the Texas State Board of Public
Accountancy.  Such audit and financial statement shall be filed with the
Municipal Secretary within 120 days after the last day of each fiscal year.



Statutory reference:



   Annual audit, see Tex. Local Gov't Code Ch. 103



§ 36.031  FINANCIAL REPORTING OF AGENCIES FUNDED BY THE MUNICIPALITY.



   The Council may condition funding of volunteer or other groups
requesting municipal support on availability of adequate periodic financial
information listing income and expenditures by type, amount, and date.



§ 36.032  FORFEITURE PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   All money received from forfeitures by the Police Department
or from forfeitures of any other law enforcement agency shall be immediately
deposited into a special bank account maintained in the municipality's
authorized depository.  Such funds shall be subject to the same signature
requirements as other municipal accounts and payment authorizations shall be
documented by the Police Department by case number or other reference to an
eligible expenditure.



   (B)   In the case of monies required for the payment of informants
or other criminal investigatory matters, the Police Chief shall be
responsible for request documentation and for keeping the amounts withdrawn
to the minimum required for the particular prospective activity.  He or she
shall also be responsible for the redeposit of unused amounts.  The Police
Department case files shall reflect amounts paid for drugs, informants, or
other criminal investigatory activity with appropriate safeguards for the
protection of individuals or the criminal investigatory process.  Sums not
required for informants or drug buys may be expended only after receiving
budget approval.



   (C)   The Municipal Secretary shall maintain a separate account for
the special forfeiture account.  Amounts budgeted for drug buys or payment
of informants shall be deposited into the special account where forfeiture
funds are paid.



Cross-reference:



   Disposition of controlled substances, firearms, and weapons, see §§
31.024 - 31.026



AD VALOREM (PROPERTY) TAX



§ 36.040  AUTHORITY TO LEVY PROPERTY  TAX.



   There is hereby established the authority to levy and collect an annual
ad valorem (property) tax not exceeding 1½% on $100 valuation of taxable
property within the municipality.  The tax rate shall be set annually by the
Council in an amount to fund the annual budget of the municipality.



§ 36.041  PARTICIPATION IN APPRAISAL  DISTRICT.



   The municipality hereby authorizes participation in the County Central
Appraisal District.  Such appraisal district shall be authorized to perform
all appraisal and assessment functions required under the Tex. Property Tax
Code.  The municipality shall be responsible for the collection of its
municipal taxes unless other contractual arrangements are made.



§ 36.042  TAX DUE DATE.



   The property taxes levied by the municipality each year shall become
due on the first day of October of each year for which the levy is made and
shall become delinquent on the following first day of February.  Penalties
and interest for delinquent taxes shall be incurred in accordance with Tex.
Tax Code Ch. 33.



§ 36.043  ADDITIONAL PENALTY FOR COLLECTION COSTS OF DELINQUENT TAXES.



   To enforce the collection of delinquent taxes pursuant to Tex. Tax Code
Ch. 33, it is hereby provided, as authorized in Tex. Tax Code § 33.01, that
taxes that remain delinquent on July 1 of the year in which they become
delinquent shall incur an additional penalty in the amount of 12% of the
amount of taxes, penalty, and interest due, to defray the costs of collection.



§ 36.044  TAX CERTIFICATES.



   Upon request, the Municipal Secretary shall issue a certificate showing
the amount of delinquent taxes, penalties, and interest due the municipality
on a property according to the municipality's current tax records.  The
Municipal Secretary shall charge a fee as provided for in § 2.00 of the Fee
Schedule, set forth as Appendix 1 of this code, for each certificate issued
and retain this fee as payment for such services as duly rendered.



LOCAL SALES AND USE TAXES



§ 36.050  LOCAL SALES TAX AUTHORIZED.



   In accordance with Tex. Tax Code Ch. 321, a local sales and use tax of
1% has been adopted and is now imposed as a result of an election held in the
municipality on June 28, 1969.



(Ord. 461, passed 5-20-69)



§ 36.051  LOCAL SALES TAX ON RESIDENTIAL GAS AND ELECTRICITY  RETAINED.



   The municipality, by a majority vote of its governing body, hereby
votes to retain the tax authorized by the local sales and use tax act (Tex.
Tax Code Ch. 321) on the receipts from  the sale, production, distribution,
lease, or rental, and the use, storage, or other consumption of gas and
electricity for residential use, as authorized by Tex. Tax Code Ch. 321.



(Ord. 573, passed 3-8-79)



§ 36.052  TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX  AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services
sold within the municipality.  For purposes of this section, the sale of
telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone
or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication
originates.  If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is
consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed.



   (B)   The application of the exemption provided for in Tex. Tax Code
§ 321.210 is hereby repealed by the municipality, as authorized by Tex. Tax
Code § 321.210(b).



   (C)   The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as
the rate imposed by the municipality for all other local sales and use taxes
as authorized by the legislature of the state.



   (D)   The Municipal Secretary shall forward to the Comptroller of
the state by registered or certified mail a copy of this section with a copy
of the minutes of the Council's vote and discussion of this section.



   (E)   The tax provided for herein shall not serve as an offset to,
be in lieu of, or in any way reduce any amount payable to the municipality
pursuant to any franchise, street use ordinance, statute, or without
limitation by the foregoing enumeration, otherwise payable by any provider of
telecommunications service, it being the express intent hereof that all such
obligations and impositions of every kind and nature shall remain in full
force and effect without reduction or limitation hereby.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to impose tax on telecommunications services, see Tex. Tax
Code § 321.210



§ 36.053  ADOPTION OF 4A AND 4B SALES  AND USE TAXES.



   Pending approval at the special election held January 17, 1998, the
following sales and use taxes are adopted by the city:



   (A)   The adoption of a sales and use tax within the city for the
promotion and development of new and expanded business enterprises at the
rate of one fourth of one percent (¼%) and the adoption of an additional
sales and use tax within the city at a rate of one fourth of one percent
(¼%) to be used to reduce the property tax rate.



   (B)   The adoption of an additional sales and use tax within the
city at the rate of one half of one percent (½%) to be used for but not
limited to land, buildings, equipment and improvements and other purposes
authorized by Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Art. 5190.6, § 4B, and the operation and
maintenance expense of any authorized project.



(Ord. 807, passed 12-2-97)



HOTEL/MOTEL TAX



§ 36.060  DEFINITIONS



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONSIDERATION.   The cost of the room, sleeping space, bed or
dormitory space or other facilities in such hotel and shall not include the
cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant not
related to cleaning and readying such room or space for occupancy, and shall
not include any tax assessed by any other governmental agency.



   HOTEL.   Any building or buildings, or other facility in which the
public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations in exchange
for a consideration.  The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes,
houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, trailer houses,
trailer motels, railroad pullman cars parked on a siding or other area and
used for sleeping accommodations not involving the transportation of
travelers, dormitory space where bed space is rented to individuals or
groups, apartments not occupied by "permanent residences," as that term is
hereinafter defined, and all other facilities where rooms or sleeping
facilities or spaces are furnished for a consideration.  HOTEL shall not be
defined to include a hospital, sanitarium, nursing home, or convalescent home.



   OCCUPANCY.  The use or possession or the right to use or possession of
any room, space, or sleeping space in a hotel for any purpose.



   OCCUPANT.  Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a
right to use or possess any room or rooms or sleeping space or facility in a
hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license,
contract, or agreement.



   PERMANENT RESIDENT.  Any occupant who has or shall have the right of
occupancy of a room or rooms or sleeping space or facility in a hotel for at
least 30 consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year.



   PERSON.  Any individual, company, corporation, or association owning,
operating, managing or controlling any hotel in the municipality.



   QUARTERLY PERIOD.  The regular calendar quarter of the year, the first
quarter being composed of the months of January, February, and March, the
second quarter being the months of April, May, and June, the third quarter
being the months of July, August, and September, and the fourth quarter being
the months of October, November, and December.



(Ord. 977, passed 4-15-08)



§ 36.061  HOTEL/MOTEL TAX LEVIED; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   There is levied a tax of 7.0% on the consideration paid for a
room in a hotel on every occupant who, under a lease, concession, permit,
right of access, license, contract or agreement, pays for the use or
possession or for the right to the use or possession of a room that is in a
hotel, that costs $2 or more each day and that is ordinarily used for
sleeping.



   (B)   The price of a room in a hotel does not include the cost of
food served by the hotel and the cost of personal services performed by the
hotel for the person except for those services related to cleaning and
readying the room for use or possession.



   (C)   No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident;
or an officer or employee of a governmental entity of the United States or an
officer or employee of a state governmental entity who is provided with photo
identification verifying the identity and exempt status of the person when
such person is traveling on or otherwise engaged in the course of official
duties for the governmental entity.



(Ord. 977, passed 4-15-08)



§ 36.062  TAX COLLECTION.



   (A)   Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any
hotel or collecting payment for occupancy in any hotel shall collect the tax
levied for the municipality.



   (B)   The hotel operator shall be entitled to 1% of the hotel
occupancy tax revenues collected as reimbursement for the operator's
administrative costs for collecting the tax.  However, this reimbursement
may be forfeited at the discretion of the city if the hotel operator fails to
timely pay over the tax or fails to timely file a report as required by the
city or if the operator files a false report with the city.



   (C)   If a person who is liable for the payment of a tax under this
chapter is the owner of a hotel and sells the hotel, the successor to the
seller or the seller's assignee shall withhold an amount of the purchase
price sufficient to pay the amount of tax due until the seller provides a
receipt issued by the municipality showing that the amount has been paid or a
certificate issued by the municipality showing that no tax is due.



   (D)   The purchaser of a hotel who fails to withhold an amount of
the purchase price as required by this subchapter is liable for the amount of
tax required to be withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase price.



      (1)   The purchaser of a hotel may file a written request with
the municipality for the issuance of a certificate stating that no tax is due
or for the issuance of a statement of the amount required to be paid before a
certificate may be issued.  The municipality shall issue the certificate or
statement not later than the 60th day after the date that the municipality
receives the request.



      (2)   If the municipality fails to issue the certificate or
statement within the period provided by division (D)(1) of this section, the
purchaser is released from the obligation to withhold the tax on the purchase
price or pay the amount of tax due.



(Ord. 977, passed 4-15-08)



§ 36.063  QUARTERLY REPORTS.



   (A)   On the last day of the month following each quarterly period,
every person required to collect the tax imposed by this chapter pursuant to
division (A) shall file a report with the municipality showing the
consideration paid for all room occupancies, in the preceding quarter, the
amount of the tax collected on such occupancies, the amount of permanent and
regular exemptions granted and any other information the municipality may
reasonably require.



   (B)   A copy of the concurrent quarterly Texas Hotel and Motel Tax
Report filed with the state by the hotel shall be attached to the quarterly
report along with the names, addresses and identification relied upon for the
granting of exemptions to the collection of the tax levied.



   (C)   The tax due on such occupancies shall be paid at the time of
filing the quarterly report.



   (D)   The report shall be filed on report HOT 01 prescribed by the
municipality.



   (E)   The city shall have the authority to request and receive,
within a reasonable time, additional documentation verifying the information
contained in the report to the city by the hotel.  Such verifying
information and documents shall be retained in a retrievable format and shall
be maintained for a period of not less than four years.



(Ord. 977, passed 4-15-08)



§ 36.064  PENALTIES.



   (A)   If any person shall fail to file a report as required in this
chapter or if any person shall file a false report or shall fail to pay to
the city the tax imposed in this chapter when the report or payment is due,
he shall pay, in addition to the amount otherwise required to be paid, an
additional sum equal to 5% of the amount due as penalty, and after the first
30 days he shall pay an additional 5% of such tax.  However, such penalty
shall never be less than $1.  Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the
rate of 12% per annum beginning 60 days from the due date.



   (B)   The City Attorney is authorized to bring suit to collect the
tax not paid against any person who is required to collect the tax imposed by
this chapter and who is required to pay the collections over to the city and
who has failed to file a tax report or who has filed a false report or who
has failed to pay the tax when due.  Such suit may seek to collect the tax
not paid or to enjoin such person from operating a hotel in the city until
the tax is paid or the report is filed, as applicable and as provided in the
injunction.



   (C)   The city is authorized to require the forfeiture of any
revenue the city allowed the hotel operator to retain for its cost of
collecting the tax.



(Ord. 977, passed 4-15-08)



§ 36.065  ALLOCATION AND USE OF REVENUE.



   (A)   The revenue derived from the hotel occupancy tax imposed and
levied by this chapter may be used only to promote tourism and the convention
and hotel industry, according to the following limitations:



      (1)   Advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional
programs to attract tourists to the municipality or its vicinity.



      (2)   Historical preservation and restoration projects or
activities or advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional
programs to encourage tourists to visit preserved historic sites or museums.



   (B)   Revenue derived from the hotel occupancy tax shall be expended
only in a manner that directly enhances and promotes tourism and hotel
industry as delineated in this chapter.  Such revenues shall not be used for
the general revenue purposes or general governmental operations of the city.



   (C)   The provisions of Texas Tax Code § 351.101 shall govern the
use of tax revenues for promotion of tourism as applicable in this section.



   (D)   The city may by contract delegate to a person, including
another governmental entity or a private organization, the management or
supervision of programs and activities funded with revenue from the tax
authorized by this chapter.



      (1)   The city in writing shall approve in advance the annual
budget of the person to which it delegates those functions and shall require
the person to make quarterly reports listing the expenditures made by the
person with revenue from the tax authorized by this chapter.



      (2)   A person with whom the city contracts under this chapter
to conduct an activity authorized by this section shall maintain complete and
accurate financial records of each expenditure of hotel occupancy tax revenue
made by the person and, on request of the governing body of the municipality
or other person, shall make the records available for inspection and review.



      (3)   Hotel occupancy tax revenue spent for a purpose
authorized by this section may be spent for day-to-day operations, supplies,
salaries, office rental, travel expenses, and other administrative costs only
if those administrative costs are incurred directly in the promotion and
servicing expenditures authorized under division (A)(1) of this section.



      (4)   Hotel occupancy tax revenue may not be spent for travel
for a person to attend an event or conduct an activity the primary purpose of
which is not directly related to the promotion of tourism and hotel industry
or the performance of the person's job in an efficient and professional
manner.



(Ord. 977, passed 4-15-08)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to impose hotel/motel tax, see Tex. Tax Code Ch. 351



BIDDING PROCEDURES



§ 36.070  BIDDING PROCEDURES AND  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Except in the case of exempted procurements, the municipality
may not purchase or enter into a contract that requires an expenditure of
more than $5,000 without first submitting such to competitive sealed bidding,
except in the case of high technology procurements in which case the
municipality may take competitive sealed proposals.  Exempted procurements
shall include the following:



      (1)   A procurement made because of a public calamity that
requires the immediate appropriation of money to relieve the necessity of the
municipality's residents or to preserve municipal property;



      (2)   A procurement necessary to preserve or protect the
public health or safety of the municipality's residents;



      (3)   A procurement necessary because of unforeseen damage to
public machinery, equipment, or other property;



      (4)   A procurement for personal or professional services;



      (5)   A procurement for work that is performed and paid for by
the day as the work progresses;



      (6)   A purchase of land or right-of-way;



      (7)   A procurement of items that are available from only one
source;



      (8)   A purchase of rare books, papers, and other library
materials for a public library;



      (9)   Paving, drainage, street widening, and other public
improvements, or related matters, if at least one-third of the cost is to be
paid by or through special assessments levied on property that will benefit
from the improvements;



      (10)   A public improvement project authorized by the voters
for which there is a deficiency of funds for completing the project in
accordance with the plans and purposes authorized by the voters;



      (11)   A payment under a contract by which a developer
participates in the construction of a public improvement as provided by Tex.
Local Gov't Code §§ 212.071 et seq.; and



      (12)   Personal property sold at an auction by a state
licensed auctioneer, at a going out of business sale held in compliance with
Tex. Business & Commerce Code §§ 17.81 et seq., or by a political
subdivision of this state, a state agency of this state, or an entity of the
federal government.



   (B)   Notice of the time and place at which competitive sealed bids
or proposals must be published in accordance with the provisions of Tex.
Local Gov't Code §§ 252.023, 252.041, and 271.025.



   (C)   Bids may be opened only by the Council at a public meeting or
by an officer or employee of the municipality at or in an office of the
municipality.



   (D)   A bid that has been opened may not be changed for the purpose
of correcting an error in the bid price.



   (E)   If the competitive sealed bidding requirement applies to the
contract, the contract must be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder.  In
determining who is a responsible bidder, the governing body may take into
account the safety record of the bidder, of the firm, corporation,
partnership, or institution represented by the bidder, or of anyone acting
for such a firm, corporation, partnership, or institution if:



      (1)   The governing body has adopted a written definition and
criteria for accurately determining the safety record of a bidder;



      (2)   The governing body has given notice to prospective
bidders in the bid specifications that the safety record of a bidder may be
considered in determining the responsibility of the bidder; and



      (3)   The determinations are not arbitrary and capricious.



   (F)   A contract may not be awarded to a bidder who is not the
lowest bidder unless before the award each lower bidder is given notice of
the proposed award and is given an opportunity to appear before the governing
body of the governmental entity or the designated representative of the
governing body and present evidence concerning the bidder's responsibility.



   (G)   The municipality is entitled to reject any and all bids.



§ 36.071  CONTRACTOR'S BOND.



   (A)   If the contract is for the construction of public works, the
bidder to whom the contract is awarded must execute a good and sufficient
bond.



   (B)   The bond must be:



      (1)   In the full amount of the contract price;



      (2)   Conditioned that the contractor will faithfully perform
the contract; and



      (3)   Executed, in accordance with Tex. Gov't Code §§
2253.001 et seq., relating to contractors' surety bonds.



Statutory reference:



   Competitive bidding, see Tex. Local Gov't Code Ch. 252 and 271



§ 36.072  TRENCH EXCAVATION PLAN.



   For any construction project which involves trench excavation that
exceeds a depth of five feet, the bid documents and the contract must include
detailed plans and specifications for trench safety systems that meet United
States Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) standards. 
These plans and specifications shall include a pay item for these safety
systems.



Statutory reference:



   Trench safety plans required, see Tex. Health & Safety Code §§
756.021 et seq.



CHAPTER 37:  ANNEXATION AND DISANNEXATION



Section



   37.01   Petitions required



   37.02   Service plan required



   37.03   Public hearings required



   37.04   Public notices required



   37.05   Property to be annexed within 90 days



   37.06   Property to be annexed upon majority vote



   37.07   Annexation of property occupied by less than three voters



   37.08   Notification of other agencies required



   37.09   Limitations on annexations



   37.10   Disannexation for failure to provide services



   37.11   Disannexation by petition



   37.12   Disannexation by ordinance



§ 37.01  PETITIONS REQUIRED.



   For the municipality to consider annexation of property into the
municipality, a petition must be presented to the Mayor by either a majority
of the inhabitants of the land to be annexed or by the owner or owners of the
property to be annexed, as follows:



   (A)   Inhabitant's petition.  The majority of the inhabitants of
the area to be annexed who are qualified to vote must present a petition for
annexation with an attached affidavit of any three of the inhabitants
certifying to the vote.  The petition must contain a description of the land
to be annexed.



   (B)   Owner's petition.  The owners of land contiguous and adjacent
to the municipality desiring to be annexed must present a petition requesting
annexation.  The petition must contain an acknowledged description by metes
and bounds of the land to be annexed.  The land to be annexed by owner's
petition must contain less than three qualified voters.



§ 37.02  SERVICE PLAN REQUIRED.



   Prior to the publication of notice of the first hearing, the Mayor
shall cause to be prepared a service plan that provides for the extension of
municipal services into the area to be annexed.  This service plan shall be
made available for inspection and explained to the inhabitants of the area to
be annexed at the scheduled public hearings.  The service plan shall be
attached to the ordinance annexing the proposed area.



§ 37.03  PUBLIC HEARINGS REQUIRED.



   Before the municipality may institute annexation proceedings, the
Council shall provide an opportunity for all interested persons to be heard
at two public hearings to be held not more than 40 days nor less than 20 days
prior to consideration of the ordinance annexing the property.  If within 10
days after the publication of the notice required herein, more than 20 adult
residents who reside in the territory proposed to be annexed protest in
writing to the Municipal Secretary of the institution of the annexation
proceedings, then at least one of the public hearings must be held within the
area proposed to be annexed.  Each written protest shall contain the name,
address, and age of each signatory.



§ 37.04  PUBLIC NOTICES REQUIRED.



   The Mayor shall establish dates for public hearings and the Municipal
Secretary shall publish notice of the public hearings in the official
newspaper not more than 20 days nor less than 10 days before the public
hearings.  If the area to be annexed contains any railroad rights-of-way,
the Municipal Secretary shall mail a notice of the public hearings to the
railroad company by certified mail.



§ 37.05  PROPERTY TO BE ANNEXED WITHIN 90 DAYS.



   Annexation of territory shall be brought to completion within 90 days
of the date on which the Council institutes annexation proceedings or be null
and void.  Any period of time during which the municipality is restrained or
enjoined from annexing any such territory by a court of competent
jurisdiction shall not be computed in such 90 day limitation period.



§ 37.06  PROPERTY TO BE ANNEXED UPON  MAJORITY VOTE.



   Upon receipt of an inhabitant's petition meeting the conditions
established in § 37.01(A), the Council may, by ordinance, receive them and
the area in which they reside as part of the municipality and from
thenceforth the territory so received shall be a part of the municipality. 
The Municipal Secretary shall file a certified copy of the ordinance annexing
the property together with a duplicate copy of the petition in the office of
the County Clerk.



§ 37.07  ANNEXATION OF PROPERTY  OCCUPIED BY LESS THAN THREE VOTERS.



   Upon receipt of an owner's petition meeting the conditions established
in § 37.01(B), the Council shall hear such petition and the arguments for
and against the same and grant or refuse such petition as it may see fit. 
Such hearing must be had not less than 5 and not more than 30 days after the
filing of such petition.  If the Council decides to grant such petition, the
property must be annexed by ordinance.  The Municipal Secretary shall file a
certified copy of the ordinance annexing the property together with a
duplicate copy of the petition in the office of the County Clerk.



§ 37.08  NOTIFICATION OF OTHER AGENCIES REQUIRED.



   (A)   Prior to final approval of any annexation, the Municipal
Secretary shall send all documents relating to the proposed annexation to the
United States Department of Justice, which shall review the proposed
annexation for consistency with the Voting Rights Act.  Materials to be sent
to the Justice Department include:



      (1)   A letter or other written document which includes the
name and title of the municipal official submitting the proposed annexation,
together with the name and address of the municipality proposing the
annexation.



      (2)   Supporting materials which demonstrate that the proposed
annexation will not have the effect of abridging the right of any person to
vote on account of race, color, or membership in a language minority group.



      (3)   A copy of the ordinance embodying the proposed
annexation, certified by the Municipal Secretary as a true copy.



      (4)   The date of final approval of the proposed annexation.



      (5)   A description of the different parts of the municipality
that would be affected by the proposed annexation, and how they would be
affected, with particular reference to how the proposed annexation would
affect the voting strength of minorities in the municipality.



      (6)   A statement certifying that the proposed annexation is
not yet final, or an explanation of why such a statement cannot be made.



      (7)   A statement of the reasons for the proposed annexation.



      (8)   A statement identifying any past or pending lawsuits
relative to the proposed annexation.



      (9)   An indication of population changes or shifts that will
occur as a result of the proposed annexation.



   (B)   The Municipal Secretary shall send the following documents
relating to the annexation to the Secretary of State of the State of Texas:



      (1)   A copy of the ordinance annexing the territory.



      (2)   A statement that the annexation is not involved in any
litigation.



   (C)   The Municipal Secretary shall send the following documents
relating to the annexation to the Sales Tax Division of the Texas
Comptroller's Office, by registered or certified mail:



      (1)   A certified copy of the ordinance annexing the territory.



      (2)   A map of the municipality which clearly shows the entire
municipality, with the boundaries of the new territory added to the
municipality clearly distinguished from the rest of the municipality.



§ 37.09  LIMITATIONS ON ANNEXATIONS.



   The municipality shall not annex property in violation of the following
limitations imposed by state law:



   (A)   The area to be annexed must be within the municipality's
extraterritorial jurisdiction unless such property is owned by the
municipality.



   (B)   The area to be annexed must be contiguous to the municipal
limits.



   (C)   The area must have a width of at least 1,000 feet at its
narrowest point, unless the property is contiguous with the municipal limits
on two sides or such annexation was initiated upon a written petition by an
owner or a majority of the qualified voters of the area.



   (D)   If the area to be annexed is within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of another municipality, that municipality's permission is
required prior to annexation.



§ 37.10  DISANNEXATION FOR FAILURE TO PROVIDE SERVICES.



   A majority of the qualified voters of an annexed area may petition the
Council to disannex the area if the municipality fails or refuses to provide
services or to cause services to be provided within the area or if
construction of any new facilities has not begun within two years or
substantially completed within 4½ years after the date of annexation.  If
the area is disannexed, it may not be annexed again within five years.



§ 37.11  DISANNEXATION BY PETITION.



   (A)   Whenever 50 qualified voters of any property within the limits
of the municipality shall sign and present a petition to the Mayor requesting
such territory be declared no longer a part of the municipality, the Mayor
thereof shall order an election to be held within 30 days thereafter.  If a
majority of the voters of the municipality voting at such election cast their
votes in favor of discontinuing said territory, such territory shall no
longer be a part of the municipality and the Mayor shall enter an order to
that effect on the minutes or records of the Council.  From and after the
date of such order, such territory shall cease to be a part of the
municipality; provided, it shall not reduce the municipality to less area
than one square mile or one mile in diameter around the center of the
original corporate limits.



   (B)   Whenever any property is withdrawn as provided above and the
municipality shall at the time of such withdrawal owe any debts, by bond or
otherwise, such property shall not be released from the payment of its pro
rata of such indebtedness.  The municipality shall continue to levy an ad
valorem tax each year on the property at the same rate as is levied upon
other property of the municipality until the taxes collected from such
territory shall equal its pro rata share of the indebtedness at the time of
the withdrawal.  The taxes so collected shall be applied exclusively to the
payment of such pro rata share of indebtedness.  Nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent the inhabitants of such territory from paying in full,
at any time, their pro rata share of the indebtedness of the municipality.



§ 37.12  DISANNEXATION BY ORDINANCE.



   Whenever there exists within the municipal limits of the city to the
extent of at least ten acres, contiguous and adjoining the lines of the
municipality, which is uninhabited or on which there is fewer than one
occupied residence or business structure for every two acres of such
territory and fewer than three occupied residences or business structures on
any one acre of such territory, the Council may, by ordinance, discontinue
such territory as a part of the municipality.  When such ordinance has been
duly passed, the Mayor shall enter an order to that effect on the minutes or
records of the Council.  From and after the entry of such order, such
territory shall cease to be a part of the municipality.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to annex and disannex property, see Tex. Local Gov't Code Ch.
43



CHAPTER 38:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



Section



   38.01   Municipal civil defense and emergency management committee
created



   38.02   Duties of municipal civil defense and emergency management
committee



   38.03   County-wide civil defense and emergency management program



   38.04   Emergency management coordinator



   38.05   Office of emergency management director created; duties



   38.06   Operational civil defense and emergency management
organization



   38.07   Conflicts with these rules and regulations



   38.08   Liability for damages and injuries



   38.09   Expending public funds on civil defense activities



   38.10   Interfering with public officer; violating rules and
regulations; impersonating public officer



Statutory reference:



   Local emergency management authorized, see Tex. Gov't Code §§ 418.101
- 418.109



§ 38.01  MUNICIPAL CIVIL DEFENSE AND  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
CREATED.



   (A)   The Municipal Civil Defense and Emergency Management Committee
is hereby created.



   (B)   The Committee shall include the following:



      (1)   The Mayor of the municipality, who shall serve as
chairperson of the committee, and who shall also be known as Emergency
Management Director of the municipality.



      (2)   The directors of divisions and chiefs of services of
such divisions as may be provided for by resolution by the Council or by
directive of the Emergency Management Director.



      (3)   Representatives not to exceed seven in number from
civic, business, industry, labor, veterans, professional, or other groups, to
be selected and appointed by the Mayor.



§ 38.02  DUTIES OF MUNICIPAL CIVIL DEFENSE AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
COMMITTEE.



   The powers and duties of the Municipal Civil Defense and Emergency
Management Committee shall include the recommendation for adoption by the
Council of a civil defense and emergency management plan for the
municipality, and the recommendation for adoption by the Council of any and
all mutual aid plans and agreements which are deemed essential for the
implementation of such emergency management plan.  The duties of such Civil
Defense and Emergency Management Committee shall also include making an
inventory of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and
services which could be used during an emergency as well as a continuing
study of the need for amendments and improvements to the emergency management
plan adopted by the Council.  The Civil Defense and Emergency Management
Committee shall meet upon the call of either the chairperson or request, in
writing, of two members of the committee.



§ 38.03  COUNTY-WIDE CIVIL DEFENSE AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.



   The Mayor is hereby authorized to join with the County Judge of this
county and the mayors of other municipalities in this county in the formation
of a Civil Defense and Emergency Management Council for the county and shall
have the authority to cooperate in the formation of a civil defense and
emergency management plan for the county and in the appointment of an
Emergency Management Director for the county, as well as all other powers
necessary to participate in a county-wide program of civil defense and
emergency management insofar as such program may affect the municipality.



§ 38.04  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT  COORDINATOR.



   An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at
the pleasure of the Emergency Management Director.  He or she shall perform
such duties as may be delegated to him or her by the Emergency Management
Director.  He or she shall serve as an ex-officio member of the Municipal
Civil Defense and Emergency Management Committee.



§ 38.05  OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR CREATED; DUTIES.



   (A)   The office of Emergency Management Director is hereby
created.  The Emergency Management Director shall have the authority to
request the declaration of the existence of an emergency by the Council or by
higher authority.  If it is deemed necessary to declare the existence of an
emergency without delay, the Director may do so, if the Council is not in
session, but such action shall be subject to confirmation by the Council at
its next meeting.



   (B)   The duties and responsibilities of the Emergency Management
Director shall include the following:



      (1)   The control and direction of the actual operation or
training efforts of the civil defense and emergency management organization
of the municipality;



      (2)   The determination of all questions of authority and
responsibility that may arise within the civil defense and emergency
management organization of the municipality;



      (3)   The maintenance of necessary liaison with other
municipal, district, state, county, regional, federal, or other civil defense
and emergency management organizations;



      (4)   The marshaling, after declaration of an emergency as
provided for above, of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from
any department of the municipality to aid in the carrying out of the
emergency management plan;



      (5)   The issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the
existence of an emergency and the immediate operational effectiveness of the
emergency management plan;



      (6)   The issuance of reasonable rules, regulations, or
directives which are necessary for the protection of life and property in the
municipality, such rules and regulations to be filed in the office of the
Municipal Secretary;



      (7)   The supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual
aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and
other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the
municipality is located and with other municipalities within the county for
the county-wide coordination of efforts in defense, disaster relief and
emergency management;



      (8)   The supervision of and final authorization for the
procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of
private contributions;



      (9)   The authorizing of agreements, after approval of the
Municipal Attorney, for the use of private property for air raid shelter and
other purposes.



§ 38.06  OPERATIONAL CIVIL DEFENSE AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.



   The operational civil defense and emergency management organization of
the municipality shall consist of the officers and employees of the
municipality designated by the Emergency Management Director as well as all
volunteer workers.  The functions and duties of this  organization shall be
distributed among such divisions, services and special staff as the Council
shall prescribe by resolution or the Emergency Management Director shall
provide by directive.  Any such resolution or directive shall set forth the
form of organization, establish and designate divisions and services, assign
functions, duties and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry
out the provisions of this chapter. Insofar as possible, the form of
organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of
the Texas Defense and Disaster Relief Council and of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.



§ 38.07  CONFLICTS WITH THESE RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and
promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede
all existing sections, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter
may be inconsistent with this chapter.



   (B)   These regulations shall not be construed so as to conflict
with any state or federal statute or with any military order, rule, or
regulation.



§ 38.08  LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES AND  INJURIES.



   These regulations are an exercise by the municipality of its
governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and
safety and neither the municipality, the agents and representatives of the
municipality, or any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, or trustee, or any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying
out, complying with, or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or
regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as the result of such
activity.  Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises
who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or
privilege, or otherwise permits the municipality to inspect, designate, and
use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the
purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, or practice enemy
attack, together with his or her successors in interest, if any, shall not be
civilly liable for the death of or injury to any persons on or about such
real estate or premises under such license, privilege, or other permission or
for loss of or damage to the property of such person.



Cross-reference:



   Claims for damages, see § 31.070



   Emergency actions authorized, see § 31.080



§ 38.09  EXPENDING PUBLIC FUNDS ON  CIVIL DEFENSE ACTIVITIES.



   No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the
municipality in carrying out any civil defense activity authorized by this
chapter without prior approval by the Council nor shall any person have any
right to bind the municipality by contract, agreement, or otherwise without
prior and specific approval of the Council.



§ 38.10  INTERFERING WITH PUBLIC  OFFICER; VIOLATING RULES AND 
REGULATIONS; IMPERSONATING PUBLIC  OFFICER.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct,
hinder, or delay any member of the civil defense organization in the
enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or to
do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued



pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter.



   (B)   It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry,
or display any emblem, insignia, or any other means of identification as a
member of the civil defense organization of the municipality, unless
authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials.



Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 39:  MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



Section




Municipal Officers Generally




   39.001   Council to provide for officers



   39.002   Officers to serve at pleasure of Council



   39.003   Removal of officers




City Secretary




   39.010   Appointment; residency; term of office



   39.011   Compensation; bond required



   39.012   Powers and duties



   39.013   City Secretary to serve as Treasurer



   39.014   City Secretary to serve as Assessor and Collector




Administrator




   39.030   Appointment; residency; term of office; absence



   39.031   Compensation; bond required



   39.032   Powers and duties




Municipal Attorney




   39.040   Office created; appointment and termination



   39.041   Authority to contract with person or firm




Director of Public Utilities




   39.050   Office created



   39.051   Duties




Marshal




   39.060   Office abolished




Chief Of Police




   39.070   Office created; appointment and termination




Building Inspector




   39.080   Office created



   39.081   Duties



   39.082   Right to enter premises



   39.083   Building inspector not personally liable




Personnel Rules




   39.090   Adoption of personnel policies




Social Security




   39.100   Social Security benefits authorized



   39.101   Mayor to act as agent



   39.102   Municipal Secretary to administer




Texas Municipal Retirement System




   39.110   Texas Municipal Retirement System (TMRS)— election to
participate; adoption by reference



Cross-reference:



   Fire Marshal, see §§ 92.001 - 92.012



   Health Officer, see § 93.001 - 93.004



   Municipal Court Clerk, see § 34.40



   Municipal Judge, see §§ 34.20 - 34.26



MUNICIPAL OFFICERS GENERALLY



§ 39.001  COUNCIL TO PROVIDE FOR  OFFICERS.



   The Council may provide for officers and agents of the municipality as
it may from time to time direct to be appointed or elected.



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Tex. Local Gov't Code § 22.071



§ 39.002  OFFICERS TO SERVE AT PLEASURE OF COUNCIL.



   All officers and agents of the municipality shall serve at the pleasure
of the Council, except as specifically excepted by other provisions of this
code.



§ 39.003  REMOVAL OF OFFICERS.



   (A)   The Council may by a vote of a majority of the council members
remove a municipal officer for incompetency, corruption, misconduct, or
malfeasance in office, after providing such officer with due notice and an
opportunity to be heard.



   (B)   If a resolution expressing a lack of confidence in a municipal
officer receives a favorable vote of four council members, such municipal
officer shall be deemed removed from office.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to remove, see Tex. Local Gov't Code § 22.077



CITY SECRETARY



§ 39.010  APPOINTMENT; RESIDENCY; TERM  OF OFFICE.



   (A)   Appointment.  The City Council shall appoint a City Secretary
from nominees by the Mayor, or if same are not acceptable, from those
nominees by the City Council.



   (B)   Residence of City Secretary.  The City Secretary may or may
not be a resident of the City when appointed, but during the term of his or
her office may be required to reside in the city pursuant to Tex. Local Gov't
Code § 150.021(b)(2).



   (C)   Term of office.  The City Secretary shall be appointed for an
indefinite period and shall be subject to discharge at the will of the City
Council.



(Ord. 814, passed 4-14-98)



§ 39.011  COMPENSATION; BOND REQUIRED.



   (A)   The City Secretary, as herein provided for, shall take the
oath and be bonded as provided under the general laws of the state or of
other ordinances of this municipality.



(Ord. 814, passed 4-14-98)



   (B)   The City Secretary shall execute a bond, payable to the
municipality, as required by law, conditioned that the Municipal Secretary
will faithfully perform the duties of the office.  The Council shall
determine the amount of the bond at least annually.  If the Council fails to
determine the amount of the bond for the succeeding year, the amount last
prescribed shall continue to be the amount of bond required.  Such bond
shall be a corporate surety bond and the municipality shall pay all costs,
premiums, and expenses connected therewith.



   (C)   The City Secretary shall receive such compensation as may be
fixed by the City Council. 



§ 39.012  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The City Secretary shall attend all meetings of the City
Council and keep correct minutes or journal of the proceedings in a book
provided for that purpose, and shall read all petitions, ordinances,
resolutions, reports or other writings that shall come before the City
Council of their action; record all ordinances and attest therein with his or
her official signature the date of passage of such ordinances and when
publication thereof his or her official signature, the date of passage of
such ordinance, and when publication thereof is required, shall cause the
same to be published in the official newspaper in compliance with the statues
of the state pertaining thereto; shall record all resolutions adopted by the
City Council and executed by the Mayor and file same in the minutes of the
City Council; shall have custody of and keep all records, books, contracts
and such other documents that may be filed with the City Council or in the
office of the City Secretary; shall keep all books and records for the
receipts and disbursement of all moneys and funds of the city; maintain all
records of all bonds, warrants, or all such other financial instruments,
arrangements, and negotiations necessary for maintaining the money
transactions of the city, and to supervise all such other employees of the
office of the city and do all such other duties as provided under the general
laws of the state for such office or as provided for by the ordinances of
this city, and to be responsible for such other official duties as therein
provided for.



   (B)   The City Secretary may appoint a person subject to the
approval of the City Council to serve in the City Secretary's absence or to
assist in the performance of his or her duties, such assistant to be
classified as City Clerk.  The City Secretary shall appoint such other
persons, subject to the approval of the City Council, to assist in the
operation of the city office.



(Ord. 814, passed 4-14-98)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to appoint, remove, and establish duties for City Secretary,
see Tex. Local Gov't Code §§ 22.071 - 22.074 and 22.077



   Duties specified, see Tex. Local Gov't Code § 22.073



§ 39.013  CITY SECRETARY TO SERVE AS TREASURER.



   The City Secretary shall serve as Treasurer of the municipality and
shall perform all duties of the Treasurer as set forth in Tex. Local Gov't
Code § 22.075, and as assigned by the Council.



Statutory reference:



   Treasurer, see Tex. Local Gov't Code § 22.075



§ 39.014  CITY SECRETARY TO SERVE AS ASSESSOR AND COLLECTOR.



   The City Secretary shall serve as Assessor and Collector of the
municipality and shall perform all duties of such office as assigned by the
Council.



ADMINISTRATOR



§ 39.030  APPOINTMENT; RESIDENCY; TERM OF OFFICE; ABSENCE.



   (A)    Appointment.  The City Council shall appoint an
Administrator for the city who shall be the administrative head of the
municipal government under the direction and supervision of the City Council.



   (B)   Residence of Administrator.  The Administrator may or not be
a resident of the city when appointed, but during the term of his or her
office may be required to reside in the city pursuant to Tex. Local Gov't
Code § 150.021(b)(2).



   (C)   Term of office.  The Administrator shall be appointed for an
indefinite period and shall be subject to discharge at the will of the City
Council.



   (D)   Absence or disability of Administrator.  During the absence
or disability of the Administrator, the City Council shall designate some
properly qualified person to perform the duties of such office.



(Ord. 813, passed 4-14-98)



§ 39.031  COMPENSATION; BOND REQUIRED.



   The Administrator shall receive such compensation as the City Council
shall fix from time to time by resolution and shall furnish such surety bond
as may be required by the City Council or ordinance, the premium to be paid
by the city.



(Ord. 813, passed 4-14-98)



§ 39.032  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The powers and duties of the Administrator shall be;



   (A)   To devote all of his or her working time and attention to the
affairs of the city, and be responsible to the City Council for the efficient
administration of its affairs.



   (B)   To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced.



   (C)   With the advice of the City Council, to appoint and remove all
heads of departments.  He or she shall have the power to appoint or remove
all subordinate employees.  The Administrator shall have the right, power
and authority to suspend a department head of the city with or without pay
until the next regular session of the City Council, or until an emergency
sessions called for the express purpose of reviewing the action taken by the
Administrator.  Should the City Council determine that such suspension is
not justified, reinstatement of back pay shall be made if the suspension has
been made without pay.



   (D)   To exercise supervision and control over all departments
created by the City Council or that may hereafter be created by the City
Council.



   (E)   To attend all meetings of the City Council with the right to
take part in the discussion, but having no vote; and he or she shall be
notified of all special meetings of the City Council.



   (F)   To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the
city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept
and performed and upon knowledge of any violation thereof to call the same to
the attention of the City Council.



   (G)   To act as budget officer and as such to prepare and submit to
the City Council, prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, a budget of
proposed expenditures for the ensuing year, showing in as much detail as
practicable the estimated amounts required by months for the efficient
operation of each department of the city government and the reasons for such
estimated expenditures.



   (H)   The Administrator, in addition to the foregoing paragraph,
shall make and file a budget as required by law.



   (I)   To make a full written report to the City Council as soon
after the close of each quarter's accounts as possible, showing the operation
and expenditures of each department for the preceding quarter, and a
comparison of such monthly expenditures, by departments, with the quarterly
allowances made for such departments in the annual budget, and to keep the
City Council fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and
needs of the city.



   (J)   To act as purchasing agent for the city and to purchase all
merchandise, material, and supplies needed by the city and may establish, if
needed, a suitable storehouse where such supplies shall be kept and from
which same shall be issued as needed; and to adopt such rules and regulations
governing requisitions and transactions of business between himself or
herself as such purchasing agent and the heads of the departments, officers
and employees of the city as the City Council may approve.



      (1)   The Administrator shall have purchasing power up to and
including the sum of $3,000 per month for the purchase of fuel used in the
city-owned vehicles. Except for the above fuel purchases, the Administrator's
purchasing power without prior approval of the City Council shall be up to
and including the sum of $2,000.



      (2)   In case of accident or other circumstances creating an
emergency, the Administrator may, with the consent of the City Council, award
contracts and make purchases for the purpose of repairing damages caused by
such accident or avoiding such public emergency; but immediately afterwards,
he or she shall file with the Mayor a certificate with an itemized account of
all expenditures.



   (K)   The Administrator shall have the power to give merit raises in
pay to city employees.  The Administrator may increase salaries or decrease
salaries under this merit system based upon work habits, skills, attitudes,
accomplishments, job skills.



   (L)   To recommend to the City Council, in writing, from time to
time, for adoption of such measures as he or she may deem necessary or
expedient.



   (M)   To do and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by
ordinance or resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 813, passed 4-14-98)



MUNICIPAL ATTORNEY



§ 39.040  OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT AND TERMINATION.



   The office of Municipal Attorney is created.  The Municipal Attorney
shall be appointed and terminated by the Council.



§ 39.041  AUTHORITY TO CONTRACT WITH PERSON OR FIRM.



   The Council may contract with a private firm or person in private legal
practice to perform the duties and fill the office of Municipal Attorney.



DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC UTILITIES



§ 39.050  OFFICE CREATED.



   The office of Director of Public Utilities is hereby created.



§ 39.051  DUTIES.



   (A)   The Director of Public Utilities shall direct and supervise
the activities of the Department of Public Utilities.



   (B)   The Director of Public Utilities shall have the duty to
construct, maintain, and repair as necessary all assets of the municipality
and shall supervise the activities of all maintenance employees of the
municipality.



   (C)   The Director of Public Utilities shall be the ex officio
Building Inspector.



MARSHAL



§ 39.060  OFFICE ABOLISHED.



   The municipality, having a population of less than 5,000 as shown by
the last preceding federal census, does hereby abolish the office of Marshal
and in lieu thereof substitutes any qualified peace officer of this state
that shall be selected by the Council.  The peace officer shall have all of
the powers of the Marshal as provided by law.



Statutory reference:



   Authorization to abolish, see Tex. Local Gov't Code § 22.076(b)



CHIEF OF POLICE



§ 39.070  OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT AND TERMINATION.



   The position of Police Chief is created.  The Police Chief shall be
appointed and terminated by the Council.



Cross-reference:



   Police department created and duties established, see §§ 33.10 - 33.16



BUILDING INSPECTOR



§ 39.080  OFFICE CREATED



   The office of Building Inspector is hereby created.



§ 39.081  DUTIES.



   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to enforce all laws
relating to the construction, alteration, removal, and demolition of
buildings and structures.



§ 39.082  RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES.



   The Building Inspector, in the discharge of his or her official duties
and upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building,
structure, or premises at any reasonable hour.



§ 39.083  BUILDING INSPECTOR NOT PERSONALLY LIABLE.



   The Building Inspector, acting in good faith and without malice for the
municipality in the discharge of his or her duties, shall not thereby render
himself or herself liable personally and he or she is hereby relieved from
all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property
as a result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the
discharge of his or her duties.



Cross-reference:



   Administration of building and construction codes, see Chapter 150



   Duties regarding junked and abandoned vehicles, see §§ 95.10 et seq.



PERSONNEL RULES AND POLICIES



§ 39.090  ADOPTION OF PERSONNEL  POLICIES.



   The personnel rules and policies for the municipality are hereby
adopted by reference and shall be treated as if set forth in full herein. 
All ordinances and resolutions that have been duly passed by the City Council
pertaining to personnel policies in whole or in part are hereby repealed and
superseded by the personnel policy as adopted by the City Council on the 11th
day of November, 2003.



(Ord. 791, passed 11-12-96; Am. Ord. 899, passed 11-11-04; Am. Ord. 905,
passed 3-16-04; Am. Ord. 964, passed 5-8-07)



SOCIAL SECURITY



§ 39.100  SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS  AUTHORIZED.



   The Council acting for and on behalf of the city shall enter into all
necessary agreements with the State Department of Human Resources for the
purpose of securing the benefits of Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance
for municipal employees.



Statutory reference:



   Social security for municipal employees, see Tex. Gov't Code §§
606.021 et seq.



§ 39.101  MAYOR TO ACT AS AGENT.



   The Mayor is hereby appointed as agent of the Council and of the
municipality to execute all necessary agreements and instruments for and in
behalf of the municipality.



§ 39.102  MUNICIPAL SECRETARY TO ADMINISTER.



   The Municipal Secretary is hereby directed to be the person responsible
for making assessments, collections, payments and reports as required by the
State Department of Human Resources.



TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM



§ 39.110  TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM (TMRS)— ELECTION TO
PARTICIPATE; ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   Election to participate in the TMRS.  On behalf of the
municipality, the Council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the
municipality and all of the employees of all departments, except the Fire
Department, participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereafter
“TMRS”) as provided in Tex. Gov't Code §§ 851.001 et seq., as amended;
and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted.



   (B)   Election to participate in the TMRS Supplemental Benefits
Fund.  The Council elects to have the employees of all participating
departments of the municipality participate in and be covered by the
Supplemental Benefits Fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as
provided by Tex. Gov't Code §§ 851.001 et seq.; and all the benefits and
obligations of participation in such fund are hereby accepted by the
municipality as to such employees.



   (C)   Adoption by reference.  Ordinances effecting the plan for
participation in the TMRS, employee contributions, updated service credits,
increases in benefits and retirement annuities and any other applicable
legislation of the municipality and state are adopted by reference into this
code of ordinances as if fully set forth herein and shall be kept on file in
the office of the Municipal Secretary.



(Am. Ord. 851, passed 2-15-01)



CHAPTER 40:  RECORDS MANAGEMENT



Section



   40.01   Policy



   40.02   Definitions



   40.03   Municipal records declared public property



   40.04   Designation of Records Management Officer



   40.05   Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan;
authority of plan



   40.06   Duties and responsibilities of department heads



   40.07   Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing
with state



   40.08   Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of
records under schedule



   40.09   Destruction of unscheduled records



Statutory reference:



   Records management, see Tex. Local Gov't Code §§ 201.001 et seq.



§ 40.01  POLICY.



   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the municipality to provide
for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation,
distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all
municipal records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for
their management from creation to ultimate disposition, consistent with the
requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records
management practice.



§ 40.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ESSENTIAL RECORD.  Any record of the municipality necessary to the
resumption or continuation of its operations in an emergency or disaster, to
the re-creation of its legal and financial status, or to the protection and
fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.



   MUNICIPAL RECORDS.  All documents, papers, letters, books, maps,
photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic
media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or
characteristic and regardless of whether public access to them is open or
restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the
municipality of any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the
transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the
municipality and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter or procedures authorized by it and in no
other manner.



   PERMANENT RECORD.  Any record of the municipality for which the
retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent.



   RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULE.  A document prepared by or under the
authority of the Records Management Officer listing the records maintained by
the municipality, their retention periods, and other records disposition
information that the records management program may require.



   RECORDS MANAGEMENT.  The application of management techniques to the
creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records
for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of
recordkeeping.  The term includes the development of records control
schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the
protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-
effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and
distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of
micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.



   RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER.  The person designated in § 40.04 of this
chapter.



   RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN.  The plan developed under § 40.05 of this
chapter.



   RETENTION PERIOD.  The minimum time that must pass after the creation,
recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions
associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.



§ 40.03  MUNICIPAL RECORDS DECLARED  PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   All municipal records as defined in § 40.02 are hereby declared to be
the property of the municipality.  No municipal official or employee has, by
virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records
even though he or she may have developed or compiled them.  The unauthorized
destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 40.04  DESIGNATION OF RECORDS  MANAGEMENT OFFICER.



   (A)   The Municipal Secretary, and the successive holders of such
office, shall serve as Records Management Officer for the municipality.  As
provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or
her name with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library within 30
days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable.



   (B)   In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, the
Records Management Officer shall:



      (1)   Administer the records management program and provide
assistance to department heads in its implementation;



      (2)   Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition
policies, systems, standards, and procedures;



      (3)   In cooperation with department heads, identify essential
records and establish a disaster plan for each municipal office and
department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to re-
establish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;



      (4)   Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation
of the historically valuable records of the municipality;



      (5)   Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and
for recordkeeping supplies;



      (6)   Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish
a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the
municipality;



      (7)   Monitor records retention schedules and administrative
rules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine
if the records management program and the municipality's records control
schedules are in compliance with state regulations;



      (8)   Disseminate to the Council and department heads
information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local
government records;



      (9)   Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming,
destruction, or other disposition of the records of the municipality are
carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records
management program and the requirements of state law;



      (10)   Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed
under approved records control schedules or through records destruction
authorization requests, the volume of records microfilmed or stored
electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of
such disposal or disposition;



      (11)   Report annually to the Council on the implementation of
the records management plan in each department of the municipality, including
summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under division (B)(10)
of this section; and



      (12)   Bring to the attention of the Council non-compliance by
department heads or other municipal personnel with the policies and
procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records
Act.



§ 40.05  RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN TO  BE DEVELOPED; APPROVAL OF PLAN; 
AUTHORITY OF PLAN.



   (A)   The Records Management Officer shall develop a records
management plan for the municipality for submission to the Council.  The
plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and
improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential
records of the municipality, and to properly preserve those records of the
municipality that are of historical value.  The plan must be designed to
enable the Records Management Officer to carry out his or her duties
prescribed by state law and this chapter effectively.



   (B)   Once approved by the Council, the records management plan
shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs,
commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the
municipality and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed,
or disposed of in accordance with the plan.



   (C)   State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or
recordkeeping requirements of a department head to not exempt the department
head or the records in the department head's care from the application of
this chapter and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be
used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the
records management program of the municipality.



§ 40.06  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEPARTMENT HEADS.



   In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, department heads
shall:



   (A)   Cooperate with the Records Management Officer in carrying out
the policies and procedures established in the municipality for the efficient
and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of
this chapter;



   (B)   Adequately document the transaction of government business and
the services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his or
her staff are responsible; and



   (C)   Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their
preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in
accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program
of the municipality and the requirements of this chapter.



§ 40.07  RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULES TO BE DEVELOPED; APPROVAL; FILING WITH 
STATE.



   (A)   The Records Management Officer, in cooperation with department
heads, shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department
basis listing all records series created or received by the department and
the retention period for each series.  Records control schedules shall also
contain such other information regarding the disposition of municipal records
as the records management plan may require.



   (B)   Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended
as needed by the Records Management Officer on a regular basis to ensure that
it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and
that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the
department and the records management program of the municipality.



   (C)   Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended
schedule for a department must be approved by the department head and the
Council.



   (D)   Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be
submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian as
provided by state law.  If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the
schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing.  The Records
Management Officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director
and librarian.



§ 40.08  IMPLEMENTATION OF RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULES; DESTRUCTION OF 
RECORDS UNDER SCHEDULE.



   (A)   A records control schedule for a department that has been
approved and adopted under § 40.07 shall be implemented by department heads
according to the procedures of the records management plan.



   (B)   A record whose retention period has expired on a records
control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending
on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending
lawsuit, or the department head requests in writing to the Records Management
Officer that the record be retained for an additional period.



   (C)   Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records
control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the
Records Management Officer from the Council.



§ 40.09  DESTRUCTION OF UNSCHEDULED  RECORDS.



   A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control
schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same
manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the Records
Management Officer has submitted to and received back from the director and
librarian an approved destruction authorization request.



TITLE V:  PUBLIC UTILITIES



   Chapter



      50.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE SERVICES



      51.   WATER AND SEWER SERVICES



      52.   ELECTRICITY



CHAPTER 50:  GARBAGE AND REFUSE SERVICES



Section



   50.01   Sanitation collection service required



   50.02   Container required



   50.03   Placement of containers



   50.04   Meddling with trash receptacles prohibited



   50.05   Containers to be kept sanitary and secure



   50.06   Unauthorized private collections prohibited



   50.07   Rates for collection, hauling and disposal of garbage and
trash



   50.08   Collection of charges



   50.09   Removal of building materials



   50.10   Prohibited acts



   50.11   Non-residential customers; container types; collection
schedules



   50.12   Manner of collection and transportation



   50.13   License for private collection required; exception



   50.14   Out-of-municipality services



   50.15   Dumping of solid waste at Wilson Street Yard



   50.16   Transporters of grease trap, sand trap, and septic waste



Cross-reference:



   Grease traps, see § 93.089



§ 50.01  SANITATION COLLECTION SERVICE REQUIRED.



   Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any
premises or any place where garbage or rubbish accumulates shall subscribe to
a sanitation collection service.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.02  CONTAINER REQUIRED.



   It shall be the duty of every person subscribing to the sanitation
collection service to provide a container or containers for garbage and
refuse, sufficient in size and number to accommodate and securely keep all
garbage and refuse that may accumulate between collections.  Garbage
containers shall be watertight and constructed of a solid and durable grade
of metal, plastic, or paper material.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.03  PLACEMENT OF CONTAINERS.



   It shall be the duty of every person subscribing to the sanitation
collection service to place such garbage containers directly behind the
curbline of the street abutting such property or in the absence of a curb
directly behind the ditch line abutting such property.  In no event shall
such containers be placed in the street or on the sidewalk or in any manner
placed where the containers will interfere with vehicular or pedestrian
traffic.  It shall be the responsibility of the subscriber to place the
containers no earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the afternoon preceding the
collection day.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.04  MEDDLING WITH TRASH RECEPTACLES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to meddle with garbage cans, trash or
rubbish receptacles or in any way pilfer, search, or scatter contents of such
garbage cans or rubbish receptacles in or upon any street or alley within the
municipal limits.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to persons authorized by the
municipality to search or otherwise meddle with trash receptacles.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.05  CONTAINERS TO BE KEPT  SANITARY AND SECURE.



   All containers shall be kept clean and free from accumulation of any
substance remaining attached to the inside of the container which would
attract or breed flies, mosquitoes, or other insects.  The area surrounding
garbage containers shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
The contents of all receptacles shall be protected so that the wind cannot
scatter the contents over the streets, alleys, or other property within the
municipality.  All containers shall be securely closed in such a manner as
to prevent the scattering of the contents and to make them inaccessible to
insects, rodents, and other animals.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.06  UNAUTHORIZED PRIVATE  COLLECTIONS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport garbage or
refuse for hire which has been collected from any premises within the
municipality over any public street within the municipality.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to any person who at the time of
such activity is operating under a valid contract or franchise granted by the
municipality which authorizes such person to use the public streets to
conduct such activity.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.07  RATES FOR COLLECTION, HAULING AND DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND TRASH.



   The monthly charge for the collection, removal and disposal of garbage
and trash from residences and businesses within the corporate limits of the
municipality shall be as provided for in § 15.00 of the Fee Schedule, set
forth in Appendix 1 of this code.



§ 50.08  COLLECTION OF CHARGES.



   The charges fixed herein for the collection, removal, and disposal of
all garbage and trash shall be entered in their respective amounts on the
utility bill.  The municipality may discontinue all utility services,
including water, sewer, electric and garbage and trash services, for failing
to pay any such assessed charges and until such charges have been paid in
full, under conditions and procedures detailed in §§ 51.33 through 51.37.



§ 50.09  REMOVAL OF BUILDING  MATERIALS.



   Waste from building operations, rock, waste, building materials, or
other refuse resulting from building or remodeling operations or resulting
from a general cleanup of vacant or improved property shall be removed by the
building contractor, owner, or occupant of the building at his or her own
expense.



(Ord. 1035, passed 1-10-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.10  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, throw, or
deposit any garbage, trash, debris, stagnant water, or dead animal into,
upon, or along any public property or private property of another, except as
may be specifically provided by this chapter.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or otherwise in
control of any premises within the municipality to permit any of the
conditions described in division (A) to exist upon property owned or
controlled by him or her after having actual or constructive notice thereof.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place in any container
any material other than as specifically provided in this chapter.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or maintain
garbage or trash except as provided for by this chapter.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any burning
match, charcoal, ember, or other material in any container used for the
disposal of garbage.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.11  NON-RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMERS; CONTAINER TYPES; COLLECTION SCHEDULES.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner or person otherwise in
charge of multi-family, institutional, or industrial premises within the
municipality to cause all garbage and trash accumulated on the premises to be
placed in disposable containers, or commercial-type containers. 
Commercial-type containers may be used and may be placed at a location on the
premises as arranged between the customer and the collector, but subject to
review by the municipality at any time.



   (B)   Disposable containers shall be placed at a location on the
premises which is readily accessible to the collector.



   (C)   The amount and character of garbage shall be considered in
establishing size of commercial containers and frequency of pickup.  The
municipality shall have final authority to establish such size and frequency
based on the history of amount and type of garbage generated by the
customer.  The collection and removal of garbage and trash from premises
used for commercial, institutional, or industrial purposes shall be made as
often as necessary in order to maintain the premises free of such
accumulations.  Garbage, except dry trash in contractor-supplied containers,
shall be collected not less than one time each week, except for roll-off
containers which shall not be subject to this provision so long as they are
used solely for brush and dry trash.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.12  MANNER OF COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION.



   (A)   The collection, removal, and disposal of all garbage, trash,
and brush shall be carried on in a systematic, efficient manner to keep the
municipality in a clean and sanitary condition.



   (B)   All vehicles used for the collection and transportation of
garbage and trash shall be equipped with suitable covers which shall be used
to prevent blowing or scattering of refuse while garbage and trash are being
transported for disposal.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.13  LICENSE FOR PRIVATE COLLECTION REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   No person shall collect, remove, or dispose of garbage
containers or trash receptacles or transport garbage or trash on the streets,
alleys, or public thoroughfares of the municipality except duly authorized
agents or employees of the municipality and persons acting pursuant to a
contract with the municipality for public collection and disposal of garbage,
trash, and brush, except as provided in this section.  This section shall
not apply to the transportation of garbage, trash, or brush from outside the
municipality to a disposal site outside the municipality.



   (B)   Upon application and compliance with this section, a license
may be obtained to serve the licensee’s place of business.  A license
shall be issued upon application and payment of a $25 license fee to the
Water Department office for the collection and transportation of garbage and
trash from the licensee’s premises or place of business using the
licensee’s own vehicles, equipment, and personnel.  Application for a
license shall include the following information:



      (1)   Name and address of applicant;



      (2)   Business name and business address of the applicant;



      (3)   Type of business of applicant;



      (4)   Number, size, and type of vehicles to be used for
carrying garbage and trash; and



      (5)   Proposed disposal site.



   (C)   All licensed trucks and containers used for the collection and
transportation of garbage and trash shall be clearly marked with the
owner’s name and telephone number in letters and figures not less than two
inches high.



   (D)   Garbage and trash shall be removed by the licensee at least
twice a week.



   (E)   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
sufficient cause for revocation of the license by the Council or its designee.



   (F)   Individuals desiring to occasionally remove brush, debris, or
trash from their own residence or business may do so if they have regular
service from the municipality’s contractor.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.14  OUT-OF-MUNICIPALITY SERVICES.



   The municipality is not required to furnish garbage services to
consumers beyond the corporate limits, or to continue to supply, once begun,
such services.  The municipality reserves the right to provide services to
such consumers it deems advisable and to, at any time, wholly or partially,
discontinue such services to any consumers located outside the corporate
limits.



§ 50.15  DUMPING OF SOLID WASTE AT WILSON STREET YARD.



   (A)   A fee per cubic yard shall be charged by the city for the
dumping of solid waste at Wilson Street Yard, as provided for in § 15.00(G)
of the Fee Schedule, as set forth in Appendix 1 of this code.



   (B)   Permits shall be obtained at the City Hall, 111 West Main,
before the dumping of any solid waste materials.



   (C)   One free dump per month of bagged waste only will be granted
upon presentation of a city utility bill stub at the City Hall.



   (D)   No tires, batteries, paint or shingles shall be permitted.



(Ord. 799, passed 8-4-97; Am. Ord. 905, passed 3-16-04)



§ 50.16  TRANSPORTERS OF GREASE TRAP, SAND TRAP, AND SEPTIC WASTE.



   (A)   The definition of terms and the enforcement hereof shall be in
accordance with Tex. Water Code Chapter 26.  The words “regulatory
authority” shall be understood to refer to the Grayson County Health
Department.  The word “department” shall refer to the Texas Department
of Health (TDH) or its authorized agents or employees.  Where inspections or
enforcement activities are herein provided, such activities may be conducted
by the regulatory authority or the city.



   (B)   (1)   Any person desiring to operate as a transporter of
grease trap, sand trap, and/or septic waste shall make written application
for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority.  Such
application shall include the name and address of each applicant, mailing
address, telephone number, name of present company, capacity of tank, and TDH
registration number, with a copy of state registration attached thereto. 
Governmental agencies providing collection and/or transportation of waste
using vehicles owned and operated by the agency are exempt from the
provisions of this section.



      (2)   Prior to approval of an application for a permit, the
regulatory authority shall inspect each transporter unit to determine
compliance with state laws and rules.



      (3)   The regulatory authority shall issue a permit to the
applicant providing an inspection reveals that the waste transporter unit
complies with the requirements of state laws and this section.  All permits
shall be renewed annually.  Temporary permits shall be issued for no more
than four consecutive days.



      (4)   A person may renew a permit by making written
application on forms provided by the regulatory authority.  Such application
shall include the information described in division (B)(1), and shall include
a renewal fee as established by the Commissioners’ Court of Grayson County.



   (C)   The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for
a hearing, deny, suspend or revoke a permit for violations of any of the
requirements of state law, or rules promulgated pursuant thereto or for
duties.  Prior to denial, suspension or revocation, the regulatory authority
shall notify the permit holder or the person in charge in writing of the
reason for which the permit is subject to denial, suspension or revocation,
and that the permit shall be denied, suspended or revoked at the end of ten
days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing
is filed with regulatory authority by the permit holder.  If no request for
a hearing is filed, revocation of the permit shall become final.



   (D)   A notice provided for in this order is properly served when it
is delivered in person to the permit holder or the person in charge, or when
deposited with U.S. Postal Service by registered mail, return receipt
requested, to the last known address of the permit holder.  A copy of the
notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority.



   (E)   The hearings provided for in this order shall be conducted by
a hearing officer designated by the regulatory authority at a time and place
designated by the hearing officer, who shall make a finding, and shall
sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing.  A
written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the permit
holder by the regulatory authority.



   (F)   (1)   Marking and identification.  Owners or operators of
tanks or containers used for the



collection and/or over-the road transportation of wastes regulated under this
section shall prominently mark such tanks or containers to show the company
name and the department-assigned registrations number and a two-digit number
assigned by the Grayson County Health Department.  The identification will
be removed when it is no longer authorized by the Texas Health Department or
leaves the possession of the person registered.



      (2)   Sanitation standards.  All vehicles and equipment used
for the collection and transportation of sludges and similar wastes shall be
constructed, operated, and maintained to prevent loss of liquid or solid
waste materials and to prevent health nuisance and safety hazards to
operating personnel and the public.  Collection vehicles and equipment shall
be maintained in a sanitary condition to preclude odors and insect breeding
and receive an annual inspection by the Grayson County Health Department or
at any other time deemed appropriate.



      (3)   Mixing of incompatible wastes.  Mixing of incompatible
wastes within the same container is prohibited.  Transporters shall not use
the same container or pumping equipment to collect or transport incompatible
waste without first emptying and cleaning the container and equipment of all
previously handled wastes.  For purposes of this subsection, incompatible
waste means wastes which have different processing, storage, or disposal
requirements.  However, transporters may mix wastes with different
characteristics provided the facility to which the waste is being transported
is authorized to receive of such a waste mixture.



   (G)   (1)   Waste control record.  Persons who collect and/or
transport waste subject to control under this section shall initiate and
maintain a record of each individual collection and deposit.  Such record
shall be in the form of a manifest trip ticket or other similar documentation
approved by the Grayson County Health Department.  The waste control record
shall include:



         (a)   Name and Texas Department of Health registration
number of transporter;



         (b)   County Health Department assigned number;



         (c)   Name and address of the person who generates the
waste and date collected;



         (d)   Type and amount of waste collected or transported;



         (e)   Name of responsible person (driver) collecting,
transporting, and depositing the waste;



         (f)   Date and place where the waste was deposited;



         (g)   Identification (permit application or site
registration number, location, and operator) of the facility where the waste
was deposited; and



         (h)   Name and signature of facility representative
acknowledging receipt of the waste and the amount of waste received.



      (2)   Maintenance of records and reporting.  The transporter
shall provide the person generating the waste a copy of the waste control
record or other document showing receipt of waste and shall provide the
facility operator a copy of all control records of wastes deposited.  The
transporter shall retain a copy of all records showing the collection and
disposition of waste.  Such copies shall be retained by the generator,
disposal site and transporter for 24 months and shall be available for
inspection upon request.  Nothing herein shall be construed so as to relieve
any person of the mandatory reporting requirements of the TDH.



   (H)   Discharge or spills.  In the event of a discharge of waste
during collection or transportation, the collector or transporter must take
appropriate action to protect human health and the environment, e.g., notify
local law enforcement and County Health department; dike the discharge area;
clean up any waste discharge that occurs during transportation; or take such
action as may be required or approved by federal, state, or local officials
having jurisdiction so that the waste discharge no longer presents a public
health or environmental danger.  Transporters are responsible for reporting
spills in accordance with requirements of the state Oil and hazardous
Substance Spill Contingency Plan.



   (I)   Any person who engages in the transporta- tion of wastes
(subject to regulation under this section) from Grayson County to other
states or from other states to Grayson County, or persons who collect or
transport such waste in Grayson County but have their place of business in
another state, shall comply with all the requirements for transporters
contained in the TDH solid waste management regulations and this section. 
If such person also engages in the activity of managing such wastes in the
state by storage, processing, or disposal, such person shall follow the
applicable requirements for site operators of such activities.



   (J)   Any person who violates any provision of this section and any
person who is a permit holder of or otherwise operates a waste transporter
that does not comply with the requirements of this section shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined as provided in § 10.99. 
Each and every violation of the provisions of this section, each day that
such offense continues, shall constitute a separate offense whether or not
such act or omission was knowingly or willfully done or omitted.



(Ord. 708, passed 11-14-89)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 51:  WATER AND SEWER SERVICES



Section




General Regulations




   51.001   Provisions applicable to all users



   51.002   Enforcement



   51.003   Application required



   51.004   False statements in application



   51.005   Users liable for bills



   51.006   No service to other premises when account is delinquent



   51.007   Right of entry



   51.008   Tampering with lines



   51.009   Taps to be made by municipal personnel



   51.010   Service not required to out-of- municipality consumers



   51.011   Connection to municipal service required



   51.012   Public water well restrictions




Tap Fees; Meter Deposits; Utility Service Deposits




   51.020   Water and sewer tap fees required



   51.021   Water service fee



   51.022   Sewer service fee



   51.023   Utility service deposit required




Water And Sewer Rates; Billing Procedures




   51.030   Water and sewer rate schedule



   51.031   Charges to accrue



   51.032   Multiple units served by one meter



   51.033   Billing regulations



   51.034   Penalty for late payment



   51.035   Discontinuation of service; notice



   51.036   Discontinuation and reconnect charge



   51.037   Service charge for insufficient funds check




Water Conservation/Drought Contingency Plan




   51.050   When water saving required



   51.051   Water rationing or termination of service




Waterworks Regulations




   51.060   General regulations



   51.061   Out-of-municipality water services



   51.062   Waste of water



   51.063   Regulations affecting connections to system



   51.064   Turning on and off at meter



   51.065   Bypassing meter



   51.066   Breaking lock on municipal stopcock



   51.067   Damage to meter



   51.068   Secondary taps prohibited



   51.069   Dual connections prohibited



   51.070   Patron responsible for service line condition and water
usage



   51.071   Fire hydrant use restricted



   51.072   Access to meter



   51.073   Inaccurate metering



   51.074   Temporary service interruptions



   51.075   Cross connection control program




Meter Rereads




   51.080   Meter reread procedures and fees; testing of meter




Sanitary Sewer System Regulations




   51.090   Definitions



   51.091   Sewer service required; exceptions



   51.092   Service connections



   51.093   Septic tank requirements



   51.094   Stoppage or obstruction of sewer system



   51.095   Cesspools prohibited



   51.096   Industrial wastes



Cross-reference:



   Transporters of grease, trap, sand trap, and septic waste, see § 50.16



   Utility meter tampering, see § 130.08



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 51.001  PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL USERS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons provided
utility and sanitation collection services by the municipality.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to operate water and sewer utility, see Tex. Local Gov’t
Code § 402.001



   Exclusive jurisdiction of the municipality, see Tex. Water Code §
13.042



§ 51.002  ENFORCEMENT.



   Except where other arrangements are specifically provided, it shall be
the duty of the Director of Public Utilities or his or her authorized agent
to enforce the provisions of this chapter.



§ 51.003  APPLICATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any person who moves into any premises shall file an
application for water and/or sewer service in accordance with the rules and
requirements of the municipality before using the water or sewer service
connections for such premises.



   (B)   If any customer shall change his or her place of residence or
business, he or she shall, within 48 hours after such change, give notice of
such change to the municipality.



   (C)   Where an application is accepted for water or sewer service,
it shall be considered the bona fide residence or place of business of the
applicant.  Should water or sewer be disconnected for the nonpayment of
bills or for other violations of this chapter, no new application will be
accepted from the owner, agent, or any other person to continue service in
such place or any other place under any other name, so long as such place or
any other place is occupied by the original applicant as the bona fide
resident or place of business of same, until after all bills and penalties,
damages to water works equipment, or other service charges have been paid in
full or some form of agreement has been reached.



   (D)   Should any person move into any premises supplied with water
from the municipal mains, without making an application in the manner
provided for by the municipality, such person shall become responsible for
all water used from the date of the last payment made on such account
previous to his or her occupying such premises, and the failure to pay same
shall be cause for disconnecting such service until the amount due is paid.



   (E)   Where service has been discontinued, refused or posted for
discontinuance at a premises due to nonpayment of delinquent charges or a
violation of this code, no application will be accepted from any owner,
occupant, tenant, person or entity to resume service at the premises so long
as there remains delinquent charges on any account or a code violation for
services at the premises.



   (F)   The city shall not accept an application of any owner,
occupant, tenant, person or entity at a premise if the owner(s) or any
occupant(s) of the premises has a prior payment history reflecting delinquent
utility accounts with any municipality and/or utility district.



   (G)   No application shall be accepted until the occurrence of any
of the following events:



      (1)   All delinquent charges are paid in full;



      (2)   Arrangements for payment of the delinquent charges,
satisfactory to the city are made; or



      (3)   The Code violation is repaired, corrected or abated
pursuant to the existing codes of the city.



   (H)   Any premises owner(s) or occupant(s) that attempts to negate
the requirements of the preceding sections by changing the name of the
responsible person on any application for service shall be liable for any
subsequent service charges provided to the premises if said transfer is in
order to avoid the payment of delinquent charges and/or the correction of
Code violations on the premises.



(Ord. 992, passed 5-12-09)



§ 51.004  FALSE STATEMENTS IN APPLICATION.



   (A)   If any person shall make false statements in the application
for water or sewer service, he or she shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Any consumer who discontinues his or her place of business or
moves from his or her residence and leaves a bill for water service or any
other services due the municipality and makes application for service at some
other address, either under his or her own name or under a different name,
without stating to the municipality the old address and name under which
water or sewer services were used at the address where there is a bill due,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.005  USERS LIABLE FOR BILLS.



   (A)   Where there are different consumers liable for water or sewer
charges, and where one or more consumers so liable leave such premises, such
consumers so leaving shall not be supplied with water at the new premises
occupied by them until all accounts due by such persons shall have been
paid.  Where any consumer is liable to the municipality for such charges at
one place and is thereafter located using water at some other place, the
water shall be turned off at the new location until all valid accounts past
due are paid.



   (B)   Where two or more families or unrelated individuals occupy the
same house or apartment, and the water or sewer account is in the name of one
family or unrelated individual, if the one in whose name the account stands
moves away, the remaining family or unrelated individual is also responsible
for the unpaid water or sewer bills.



§ 51.006  NO SERVICE TO OTHER PREMISES WHEN ACCOUNT IS DELINQUENT.



   No service shall be furnished to any person who is delinquent in the
payment of any bill for water or sewer furnished on the premises to which
water or sewer service is desired or to any other premises in the
municipality.



§ 51.007  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   A duly authorized representative or agent of the municipality, bearing
proper credential and identification, shall have the right at all reasonable
times to go upon privately owned property for the purpose of inspection of
water service lines or mains and sewer connections and drains and all other
related lines or equipment.  Upon refusal of the right to make such
inspections, any duly authorized representative or agent of the municipality
shall have the right to disconnect from such privately owned property all
municipal sewer and water connections.



§ 51.008  TAMPERING WITH LINES.



   Any person who shall tamper with, alter, change, bypass, divert, or
connect to any water or sewer mains or service lines owned by the
municipality without first obtaining permission or consent of the
municipality shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.009  TAPS TO BE MADE BY MUNICIPAL PERSONNEL.



   All sewer and water taps will be made by municipal personnel, after all
permits and application forms have been completed and required fees paid.



§ 51.010  SERVICE NOT REQUIRED TO OUT- OF-MUNICIPALITY CONSUMERS.



   The municipality is not required to furnish water or sewer services to
consumers beyond the corporate limits, or to continue to supply, once begun,
such services.  The municipality reserves the right to provide services to
such consumers it deems advisable and to, at any time, wholly or partially,
discontinue such water and sewer services to any consumers located outside
the corporate limits of the municipality.



§ 51.011  CONNECTION TO MUNICIPAL SERVICE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Each house and building within the limits of the municipality
shall be separately and independently connected only with the municipal water
system and no other source of water where there is a municipal water main
available.



   (B)   The use of water from a private water well from or to any
property served by the municipal water system is prohibited.  This provision
shall not be construed as prohibiting the use of such private well water for
non-household purposes by the property on which an existing well is situated.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.012  PUBLIC WATER WELL RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Purpose, restrictions and uses of all that area within a
150-foot radius of a public water well.



      (1)   The purpose of this section is to protect the public
water supply from pollution hazards by means of sanitary control.



      (2)   The construction and operation of underground petroleum
and chemical storage tanks and liquid transmission pipelines, stock pens,
feedlots, dump grounds, privies, cesspools, septic tank or sewage treatment
drainfields, improperly constructed water wells of any depth, and all other
construction or operation that could create an unsanitary condition within,
upon, or across the area within a 150-foot radius of the well are
prohibited.  For the purpose of this section, improperly constructed water
wells are those wells which do not meet the surface and subsurface
construction standards for a public water supply well.



      (3)   The construction of tile or concrete sanitary sewers,
sewer appurtenances, septic tanks, storm sewers, and cemeteries is
specifically prohibited within a 50-foot radius of any public water well.



      (4)   This section permits the construction of homes or
buildings within the 150-foot radius as long as all items in divisions (A)(2)
and (A)(3) are recognized and followed.



      (5)   This section permits normal farming and ranching
operations, except that livestock shall not be allowed within 50 feet of any
public water well.



   (B)   Penalty.  Any person violating any part of this section shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine
not to exceed $1,000 for each offense, each day to be considered a separate
violation.



(Ord. 929, passed 7-12-05)



TAP FEES; METER DEPOSITS; UTILITY SERVICE DEPOSITS



§ 51.020  WATER AND SEWER TAP FEES REQUIRED.



   The municipality shall install and maintain water and sewer service
connections in the streets, alleys, and easements, and shall charge for the
installation of all such connections.  Water and sanitary sewer tap fees
shall be paid to the municipality at the time application is made for each
service installation as provided for in Plumbing Fees, § 10.00(A)(5) of the
Fee Schedule set forth in Appendix 1 of this code.  No tap fee charge shall
be made for connections to the main installed by a developer.



(Am. Ord. 944, passed 9-6-05)



§ 51.021  WATER SERVICE FEE.



   A water service fee shall be paid to the municipality prior to
commencement of service as provided for in § 16.00 of the Fee Schedule set
forth in Appendix 1 of this code.



(Ord. 905, passed 3-16-04; Am. Ord. 944, passed 9-6-05)



§ 51.022  SEWER SERVICE FEE.



   A sewer service fee shall be paid to the municipality prior to
commencement of service as provided for in § 16.01(B) of the Fee Schedule
set forth in Appendix 1 of this code.



(Ord. 944, passed 9-6-05)



§ 51.023  UTILITY SERVICE DEPOSIT  REQUIRED.



   At the time of application for utility service, the applicant shall
make a security deposit in the amount as provided for in § 16.00(B) of the
Fee Schedule set forth in Appendix 1 of this code.



(Am. Ord. 944, passed 9-6-05)



WATER AND SEWER RATES; BILLING PROCEDURES



§ 51.030  WATER AND SEWER RATE SCHEDULE.



   Monthly rates and charges for water and sewer services furnished by the
municipality shall be determined in accordance with §§ 16.00 and 16.01 of
the Fee Schedule set forth in Appendix 1 of this code.



§ 51.031  CHARGES TO ACCRUE.



   All rates and charges for services to consumer’s premises shall
accrue and be charged against the consumer until such time as notice is given
to the office of the Municipal Secretary by the consumer or consumer’s
authorized agent to discontinue services to the consumer’s premises.



§ 51.032  MULTIPLE UNITS SERVED BY ONE  METER.



   In all cases where two or more units are served by one meter, separate
minimum charges shall be made for each unit.  No provision shall be made for
a vacancy in any unit unless the owner shall furnish satisfactory proof to
the Council that water service to such unit has been discontinued and at the
same time by a written statement agree that the unit shall be equipped with a
separate meter and a separate charge paid therefor.



§ 51.033  BILLING REGULATIONS.



   All monthly water, sewer, and garbage charges shall be billed and
considered in all things as one charge; the payment shall not be divided at
any time for any reason and the payment shall apply to the bill as a whole. 
The monthly charges shall become due and payable on the first of each month
following the month in which service was rendered, and shall be payable in
full by the 10th of that month.  If the 10th of the month falls on a
Saturday or Sunday, any payment received by the municipality prior to 8:00
a.m. on the following Monday morning will be considered a timely payment. 
If the 10th of the month falls on a holiday observed by the municipality, any
payment received by the municipality prior to 8:00 a.m. on the following work
day will be considered a timely payment.



§ 51.034  PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT.



   A late payment (delinquency) penalty as prescribed in § 16.00 of the
Fee Schedule, as set forth in Appendix 1 of this Code, shall be imposed on
any service accounts which are not paid within 10 days after the account
becomes due and payable.



§ 51.035  DISCONTINUATION OF SERVICE; NOTICE.



   (A)   Water, sewer, or garbage collection services to any customer
are subject to discontinuation after 22 days from the first of each month
following the month in which service was rendered.



   (B)   The following policies will be followed by the municipality
regarding discontinuation of service:



      (1)   When it becomes necessary for the municipality to
discontinue utility service to a customer for nonpayment of bill, service
will be reinstated only after all bills for service then due have been paid
and any required deposit or reconnect charges have been made.



      (2)   It is the policy of the municipality to discontinue
utility service to customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after
notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills.  The
municipality’s form for application for utility service and all bills shall
contain, in addition to the title, address, and telephone number of the
official in charge of billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions
to the effect:



         (a)   That all bills are due and payable on or before
the date set forth on the bill;



         (b)   That if any bill is not paid by or before the 22nd
day from the first of each month following the month in which service was
rendered, service will be discontinued for nonpayment; and



         (c)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his
or her bill shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be
represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his or her 
choosing and may present orally or in writing his or her complaint and
contentions to the City Administrator.  This official shall be authorized to
order that the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer’s complaint.



§ 51.036  DISCONTINUATION AND RECONNECT CHARGE.



   If utility service is discontinued or reconnected, a fee shall be
required as prescribed in § 16.00 of the Fee Schedule, as set forth in
Appendix 1 of this code, for each time a municipal employee discontinues or
reconnects service.  If the meter is pulled to prevent unauthorized use of a
utility, an additional charge shall be made in the amount prescribed in §
16.00 of the Fee Schedule set forth in Appendix 1 of this code.



(Ord. 905, passed 3-16-04)



§ 51.037  SERVICE CHARGE FOR  INSUFFICIENT FUNDS CHECK.



   There is hereby established a service charge as prescribed in § 11.00
of the Fee Schedule, as set forth in Appendix 1 of this code, which shall be
levied and assessed by the municipality when an account for any water, sewer,
or garbage service provided by the municipality or an account rendered or
collected for the municipality is paid by a check, draft, or money order
which is returned unpaid for lack of sufficient funds or closed or
non-existent account.  The customer giving such check, draft, or money order
shall be mailed a notice requiring payment of the check and a returned check
charge within five business days from the date of the sending of the
notice.  If such payment is not made in cash or with certified funds within
such time, water service shall be discontinued and not be reconnected until
payment of the reconnection fee.  If any customer’s checks are returned
twice within any six calendar months, all future payments must be in cash or
certified funds.  The Municipal Secretary may waive this provision and the
returned check charge upon presentation of a letter from the financial
institution upon which the check or other instrument was drawn acknowledging
an error in return of such check.



WATER CONSERVATION/DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN



§ 51.050  WHEN WATER SAVING REQUIRED.



   The following water conservation stages shall be in effect at the
following times.  Total water consumption per day shall be determined by
totaling all the treated water pumped by the entire waterworks system.  The
City Administrator is designated as the official responsible for the
implementation and enforcement of the Water Conservation/Drought Contingency
Plan.  To that end, the following stages are adopted:




Stage 1:   Mild drought conditions occur when the average daily water
consumption reaches 95% of the rated production capacity and has remained at
that level for seven days.





Stage 2:   Moderate drought conditions occur when:




      (A)   Any mechanical failure of pumping equipment will require
more than 48 hours to repair and a mild drought is in process; or



      (B)   Average daily water consumption reaches 100% of rated
production for a seven day period.




Stage 3:   Severe drought conditions occur when:




      (A)   The average daily consumption reaches 110% of rated
production capacity for a three day period; or



      (B)   The system demand exceeds the available high service
pump capacity; or



      (C)   Any mechanical failure of pumping equipment will require
more than 24 hours to repair if moderate drought exists.




Stage 4:   Emergency conditions occur when:




      (A)   Water system contamination (whether accidental or
intentional) is detected; or



      (B)   The water system fails from acts of God (tornados,
hurricanes, etc.) or man.



      Severe condition exists immediately upon detection.



(Ord. 822, passed 8-11-98)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.051  WATER RATIONING OR TERMINATION OF SERVICE.



   In the event severe classification conditions persist, Stage 3, for an
extended period of time or an emergency condition is identified, Stage 4, the
city may ration water usage and/or terminate service to selected users of the
system in accordance with the following sequence:



   (A)   Recreational users; outside residential water uses; outside
commercial water uses;



   (B)   Commercial users;



   (C)   School users;



   (D)   Residential users; and



   (E)   Hospitals, public health and safety facilities.



(Ord. 822, passed 8-11-98)  Penalty, see § 10.99



WATERWORKS REGULATIONS



§ 51.060  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The municipality is not required to furnish water of any
special or specific analysis or in any special or specified amount but only
undertakes to furnish such water and amount of water that may be supplied
from such sources as the municipality may select and in an amount within the
capacity of the municipality’s pumping plants and storage facilities.



   (B)   If an accident impedes the municipality’s ability to supply
water to its patrons or to the municipality for the prevention or suppression
of fire, the municipality will not be liable for damages by reason of any
such failure to any patron of the water system or to any person or persons
whose property may have been destroyed by fire or otherwise damaged.



§ 51.061  OUT-OF-MUNICIPALITY WATER SERVICES.



   If any person, corporation, firm, or business entity located outside
the municipal limits desires municipal water service and pays all expenses
incurred in extending the water mains and secures all necessary easements, so
that the municipality incurs no expense in such connection, and the
municipality elects to provide such water service to such patron, and
provided all mains and lines installed shall meet the requirements and
approval of the Director of Public Utilities, then such patron shall be
furnished water at a rate provided for in § 16.00(E) of the Fee Schedule as
set forth in Appendix 1 of this code.



(Ord. 905, passed 3-16-04)



§ 51.062  WASTE OF WATER.



   In case of willful or unreasonable waste of water by any patron, the
municipality shall have the right to cut off the water supply and recover all
damages.  Such action of cutting off the water supply may be taken by the
Director of Public Utilities at any time after he or she shall learn of such
waste.



§ 51.063  REGULATIONS AFFECTING  CONNECTIONS TO SYSTEM.



   All connections to the municipal waterworks system within the corporate
limits shall be made in the following manner:



   (A)   It shall be the policy of the municipality to supply water to
its patrons through mains owned or controlled by the municipality and which
shall be located in the streets, between the curb and sidewalk lines, or in
alleys adjacent to property being served, or on easements controlled or owned
by the municipality.



   (B)   The municipality may assess the estimated cost of breaking and
replacing pavement necessary to make such connection, in addition to the
regular service connection charge, such assessment to be paid with such
service charge, and the difference between assessment and actual cost of such
breaking and replacing shall be refunded to the patron when such work has
been completed.



   (C)   In addition to the above charges, the municipality may assess
the estimated cost of boring under or crossing over any street or highway in
furnishing water services.



   (D)   All lines constructed and meters installed under the
provisions of this section shall be the property of the municipality and the
municipality shall have full control and jurisdiction over such lines and
meters.



§ 51.064  TURNING ON OR OFF AT METER.



   No person except authorized employees of the utility department shall
turn water on or off at the stopcock in the meter box without a written
permit first being obtained from the utility department.  A charge as
prescribed in § 16.00 of the Fee Schedule, as set forth in Appendix 1 of
this code, shall be made for turning water off or on at the customer’s
request.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.065  BYPASSING METER.



   No person shall interfere with or bypass the municipality’s meter in
such a manner as to obtain water without the full amount thereof being
registered on such meter.  Service shall be permanently disconnected from
any account where a bypass or other such device is discovered.  Such account
shall be reconnected only at the discretion of the municipality and only
after payment for water used, as estimated by the municipality, at twice the
rate otherwise applicable plus the cost of rerouting and repairing the
service to register water use properly on the meter.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.066  BREAKING LOCK ON MUNICIPAL STOPCOCK.



   No person except authorized employees of the municipality shall break
any lock on the stopcock in the water meter box.  Service to any account
where a broken lock is found will not be restored until all charges,
including charges for water received, have been paid, together with a charge
of $25 for damage to the lock and for service calls.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.067  DAMAGE TO METER.



   Service will be discontinued to any account where any meter or other
municipal utility equipment is damaged.  Service will not be reconnected
until all damage is paid for and all outstanding bills are paid.



(Ord. 905, passed 3-16-04)



§ 51.068  SECONDARY TAPS PROHIBITED.



   No patron of the waterworks system shall permit any person to tap any
water pipe leading into his or her premises without the consent of the
Council.  Owners or occupants of premises having service pipes and
connections will be held strictly responsible for all uses of water from such
service by other parties.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.069  DUAL CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.



   Dual connections (more than one user on a single meter) shall be
prohibited.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.070  PATRON RESPONSIBLE FOR SERVICE LINE CONDITION AND WATER USAGE.



   Water consumers shall keep their own service pipe lines and apparatus
in good repair and condition and shall prevent all unnecessary waste of
water.  No claim shall be made against the municipality by reason of
breakage of any service pipe or service cock, or from any damage by reason of
shutting off the water to repair mains, or for other purposes, and in case of
neglect or refusal to promptly repair any imperfection in the service pipes,
lines, stops, or other fixtures, the Director of Public Utilities may cause
the same to be done at the expense of the owner, which expense shall be paid
to the municipality before water service is returned to the patron.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.071  FIRE HYDRANT USE RESTRICTED.



   Every hydrant placed for the purpose of extinguishing fires is hereby
declared to be a public hydrant and no person, other than members of the Fire
Department, the state Department of Health, and those authorized by the 
Director of Public Utilities shall open any such hydrant or draw or attempt
to draw water from same or in any manner interfere with such hydrants.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.072  ACCESS TO METER.



   If easy access to a meter is obstructed by a patron or if entrance to
the premises is made dangerous for whatever reason, thereby preventing a
meter reader from obtaining a meter reading, the charges may be estimated for
the amount not to exceed double the normal charge.  If the patron does not
remedy the condition or should he or she refuse to pay the estimated bill,
the municipality shall have the right to discontinue utility service without
further notice and service shall not be resumed until the obstructive or
dangerous conditions have been remedied and all charges for the utility
service paid.



(Ord. 905, passed 3-16-04)



§ 51.073  INACCURATE METERING.



   If a meter fails to register the water actually consumed by reason of
the meter being out of order, the municipality may estimate the charge by the
customary consumption of the patron, taking into consideration the season of
the year.



§ 51.074  TEMPORARY SERVICE  INTERRUPTIONS.



   The municipality reserves the right to temporarily discontinue and to
reconnect water supply to all consumers, without notice, for the purpose of
making repairs, connections, extensions, and cleaning of mains, machinery,
reservoir, or any part of the municipal water and sewer department property.



§ 51.075  CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM.



   (A)   General.  No water service connection shall be made to any
establishment where a potential or actual contamination hazard exists unless
the water supply is protected in accordance with the Texas Natural Resource
Conservation Commission Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems (TNRCC
Rules) and this section.  The water purveyor shall discontinue water service
if a required backflow prevention assembly is not installed, maintained and
tested in accordance with the TNRCC Rules and this section.



   (B)   Backflow prevention assembly installation, testing and
maintenance.



      (1)   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon
installation by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester and
certified to be operating within specifications.  Backflow prevention
assemblies which are installed to provide protection against health hazards
must also be tested and certified to be operating within specifications at
least annually by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester.



      (2)   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed
and tested in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, the American
Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and
Cross-Connection Control (Manual M-14) or the University of Southern
California Manual of Cross-Connection Control.



      (3)   Assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced at
the expense of the customer whenever said assemblies are found to be
defective.  Original forms of such test, repairs, and overhaul shall be kept
and submitted to the city within five working days of the test, repair or
overhaul of each backflow prevention assembly.



      (4)   No backflow prevention assembly or device shall be
removed from use, relocated, or other assembly or device substituted without
the approval of the city.  Whenever the existing assembly or device is moved
from the present location or cannot be repaired, the backflow assembly or
device shall be replaced with a backflow prevention assembly or device that
complies with this section, The American Water Works Association's
Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control
(Manual M-14), current addition, University of Southern California Manual of
Cross-Connection Control, current addition, or the current Plumbing Code of
the City of Whitesboro, whichever is more stringent.



      (5)   Test gauges used for backflow prevention assembly
testing shall be calibrated at least annually in accordance with The American
Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and
Cross-Connection Control (Manual M-14), current addition, University of
Southern California Manual of Cross-Connection Control, current addition. 
The original calibration form must be submitted to the city within five
working days after calibration.



      (6)   A recognized backflow prevention assembly tester must
hold a current endorsement from the Texas Natural Resourc Conservation
Commission (Commission).



   (C)   Customer service inspections.



      (1)   A customer service inspection shall be completed prior
to providing continuous water service to all new construction, on any
existing service when the water purveyor has reason to believe that
cross-connections or other contaminant hazards exist, or after any material
improvement, correction, or addition to the private water distribution
facilities.



      (2)   Only individuals with the following credentials shall be
recognized as capable of conducting a customer service inspection:



         (a)   Plumbing inspectors and water supply protection
specialists that have been licensed by the Texas State Board of Plumbing
Examiners.



         (b)   Certified waterworks operators, and members of
other water related professional groups who have completed a training course,
passed an examination administered by the Commission or its designated agent,
and hold a current endorsement issued by the Commission.



      (3)   The customer service inspection must certify that:



         (a)   No direct connection between the public drinking
water supply and a potential source of contamination is permitted. 
Potential sources of contamination shall be isolated from the public water
system by a properly installed air gap or an appropriate backflow prevention
assembly.



         (b)   No cross-connection between the public water
supply and a private water source exists.  Where an actual properly
installed air gap is not maintained between the public water supply and a
private water supply, an approved reduced pressure zone backflow prevention
assembly is properly installed and a service agreement exists for annual
inspection and testing by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester.



         (c)   No connection exists which allows water to be
returned to the public drinking water supply is permitted.



         (d)   No pipe or pipe fitting which contains more than
8% lead may be used for the installation or repair of plumbing at any
connection that provides water for human use.



         (e)   No solder or flux which contains more than 0.2%
lead can be used for the installation or repair of plumbing at any connection
that provides water for human use.  A minimum of one lead test shall be
performed for each inspection.



(Ord. 968, passed 8-14-07)



METER REREADS



§ 51.080  METER REREAD PROCEDURES AND FEES; TESTING OF METER.



   (A)   A water system customer believing a water meter reading to be
inaccurate may request a rereading.  The person requesting a water meter to
be reread will be charged a fee as provided for in § 16.02 of the Fee
Schedule as set forth in Appendix 1 of this code.  If the municipality is in
error in the original reading or if the meter is tested and found to register
more than the warranty of the meter manufacturer, the fee shall be refunded
to the customer and appropriate adjustment in the water service charges shall
be made.



   (B)   Should a customer demand that a meter be tested for accuracy,
he or she shall make a deposit equal to the amount the municipality must pay
to have the meter tested.  If the test shows that the meter is registering
within the warranty of the meter manufacturer or registering less water than
is actually used, the deposit shall become the property of the municipality;
otherwise, the deposit shall be refunded to the user.



   (C)   If the meter has been misread or the meter is found to
register more than the warranty of the meter manufacturer, billings will be
adjusted to reflect the inaccuracy.  Adjustments shall be limited to the
previous three billing periods.



SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM REGULATIONS



§ 51.090  DEFINITIONS.



   The SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM of the municipality consists of main and
lateral conduits of salt glazed vitrified earthenware, polyvinylchloride
(PVC) plastic, concrete, or other similar pipe, with necessary accessories,
and are designed to transport liquid waste materials.  The sewers in the
alleys or streets adjacent to the various lots are called MAIN or LATERAL
SEWERS.  The sewers leading from the main or lateral sewers to the property
on either side are called HOUSE SEWERS.



§ 51.091  SEWER SERVICE REQUIRED;  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building
or premises within the municipality to inhabit, use, or permit anyone else to
inhabit or use a building or premises unless such building or premises is
connected with the sanitary sewer system of the municipality or a septic tank
system built according to the specifications of the state Department of
Health and the municipality.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to install or use a septic
tank for private waste disposal within the municipal limits, except when the
structure to be served is more than 150 feet from a public sewer main line
and approval to use a septic tank is specifically granted by the Council.



   (C)   The owner of any property containing a structure used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose in which human
waste is generated shall be required to connect to the municipal sanitary
sewer system if a public sewer is available within 150 feet of such structure.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.092  SERVICE CONNECTIONS.



   The property owner shall install a sanitary sewer service line at his
or her expense to the municipality’s lateral, in accordance with
regulations and subject to the inspection of the municipality.  He or she
shall thereafter maintain the service line to and including the “y.”



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.093  SEPTIC TANK REQUIREMENTS.



   Any septic tank shall be installed in compliance with the provisions of
the most recent edition of the Construction Standards for On-Site Sewage
Facilities as published by the Texas Water Commission.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.094  STOPPAGE OR OBSTRUCTION OF  SEWER SYSTEM.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit into the
building drainage system or sewer any ashes, cinders, rags, poisonous or
explosive liquids, gases, oils, grease, or any other material which would or
could obstruct, damage, or overload such system or sewer.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building
or premises to use, or permit anyone else to use, the building or premises
unless the building or premises shall be connected to a water supply
sufficient to insure that sewer pipes will be kept free from accumulation of
select materials and obstructions.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.095  CESSPOOLS PROHIBITED



   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or install any cesspool
within the municipality or repair any existing cesspool.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.096  INDUSTRIAL WASTES.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   ABNORMAL SEWAGE. Any industrial waste having a suspended solids or
B.O.D. content in excess of that found in normal sewage but which is
otherwise acceptable into a public sewer under the terms of this section.



   ABNORMAL SEWAGE PERMIT.  A permit approved by and received from the
Director permitting the discharge or deposit of abnormal sewage into a
sanitary sewer upon payment of a surcharge.



   ABNORMAL SEWAGE SURCHARGE.  The charge levied against any person for
services rendered during treatment of abnormal sanitary sewage or waste. 
This charge is intended to partially defray the added cost of transporting
and treating abnormal sewage or waste. This charge shall be in addition to
the usual monthly charge for sanitary sewerage service.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (B.O.D.).  The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure as specified in Standard Methods in five days at 20° centigrade
expressed as parts per million by weight (milligrams per liter).



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (B.O.D.) STRENGTH INDEX.  The measure of the
biochemical oxygen demand content of sewage in parts per million (milligrams
per liter).



   COOLING WATER.  The water discharged from any system of condensation
such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration.  Cooling water shall not
be discharged into any public sewer unless it is unpolluted and below 150°
fahrenheit.



   DIRECTOR.  The Superintendent of the Whitesboro Water Works
Department, or his or her authorized representative.



   GARBAGE.  Solid waste from domestic or commercial preparation, cooking
or dispensing of food or from the handling, storage and sale of produce.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  Any and all liquid or waterborne waste from
industrial or commercial processes and does not include domestic sewage.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE PERMIT.  A permit to deposit or discharge industrial
waste into any sanitary sewer in the city.



   NORMAL SEWAGE.  Sewage which, when analyzed, shows by weight a daily
average of not more than 2,500 pounds per million gallons (300 parts per
million) of suspended solids and not more than 2,500 pounds per million
gallons (300 parts per million) of B.O.D., and which is otherwise acceptable
into a public sewer under the terms of this section.



   OWNER or OCCUPANT.  The person, firm or public or private corporation
using the lot, parcel of land, building or premises connected to and
discharging sewage, industrial wastewater or liquid into the sanitary sewage
system of the city, and who pays, or is legally responsible for the payment
of, water rates or charges made against the lot, parcel of land, building or
premises, if connected to the water distribution system of the city, or who
would pay or be legally responsible for such payment if so connected.



   PERSON.  Any individual, business entity, partnership, corporation,
governmental agency or political subdivision.



   pH.  The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions,
in grams per liter of solution, measured and calculated in accordance with
Standard Methods.



   POLLUTED WATER OR WASTE.  Any water or liquid waste containing any of
the following: phenols or other substances to an extent imparting taste and
odor in receiving waters; toxic or poisonous substances in suspension,
colloidal state or solution; noxious or odorous gases; more than 1,000 parts
per million, by weight, of dissolved solids, of which more than 500 parts per
million are chloride; more than 20 parts per million each of suspended solids
and/or B.O.D.; color exceeding “objectionable limit” or having a pH value
of less than 5.5 or more than 10.0; and/or any water or waste not approved
for discharge into a stream or waterway by the appropriate state authority.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  Garbage that has been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewer, with no particle greater than ½-inch in
any dimension.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  Any publicly owned sanitary sewer, storm drain or water
course.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A public owned pipe or conduit designed to collect
and transport industrial waste and domestic sewage.



   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT.  Any arrangement of devices or structures used
for treating sewage.



   STANDARD METHODS.  Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, American Waterworks Association and the Water Pollution Control
Federation.



   STRENGTH INDEX.  Both the biochemical oxygen demand index and the
suspended solids strength index.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (S.S.).  Solids that either float on the surface of,
or in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquid and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (S.S.) STRENGTH INDEX.  The measure of the suspended
solids content of sewage in parts per million (milligrams per liter).



   UNPOLLUTED WATER OR WASTE.  Any water or liquid waste containing none
of the following: phenols or other substances to an extent imparting taste
and odor in receiving waters; toxic or poisonous substances in suspension
colloidal state or solution; noxious or odorous gases; not more than 1,000
parts per million, by weight, of dissolved solids, of which not more than 500
parts per million are chloride; not more than 20 parts per million each of
suspended solids and B.O.D.; color not exceeding “objectionable limit,”
nor a pH value of less than 5.5 nor higher than 10.0; and/or any water or
waste approved for discharge into a stream or waterway by the appropriate
state authority.



   WASTEWATER.  Water that has been used by and discharged from an
industry, commercial enterprise, household or other water consumer, which
water may be either polluted or unpolluted.



   (B)   Certain waste prohibited in public sewers.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or
cause to be discharged any polluted water or corrosive waste into any storm
drain or water course within the city.



      (2)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
storm water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or drainage from
down spouts, yard drains, yard fountains and ponds, or lawn sprays into any
sanitary sewer, except as provided by city ordinances.  Water from swimming
pools, unpolluted industrial water, such as water drains, blow-off pipes, or
cooling water from various equipment shall not be discharged into sanitary
sewers if a closed storm sewer is available.  If a closed storm sewer is not
available, such water may be discharged into the sanitary sewer by indirect
connection whereby such discharge is cooled, if required, and flows into the
sanitary sewer at a rate not in excess of five gallons per minute, provided
that the waste does not contain materials or substances in suspension or
solution in violation of the limits prescribed by this section.



      (3)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into
any public sewer any of the following described substances, materials, waters
or waste:



         (a)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher
than 150° fahrenheit (65° celsius).



         (b)   Any water or waste which contains wax, grease or
oil, plastic or other substance that will solidify or become discernibly
viscous at temperatures between 32° to 150° fahrenheit.



         (c)   Flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas, such
as gasoline, kerosene, benzene, naphtha, and the like.



         (d)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities capable
of causing obstruction in the flow in sewers or other interference with
proper operation of the sewage works, such as but not limited to ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails,
lime slurry, lime residues, slops, chemical residues, paint residues, or bulk
solids.



         (e)   Any garbage that has not been properly comminuted
or shredded.  If properly comminuted or shredded, then it may be accepted as
suitably pretreated.



         (f)   Any noxious or malodorous substances which can
form a gas which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is
capable of causing objectionable odors or hazards to life or form solids in
concentration exceeding limits established in this section, or creates any
other condition deleterious to structures or treatment processes, or requires
unusual provisions, attentions or expense to handle such material.  Any
toxic or poisonous substances as defined by the Texas Water Quality Board.



      (4)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into
any public sewer any of the following, except in quantities or
concentrations, or with provisions as stipulated herein:



         (a)   Free or emulsified oil and grease exceeding 100
parts per million (834 pounds per million gallons) of either or both, or
combinations of free or emulsified oil and grease.



         (b)   Acids or alkalis which attack or corrode sewers or
sewage disposal structures or have a pH value lower than 5.5 or higher than
10.0.



         (c)   Salts of a heavy metal and/or other toxic material
in concentrations exceeding those established by the Texas Water Quality
Board as effluent limitations including but not limited to the following:



            Cadmium as Cd   -   0.02 Parts per million



            Chromium as Cr   -   3 parts per million



            Copper as Cu   -      1 part per million



            Nickel as Ni      -   1 part per million



            Zinc as Zn      -   5 parts per million



            or elements which will damage collection facilities
or are detrimental to treatment processes.



         (d)   Cyanide or cyanogen compounds in excess of 2.0
parts per million by weight as Cn.



         (e)   Any water or waste that contains more than 10
parts per million of the following gases: hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or
nitrous oxide.



         (f)   Radioactive materials, in the absence of a
specific permit issued by the Director for the discharge of such waste.



   (C)   Special procedures relating to industrial waste.



      (1)   Permits.  From and after 90 days after the effective
date hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or discharge
industrial waste into any sanitary sewer in the city without having first
obtained an industrial waste permit from the city and having complied with
all of the applicable provisions hereof.  Within 90 days after the effective
date hereof, any person desiring to deposit or discharge, or who is now
depositing or discharging industrial waste into any sanitary sewer in the
city shall make application to the city for a permit.  Application forms
will be furnished by the city on request.  The city shall refer all such
applications to the Director for his or her approval or disapproval.  The
Director shall approve such applications and grant an industrial waste permit
only when the evidence submitted by the applicant demonstrates that the waste
or wastewater to be deposited by the applicant in the sanitary sewer will
comply with all the regulations of this section.



      (2)   Structures required.  Within 180 days after the
effective date hereof, any person discharging industrial waste into a
sanitary sewer in the city shall construct a suitable control manhole,
downstream from any treatment or storage tanks or other approved works
utilized by such person for pretreatment, such control manhole to be for the
purpose of facilitating observations, measurements and sampling of all waste
created and discharged by such person.  The control manhole shall be
constructed at a location and in a manner approved by the Director.  The
control manhole shall be constructed and installed at the expense of the
person discharging the waste, and it shall be maintained at the expense of
such person at all times be maintained at the expense of operating condition.



      (3)   Disconnection.  If any person depositing or discharging
industrial waste into the sanitary sewer fails to secure an industrial waste
permit within the time prescribed herein or if any person allows or causes
waste or unacceptable quality under the requirements of this section to be
discharged into any sanitary sewer in the city, the Director is authorized,
if such person is using city water, to disconnect such person’s service
line from the city water system and/or the city sanitary sewer system and the
same shall only be reconnected at the owner’s expense.  If such person
does not use city water, the Director is authorized to disconnect such
person’s service line from the city’s sanitary sewer system and the same
shall only be reconnected at the owner’s expense.  The Director shall
notify the occupant or user of the premises where the waste is generated 24
hours before disconnecting the service line.  No sanitary sewer connection
or water connection disconnected hereunder shall be reconnected until the
condition causing the disconnection has been corrected.



      (4)   Inspection.  The inspectors, agents or representatives
of the city charged with the enforcement of this section of the section shall
be deemed to be performing a governmental function for the benefit of the
general public and neither the city, the Director nor the individual
inspector, agent or representative shall ever be held liable for any loss or
damage, whether real or asserted, caused or alleged to have been caused as a
result of the performance of such governmental function.  The owners or
occupants of premises where industrial waste is created or discharged into
the sanitary sewer shall allow the Director, his or her inspectors, agents or
representatives free access at all reasonable times to all parts of such
premises for the purpose of inspection or sampling or the performance of any
of their duties hereunder, and the failure or refusal of such owners or
occupant to comply with this provision shall be ground for the disconnection
of water and/or sewer service.



      (5)   Measurement of flow.



         (a)   The volume of flow used in computing abnormal
sewage surcharges shall be based upon metered water consumption as shown in
the records of meter readings maintained by the Water Department.  In the
event that a person discharging waste into the city’s sanitary sewer system
produces evidence to the Director demonstrating that a substantial portion of
the total amount of water used for all purposes does not reach the city’s
sewer system, an estimated percentage of total water consumption to be used
in computing charges may be established by the Director.



         (b)   Any person discharging industrial waste into the
sanitary sewers of the city who procures any part or all of his or her water
supply from sources other than the Water Department all or part of which is
discharged into the sanitary sewer shall install and maintain at his or her
expense water meters of the type approved by the Director for the purpose of
determining the proper volume of flow to be used in computing sewer service
charges.  Such meters shall be read monthly and tested for accuracy when
deemed necessary by the Director.  Where it can be shown to the satisfaction
of the Director that a substantial portion of the water as measured by the
aforesaid meter, or meters, does not enter the sanitary sewer system of the
city, then the Director may require or permit the installation of additional
meters at the owners expense in such manner as to measure the quantity of
water actually entering the sanitary sewerage system from the lot, parcel of
land, building or premises of such owner or occupant, and the quantity of
water used to determine the sewer service charge and abnormal sewage
surcharge may be the quantity of water actually entering the sewerage system
as so determined, if the Director so elects.



         (c)   If the Director finds that it is not practicable
to measure the quantity or quality of waste by the aforesaid meters or
monitoring devices, he or she shall determine the quantity or quality of the
waste in any manner or method he or she may find practicable in order to
arrive at the percentage of water entering the sanitary sewerage system of
the city and/or the quality of the sewage to be used to determine the sewer
service charge and surcharge.



      (6)   Determining the character and concentration of waste. 
The industrial waste discharged or deposited into the sanitary sewers shall
be subject to periodic inspection and sampling as often as may be deemed
necessary by the Director.  Samples shall be collected in such manner as to
be representative of the character and concentration of the waste under
operational conditions.  The laboratory methods used in the examination of
such waste shall be those set forth in the Standard Methods.  The
determination of the character and concentration of industrial waste shall be
made by the Director at such times and on such schedules as may be
established by the Director.  Should an owner or occupant discharging
industrial waste to the sanitary sewers desire a determination of the quality
of such industrial waste be made at some time other than that scheduled by
the Director, such special determination may be made by the Director, at the
expense of the owner or occupant discharging the waste.



   (D)   Pretreatment and surcharge.



      (1)   Pretreatment.  Owners or occupants, or any other person
generating waste prohibited from discharge into public sewers by the
foregoing shall pretreat or otherwise dispose of such prohibited waste so as
to make the waste discharged to the public sewer acceptable under the
standards established in this chapter.



      (2)   Abnormal sewage surcharge.  Persons generating abnormal
sewage may discharge such sewage into the sanitary sewer provided the waste
will not cause damage to the collection system, the waste will not impair the
treatment processes, and the person discharging such waste pays a monthly
surcharge to the Water Department in addition to the usual monthly sewer
service charges.  Computations of such surcharges shall be based on a
formula to be determined by the city.  If the strength index for either
B.O.D. or S.S. is less than the normal strength index for that category, then
there shall be no surcharge for that category, nor shall there be credit
given to the total surcharge.



      (3)   Drawings and plans.  It shall be the responsibility of
any person, owner or occupant discharging waste into the sanitary sewerage
system of the city to furnish the Director with drawings or plans and
specifications in such detail as he or she may require to determine if the
pretreatment structure planned by such persons, or in use by such person, is
suitable for the purpose intended.  However, the approval of such plans by
the Director will in on way relieve such person of the responsibility for
modifying the structure once constructed as necessary to produce an effluent
acceptable to the Director under the terms of this section.



   (E)   Waste from acid sinks.  Drains receiving acid waste shall be
constructed of any acid-resisting material.  Such drains located outside of
a building shall be constructed of vitrified clay or earthenware pipe or
other approved acid-resisting material.  Joints shall be constructed in
accordance with Standard Methods in such manner as to secure tight joints. 
In no case shall corrosive waste be discharged into a drain, sanitary sewer,
storm sewer or soil or waste pipe without being first diluted or neutralized
in such manner as to render such wastes noncorrosive.  These wastes shall be
treated by passing through a properly trapped dilution or neutralizing catch
basin which shall function automatically.



(Ord. 495, passed 6-26-73)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate waste discharges and require pretreatment, see
Tex. Water Code §§ 26.176 and 26.177



CHAPTER 52:  ELECTRICITY



Section



   52.01   Rates and charges established



   52.02   Meter testing



   52.03   Meter access



   52.04   Meter reading charge



   52.05   Meter inaccessibility charge



Cross-reference:



   Utility meter tampering, see § 130.08



§ 52.01  RATES AND CHARGES  ESTABLISHED.



   Rates and charges or electrical service, including rates and charges
for customer deposits, general service rates for sale of electricity to
residential, commercial, schools and churches, street lights and municipal
customers, and service fees, and providing a manner in which such rates may
be changed, adjusted and amended, shall be as provided for in § 12.00 of the
Fee Schedule as set forth in Appendix 1 of this code.



(Ord. 812, passed 2-10-98)



§ 52.02  METER TESTING.



   (A)   Testing upon request and charge.  The city or its designee
shall, upon the request of a customer, if the customer so desires, in his or
her presence or in that of his or her authorized representative, make without
charge a test of the accuracy of the customer’s meter.  The test shall be
made during the city or its designees normal working hours or a time
convenient to the customer if he or she desires to observe the test.  At the
city or its designees option, the test shall be made on the customers
premises or at the city or its designees test laboratory.  If the meter has
been tested by the city or its designee or by an authorized agency at the
customers request, and within a period of two years the customer requests a
new test, the city or its designee shall make the test, but if the meter is
found to be within the accuracy standards established by the American
National Standards Institute, Incorporated, the city or its designee may
charge the customer a fee which reflects the cost to test the meter, but this
charge shall in no event be more than $15 for a residential customer. 
Following the completion of any requested tests, the city or its designee
shall promptly advise the customer of the date of the removal of the meter,
the date of test, the results of the test, and who made the test.



   (B)   Test results outside standard.  If any meter is found to be
outside of the accuracy standards established by the American National
Standards Institute, Incorporated, proper corrections shall be made of
previous readings for the period of six months immediately proceeding the
removal of such meter from service since last tested, but not exceeding six
months, as the meter shall have been shown to be in error by such tests, and
an adjusted bill shall be rendered.  No refund is required from the city or
its designee except to the customer last served by the meter prior to the
testing.  If the meter is found not to register for any period, unless
bypassed or tampered with, the city or its designee shall make a charge for
units used, but not metered, for a period not to exceed three months based on
amounts used under similar conditions during the period proceeding or
subsequent thereto, or during corresponding periods in previous years.



(Ord. 653, passed 12-18-84)



§ 52.03  METER ACCESS.



   If easy access to a meter is obstructed by a patron or if entrance to
the premises is made dangerous for whatever reason, thereby preventing a
meter reader from obtaining a meter reading, the charges may be estimated for
the amount not to exceed double the normal charge.  If the patron does not
remedy the condition or should he or she refuse to pay the estimated bill,
the municipality shall have the right to discontinue utility service without
further notice and service shall not be resumed until the obstructive or
dangerous conditions have been remedied and all charges for the utility
service paid,



(Ord. 1057, passed 3-11-14)



§ 52.04  METER READING CHARGE.



   Meter reading charge. If a customer requests a reading of a city meter
due to a contested billing more than two times in the previous 12 months and
if no error is found, the customer will be charged a meter reading charge as
provided for in § 16.02 of the fee schedule as set forth in Appendix 1.



(Ord. 1057, passed 3-11-14)



§ 52.05  METER INACCESSIBILITY CHARGE.



   Meter inaccessibility charge. A meter inaccessibility charge will be
required of any customer that prevents the regular and routine reading or
repair, maintenance or replacement of any city electric meter as provided for
in § 16.03 of the fee schedule as set forth in Appendix 1.



(Ord. 1057, passed 3-11-14)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



      71.   PARKING



      72.   VEHICLE TOWING, REMOVAL, AND IMPOUNDMENT REGULATIONS



      73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      74.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   70.001   State Uniform Act adopted



   70.002   Definitions



   70.003   Unauthorized operation of a motor vehicle on private
property



   70.004   Riding or driving on sidewalks restricted



   70.005   Use of vehicles on certain property restricted



   70.006   Use of hand-held mobile telephones prohibited in school
zones




Traffic Control Devices




   70.010   Traffic control devices to be consistent with Texas Manual



   70.011   Director of Public Utilities to implement placement and
maintenance



   70.012   Driver to obey traffic control devices



   70.013   Unauthorized signs and signals



   70.014   Defacement of traffic devices




Accidents




   70.020   Accident reports



   70.021   Removing vehicle from scene of accident



   70.022   Restrictions on activities of wrecker drivers at scene of
accident



   70.023   Garages to keep records of damaged vehicles




Emergency Vehicles




   70.040   Emergency vehicles exempted from certain regulations



   70.041   Operators of emergency vehicles required to drive
responsibly




Traffic Obstruction




   70.050   Unlawful to maintain traffic obstruction



   70.051   Municipality may abate obstruction and assess lien



   70.052   Filing statement of expense




Fire Trucks and Fire Hoses




   70.060   Drivers to stop for fire trucks; parking near fires



   70.061   Driving over fire hose




Speed Limits




   70.070   Speed limits generally



   70.071   Excessively slow speed prohibited




Truck Routes




   70.080   Director of Public Utilities authorized to establish truck
routes



   70.081   Compliance required



   70.082   Separate offenses




Parades and Processions




   70.090   Permit for parades and processions



   70.091   Funeral processions



   70.092   Escorts and traffic safety



   70.093   Funeral escorts




Bicycles




   70.100   Rules for operation



   70.101   Impounding; sale of impounded bicycles



   70.102   Penalties for minors violating bicycle riding regulations



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.001  STATE UNIFORM ACT ADOPTED.



   For the purpose of regulating traffic on the streets, alleys, and
thoroughfares of the municipality, there is hereby adopted the State Uniform
Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, codified as the Tex. Transportation Code,
and all other state motor vehicle laws, which act and laws, together with the
provisions contained in this chapter, shall be controlling in the regulation
of traffic in the municipality.  A violation of the act or any state motor
vehicle law for which the municipal court has jurisdiction shall constitute
and be punishable as a violation of this code.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.002  DEFINITIONS.



   All words and phrases in this chapter shall have the same meanings and
definitions ascribed to them in the Tex. Transportation Code, or any other
state motor vehicle law or municipal ordinance as may be provided.



Statutory reference:



   General powers and limitations on municipalities relative to regulating
traffic, see Tex. Transp. Code §§ 542.201 et seq.



§ 70.003  UNAUTHORIZED OPERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
applies:



   PRIVATE PROPERTY.  That property owned by an individual, group of
individuals, company or corporation.



   (B)   No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle on private
property located within the city without the effective consent of the owner
or person authorized to act on behalf of the owner.



(Ord. 724, passed 6-3-91)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.004  RIDING OR DRIVING ON  SIDEWALKS RESTRICTED.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   PEDESTRIAN.  Any person afoot.



   SIDEWALK.  That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the
use of pedestrians.



   (B)   No person shall drive, ride, or operate a motor driven wheeled
vehicle of any description upon any sidewalk within the city except upon a
permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.



   (C)   No person shall drive, ride, or operate a bicycle, skate
board, or other human propelled device of any description upon the sidewalks
within the following business area of the city: Main Street, 100 block west
through the 100 block east.



   (D)   No person shall drive, ride, or operate a bicycle, skate board
or other human propelled device of any description upon the sidewalks within
the city when approaching a pedestrian on such sidewalk and shall yield the
right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a
pedestrian and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child,
elderly person or incapacitated person upon any sidewalk within the city.



   (E)   No parent, guardian, or custodian of a ward or child shall
permit his or her child or ward to ride or operate a device described under
any of the provisions of this sections upon the sidewalks of the city in
violation of the provisions of this section.



   (F)   Any officer of the Police Department having probable cause to
believe that a person has violated the provisions of this section shall have
the authority to seize the wheeled device and arrest the violator without
warrant.  The officer may hold the wheeled device as evidence for court
purposes or may release it to the parent, guardian, or custodian of a child
or ward accused of violating the provisions of this section.



   (G)   Applicability.  The provisions of this section do not apply
to the following:



      (1)   persons operating emergency vehicles to include but not
limited to police, fire and ambulance personnel or employees of the city,
county or state when operating within the scope of their duties.



      (2)   Persons operating devices such as fork lifts or moving
dollies used in the movement of merchandise or property.



      (3)   Persons using motorized or human propelled wheel chairs
and similar devices that are either temporarily or permanently handicapped or
disabled.



(Ord. 696, passed 7-12-88)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.005  USE OF VEHICLES ON CERTAIN  PROPERTY RESTRICTED.



   (A)   No person shall drive or operate any motorcycle, motorbike,
mini-bike, or any other motorized vehicle on any privately owned grounds,
other than those owned by him or her or which he or she has permission to
use, or on any publicly owned property other than on a roadway, driveway, or
parking area.



   (B)   This section does not apply to persons operating emergency
vehicles including but not limited to police, fire, and ambulance when
operating within the scope of their duties.



(Ord. 643, passed 10-20-83)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.006  USE OF HAND-HELD MOBILE TELEPHONES PROHIBITED IN SCHOOL ZONES.



   (A)   For purposes of this section the following definitions apply:



      (1)   ENGAGING IN A CALL.  Talking into, dialing, answering
or listening on a hand-held mobile telephone, but shall not include holding a



mobile telephone to activate or deactivate such telephone.



      (2)   HANDS-FREE MOBILE TELEPHONE.  A mobile telephone that
has an internal feature or function, or that is equipped with an attachment
or addition, whether or not permanently part of such mobile telephone, by
which a user engages in a call without the use of either hand (or prosthetic
device or aid in the case of a physically disabled person), whether or not
the use of either hand (or prosthetic device) is necessary to activate,
deactivate or initiate a function of such telephone.



      (3)   HAND-HELD MOBILE TELEPHONE.  A mobile telephone with
which a user engages in a call using at least one hand (or prosthetic device
or aid in the case of a physically disabled person).



      (4)   MOBILE TELEPHONE.  The device used by subscribers and
other users of wireless telephone service to access such service and shall
include personal digital assistants.



      (5)   PERSONAL DIGITAL ASSISTANT. A device operated using a
wireless telecommunications service that provides for data communication
other than by voice.



      (6)   WIRELESS TELEPHONE SERVICE.  Two-way real time voice
telecommunications service that is interconnected to a public switched
telephone network and commonly referred to as cellular service or personal
communication service.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided below, it shall be unlawful for a
person to drive or operate a motor vehicle in a school zone, as designated by
any lawful authority, on official school days, during the hours when school
zones are in effect, and when school zone signs and signs prohibiting
hand-held mobile telephone use are posted in place, while using a hand-held
or hands-free mobile telephone to engage in a call or to create, send or read
messages.



   (C)   An operator of a motor vehicle who holds a mobile telephone
to, or in the immediate proximity of his or her ear while such vehicle is in
motion is presumed to be engaging in a call within the meaning of this
section. "Immediate proximity" shall mean that distance as permits the
operator of a mobile telephone to hear telecommunications transmitted over
such mobile telephone, but shall not require physical contact with such
operator's ear.



   (D)   Division (B) of this section shall not apply to:



      (1)   The use of a mobile telephone for the sole purpose of
communicating with any of the following regarding an emergency situation, an
emergency response operator; a hospital, a physician's office;



      (2)   Any law enforcement, public safety or police officers,
emergency services officials, first aid, emergency medical technicians and
personnel, or any fire safety officials in the performance of duties arising
out of and in the course of their employment as such; or



      (3)   The use of a hands-free mobile telephone when being used
in a hands-free manner.



   (E)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof may be
assessed and fined not to exceed $200.



(Ord. 998, passed 10-13-09)



TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES



§ 70.010  TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES TO BE CONSISTENT WITH TEXAS MANUAL.



   All traffic control devices including signs, signals, and markings
(pavement or curb) installed or used for the purpose of directing and
controlling traffic within the municipality shall conform with the Texas
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, Volumes I
and II (hereafter called the manual).  All signs, signals, and markings
erected or used by the municipality shall be uniform and located so far as
practicable according to the directions shown in the manual.  All existing
traffic control devices and those erected in the future by the municipality
being consistent with the manual, state law, and this chapter shall be
official traffic control devices.



§ 70.011  DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC UTILITIES TO IMPLEMENT PLACEMENT AND
MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   The Director of Public Utilities is authorized and directed to
adopt signs, signals, devices, and markings to regulate, warn, and guide
traffic.



   (B)   The Director of Public Utilities is authorized to place and
maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, any traffic control devices,
signals, signs, and markings as he may deem necessary to continue and carry
out the provisions of this chapter, subject to the approval of the Council.



   (C)   The existence of a traffic control device signal or sign shall
constitute prima facie evidence that such is an official traffic control
device, signal, or sign lawfully erected and placed.



§ 70.012  DRIVER TO OBEY TRAFFIC  CONTROL DEVICES.



   The driver of any vehicle, motor vehicle, or animal shall obey the
instructions of any official traffic control device, sign, signal, or marking
applicable thereto placed in accordance with this chapter and municipal
ordinances, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the
exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle permitted by
this chapter.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.013  UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND  SIGNALS.



   (A)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of
any highway, street, or alley any unauthorized signs, signal, marking or
device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official
traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to
direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with
the effectiveness of any official control device or any railroad sign or
signal.



   (B)   No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public
authority permit upon any highway, street, or alley any traffic sign or
signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising.



   (C)   Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance, and the Chief of Police is hereby empowered
to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.



   (D)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon
private property adjacent to highways, streets, or alleys of signs giving
useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for
official signs.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.014  DEFACEMENT OF TRAFFIC  DEVICES.



   No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic control device,
sign, or signal or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or
insignia thereon, or any part thereof.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority regarding traffic control devices, see Tex. Transp. Code §
544.002



   Destruction of traffic control device unlawful, see Tex. Transp. Code
§ 544.005



   Drivers to obey traffic control devices, see Tex. Transp. Code §
544.004



ACCIDENTS



§ 70.020  ACCIDENT REPORTS.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
injury to or death of any person or property damage as prescribed by Texas
Motor Vehicle Laws shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication,
either verbal or written, give notice of such accident to the Police
Department if such accident occurs within this municipality.



   (B)   The Police Department may require any driver of a vehicle
involved in an accident, of which report must be made as provided in this
section, to make a supplemental oral or written report whenever the original
report is found to be insufficient or inadequate, and may require witnesses
of such accident to render reports to the Police Department.



   (C)   Every law enforcement officer, other than members of the
Police Department and state department of public safety who, in the regular
course of duty, investigates an accident of which report must be made as
required in this section, either at the time of and at the scene of the
accident or thereafter by interviewing participants or witnesses, shall,
within 24 hours after completing such investigation, forward a written report
of such accident to the Police Department.  Every such report shall be made
on the appropriate form provided by the Police Department and shall contain
all of the information required therein, unless not available.  Such report
shall be without prejudice to the officer so reporting and shall be for the
confidential use of the Police Department.



   (D)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of
making a required accident report and there was another occupant in the
vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making the report, such
occupant shall make or cause to be made such report.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to require accident reports, see Tex. Transp. Code § 550.067



§ 70.021  REMOVING VEHICLE FROM SCENE  OF ACCIDENT.



   It shall be unlawful for the driver or any other person to remove any
vehicle from the scene of an accident, a report of which is required by §
70.020 above, until authorized to do so by a police officer.  This section
shall not apply if there exists or arises a duty on the part of such driver
or other person in control of such vehicle to use the vehicle in carrying any
person injured in the accident to a clinic or hospital for medical or
surgical treatment.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.022  RESTRICTIONS ON ACTIVITIES OF WRECKER DRIVERS AT SCENE OF
ACCIDENT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any person in charge of
any vehicle equipped with a crane, hoist, winch, or towing device, who has
answered a call to or is attending the scene of any collision or accident of
one or more vehicles on any highway in this municipality, to remove or
attempt to remove any vehicle involved in such collision or accident, or in
any way to interfere with or change the position of any such vehicle, except
upon authority or direction and in the presence of a police officer, unless
such change is made or attempted for the purpose of releasing a person or
persons imprisoned within or under such vehicle involved in such collision or
accident.



   (B)   It shall likewise be unlawful for the driver or person in
charge of any such vehicle equipped with a crane, hoist, winch, or towing
device to remove any vehicle from the scene of an accident or collision,
without the consent of the owner of the vehicle so removed, unless directed
by a police officer to remove such vehicle as a public safety measure or for
the protection of private property.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   General regulations regarding towing and wrecker services, see Ch. 72



§ 70.023  GARAGES TO KEEP RECORDS OF  DAMAGED VEHICLES.



   The person in charge of any garage or repair shop shall keep a record
of all damaged vehicles which show evidence of having been involved in an
accident or wreck or struck by bullets.  This record shall be available for
police inspection and shall show the name of the driver or person in charge
of the vehicle, the license number, model and type of same, a description of
the damage to the vehicle, and the date brought in for repair.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to require garage to make reports, see Tex. Transp. Code §
550.067



EMERGENCY VEHICLES



§ 70.040  EMERGENCY VEHICLES EXEMPTED FROM CERTAIN REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, as the term
“authorized emergency vehicle” is defined by state law, when responding
to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected
violator of the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire
alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to
the conditions herein stated.



   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:



      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this or
any section;



      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only
after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;



      (3)   Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he or she
does not endanger life or property;



      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions.



Cross-reference:



   Emergency action by officers, see § 31.080



§ 70.041  OPERATORS OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES REQUIRED TO DRIVE  RESPONSIBLY.



   The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of
all persons nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of reckless disregard for the safety of others.



Statutory reference:



   Traffic regulations applicable to emergency vehicles, see Tex. Transp.
Code § 546.002



TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTION



§ 70.050  UNLAWFUL TO MAINTAIN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct or
injure or cause to be obstructed or injured or to maintain an obstruction in
any manner whatsoever upon any street, alley, or other public way.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation who
shall own or occupy any lot in the municipality to allow any plant or tree to
accumulate or grow or any object or vehicle to be maintained on such lot in
such a manner as to obstruct the vision of persons using any street or alley
contiguous thereto.



§ 70.051  MUNICIPALITY MAY ABATE  OBSTRUCTION AND ASSESS LIEN.



   (A)   Should any owner of any lot within the municipality who shall
be in violation of § 70.050 fail or refuse to remove any object or vehicle
or to cut down or remove such plant or tree within ten days after notice to
the owner to do so, in writing, or by letter addressed to the owner at his or
her post office address, or within ten days after notice by publication as
many as two times within ten consecutive days in any newspaper in the
municipality, the municipality may remove such object or vehicle or cut down
or remove such plants or trees, or cause the same to be done and may pay
therefore, and charge the expenses incurred in doing such work or having such
work done or improvements made to the owner of such lot or real estate.  If
such work is done or improvements made at the expense of the municipality,
then such expenses shall be assessed on the lot or real estate upon which
such expense was incurred.



   (B)   Should any plant, tree, object, or vehicle encroach upon any
public right-of-way, the municipality shall have the authority to cut back or
trim such plant or tree and to remove the object or vehicle or portion
thereof from such right-of-way.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.052  FILING STATEMENT OF EXPENSES.



   (A)   The Mayor shall file a statement of such expenses incurred
under § 70.051, giving the amount of such expenses and the date on which the
work was done or improvements made, with the County Clerk, and the
municipality shall have a privileged lien on such lot or real estate upon
which such work was done or adjacent to any street which shall be cleared or
any work done under this section in accordance with the provisions of Tex.
Health & Safety Code § 342.007, which such lien shall be second only to tax
liens and liens for street improvements.



   (B)   Such amount shall bear 10% interest from the date the
statement was filed.



   (C)   It is further provided that for any such expenditures and
interest, as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure
of such lien may be had in the name of the municipality and the statement of
expenses so made, as aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima
facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements.



FIRE TRUCKS AND FIRE HOSES



§ 70.060  DRIVERS TO STOP FOR FIRE  TRUCKS; PARKING NEAR FIRES.



   (A)   Upon the approach of any vehicle or apparatus of the Fire
Department in answering a fire alarm, the drivers of any vehicle other than a
vehicle of the Fire Department shall drive as close as possible to the right
hand curb and stop and shall not follow within 200 feet after the fire
apparatus of the Fire Department has passed.



   (B)   No driver of any vehicle of any kind shall park within 150
feet of a fire at any time.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.061  DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.



   Any vehicle pertaining to the Fire Department shall have prior
right-of-way upon all streets, avenues or alleys of this municipality during
a fire or practice, and it shall be unlawful for any person, driver,
chauffeur in charge or control of any buggy, wagon, automobile or any other
vehicle to carelessly, wantonly, willfully, or maliciously drive over a fire
hose of the Fire Department during practice or actual fire.



Penalty, see § 10.99



SPEED LIMITS



§ 70.070  SPEED LIMITS GENERALLY.



   (A)   Reasonable and prudent speed.  Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
motor or other vehicle on any highway, street or alley in the city at a speed
greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard
to the actual and potential hazards then existing.  In every event, speed
shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any
person, other conveyance or objects and fixtures adjoining the highway,
street or alley, and shall, consistent with the requirements, drive at an
appropriately reduced speed when approaching a hill crest, when traveling
upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when a special hazard exists with
respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or conditions
on the highway, street or alley.



   (B)   Speed impeding traffic.  It shall be unlawful for any person
to drive a motor or other vehicle in the city on any highway, street or alley
at such a slow speed so as to impede or block the normal and reasonable
movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe
operation or in compliance with law.



   (C)   Maximum limits generally.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor or
other vehicle in the city on any street at a speed greater than 30 miles per
hour, unless signs are erected designating another speed in accordance with
this section.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor or
other vehicle in the city upon any alley at a speed greater than 15 miles per
hour at all times.



   (D)   School safety zones.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a motor or other vehicle in the city upon or within highways or
streets or portions of highways or streets designated as school safety zones
at a speed greater than 20 miles per hour when the school safety zone is
marked or designated by signs erected in such zones during the hours
described on such signs or whenever children are present in such zones.



   (E)   Pedestrian safety zones.  It shall be unlawful for any person
to operate or drive any motor or other vehicle in the city upon any street or
portion of a street designated as a pedestrian safety zone at a speed greater
than 20 miles per hour at any time.



   (F)   Authority.  Authority to enforce this section shall be vested
in the Chief of Police or his or her assigns.



(Ord. 713, passed 5-8-90)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Exemptions for emergency vehicles, see § 70.040



   Speed limits on certain streets, see Chapter 73, Schedule II



§ 70.071  EXCESSIVELY SLOW SPEED  PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as
to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law or at the
direction of a law enforcement officer.  Police officers are hereby
authorized to enforce this provision by directions to drivers.  In the event
of apparent willful disobedience to this provision and refusal to comply with
the direction of an officer in accordance herewith, the continued slow
operation of a motor vehicle by a driver shall be a misdemeanor.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to establish or alter speed limits, see Tex. Transp. Code §
545.356



TRUCK ROUTES



§ 70.080  DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC UTILITIES  AUTHORIZED TO ESTABLISH TRUCK 
ROUTES.



   The Director of Public Utilities shall cause signs to be erected as
necessary prohibiting truck traffic except on marked truck routes and to mark
such truck routes with signs.



§ 70.081  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle with
gross vehicular weight rating in excess of 18,000 pounds, or 18,000 pounds
gross cargo weight rating in the case of a truck trailer or tractor trailer
unit, to use, travel upon, or drive over any street or highway within the
municipality not designated as a truck route, except that if the point of
origin or destination, for commercial purposes only, for any such motor
vehicle shall be off such truck route, then such vehicle may proceed by the
shortest possible route to and from such destination to the nearest truck
route.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.082  SEPARATE OFFENSES.



   Each deviation either in the direction of or in the direction away from
a truck route shall constitute a separate offense.



Penalty, see § 10.99



PARADES AND PROCESSIONS



§ 70.090  PERMIT FOR PARADES AND  PROCESSIONS REQUIRED.



   (A)   No procession or parade excepting the forces of the United
States military, the military forces of this state, and forces of the Police
and Fire Departments shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street,
sidewalk, or any other public place or way except in accordance with a permit
issued by the Chief of Police.  This section shall not apply to funeral
processions, school functions such as marching bands, provided such
activities are under the direction of appropriate school authorities, or a
governmental agency.



   (B)   The application for such permit shall be made 15 working days
prior to the proposed parade or procession.  The permit application shall
state the name of the sponsoring organization or person, the reason for the
procession or parade, the proposed route of the parade, and the number of
persons, vehicles, floats, units, or other participants in such parade or
procession, time of day requested, any special requirements such as extremely
wide or long vehicles, special effects, such as lighted units, and the use of
any hazardous materials or live fires.



   (C)   The Chief of Police shall review the permit application and
shall issue the permit for the parade or procession on the application of the
applicant except in the following circumstances in which the Chief of Police
is authorized to deny or modify the permit to be issued:



      (1)   Where the parade or procession is of such length or
duration that such will inhibit the flow of traffic for a period in excess of
two hours;



      (2)   Where, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, there is
substantial danger to life or bodily harm or property damage to a participant
in the parade or procession, or to a spectator, or a person is likely to be
affected because of the use of hazardous materials, toxic chemicals, or live
fires in the parade or procession;



      (3)   Where the hours proposed for such parade or procession
will cause a direct interference with the traffic flow along the proposed
route to the point that personal injury or property damage is likely to
result to the parade or procession participants or others displaced by such
parade or procession along the parade or procession route or on detours
caused by such parade or procession route.



   (D)   Each application for a permit shall be accompanied with a
permit fee as provided for in § 6.00 of the Fee Schedule, as set forth in
Appendix 1 of this code, before its consideration.  This fee shall be
non-refundable regardless of whether the permit is granted or denied.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.091  FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.



   (A)   A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be
identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a
pennant or other identifying insignia or by the display of headlights on each
of the automobiles in the daytime.



   (B)   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles
comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion
and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required by division
(A) of this section.  This provision shall not apply at intersections where
traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers.



   (C)   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as
near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the
vehicle ahead as closely as is practical and safe.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.092  ESCORTS AND TRAFFIC SAFETY.



   All parades and funeral processions operating at any point in the
municipal limits shall be required to be escorted by an escort vehicle
displaying flashing red or blue lights or a combination thereof, and such
escort officer shall precede the procession at each intersection or shall
hold traffic at intersections for a reasonable length of time for the
continuous passage of the funeral procession or parade.



§ 70.093  FUNERAL ESCORTS.



   Any person who escorts a funeral or other procession in the municipal
limits shall apply to the Police Chief for permission to do so.  Expense of
such escorts shall be borne by the person responsible for the procession.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate processions, see Tex. Transp. Code § 542.202



BICYCLES



§ 70.100  RULES FOR OPERATION.



   The following rules and regulations shall be observed in the operation
of a bicycle on the streets and public places:



   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle shall at all times operate
the bicycle with due regard for the safety of other persons and vehicles
lawfully upon the streets, highways, parkways and public places, as well as
for his or her own safety, and shall at all times and under all conditions
yield the right-of- way to pedestrians on the streets, highways, parkways,
public places, and on crosswalks.



   (B)   Every person operating a bicycle shall comply with all vehicle
traffic laws, except where such laws by their nature do not apply to
bicycles, and all vehicle traffic signs and signals erected for the
regulation of traffic.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle upon
the streets, highways, parkways, and public places during the period of one
hour after sunset to one hour before sunrise unless such bicycle is equipped
with a front light, casting a beam of white light in front of such bicycle
visible for not less than 500 feet, and also a rear signal, which is an
official reflector or red light visible for not less than 300 feet.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful to operate a bicycle upon the streets,
highways, parkways, and public places that is not equipped with adequate
brakes, lights and warning signal, all of which are in proper working order
during all of the time of the operation of such bicycle that has the approval
and has passed police inspection.



   (E)   It shall be the duty of all persons operating a bicycle to
ride single file, in a straight line, and as near the right-hand curb as
possible, on all main highways and thoroughfares and in central business
sections, and when riding on other streets must not ride in groups and more
than two abreast.



   (F)   Before turning or changing the direction of any bicycle upon
any street, highway, parkway, or public place, it shall be the duty of the
bicycle rider to give a signal, by the extension of the hand, to indicate the
direction it is the intention to proceed.



   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a bicycle upon
any street, highway, parkway, or public place to attach himself or herself to
any other moving vehicle.



   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a bicycle
equipped for carrying only the rider to carry another person on the front or
rear frame or handlebar of a bicycle.



   (I)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a bicycle to
engage in fancy or trick riding and without maintaining full control of such
bicycle, keeping both hands on the handlebar, except when necessary to signal.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.101  IMPOUNDMENT; SALE OF  IMPOUNDED BICYCLES



   (A)   Whenever any bicycle shall be impounded for violation of the
provisions of this chapter, it shall be surrendered at the expiration of the
impounded period to the parents or the guardian of the offender on the
payment of a charge for storage, at the discretion of the Chief of Police. 
If a charge is made, it shall not exceed $10.



   (B)   In the case of the seizure of a bicycle because it has been
found in the possession of a person not the legal owner thereof, and the
bicycle is not reclaimed by the legal owner thereof, it shall be sold at
public auction, after the expiration of 60 days from the date of seizure. 
Notice containing a description of the bicycle shall be published in a
newspaper circulating in the municipality at least one week prior to the date
of the sale. The proceeds of the sale shall be remitted to the general fund.



§ 70.102  PENALTIES FOR MINORS  VIOLATING BICYCLE RIDING REGULATIONS.



   Any person 16 years of age and under who violates any of the provisions
of this chapter relating to the bicycle safe riding rules and regulations and
the official police instructions for the safe operation of a bicycle shall
be, for the first offense, reprimanded in writing by the Police Department,
addressed to the parents or guardian of the offender, stating the nature of
violation.  Any additional violations shall be considered as misdemeanors
under § 10.99 of this code.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Operation of bicycles and mopeds generally, see Tex. Transp. Code §§
551.001 et seq.



CHAPTER 71:  PARKING



Section



   71.01   Parking on public roadways



   71.02   Parking of heavy trucks on streets prohibited



   71.03   Parallel parking



   71.04   Angle parking



   71.05   Parking in marked spaces



   71.06   Vehicle owner not to permit parking violations



   71.07   Impoundment of unlawfully parked vehicle



   71.08   On-street handicapped parking



   71.09   Parking regulations and maintenance



 



   71.99   Penalty



§ 71.01  PARKING ON PUBLIC ROADWAYS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any boat trailers, stock
trailers, recreational vehicles (R.V.'s) or any other vehicle unable to
operate under its own power on any public street or roadway within the
municipality.



(Am. Ord. 857, passed 8-14-01; Am. Ord. 1021, passed 12-21-10)  Penalty, see
§ 71.99



§ 71.02  PARKING OF HEAVY TRUCKS ON  STREETS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any truck,
semi-trailer, or tractor truck having a rated capacity of 20,000 pounds gross
vehicle weight (gvw) or more, anywhere in any residential area as designated
by the zoning ordinances and maps of the city except for the purposes of
loading or unloading.  This prohibition shall apply not only on public
streets but also on private property, driveways or parking areas.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle,
trailer or combination thereof on the streets, alleys or other public ways in
the city which shall exceed 35 feet in length.



   (C)   The City Council may grant a waiver to this section and issue
a parking permit on a case-by-case basis depending on the ability to
accommodate off-road vehicle parking on an improved area which does not
impose any hardship on other residents in the area or the surrounding
roadways.



   (D)   An annual fee of $100 shall be paid to the city for the
parking permit.  The parking permit shall be revoked and divisions (A) and
(B) shall be in full force and effect if any of the following conditions are
not met at all times:



      (1)   No yard or street parking of the truck, semi-trailer,
tractor truck or any other similar vehicle will be allowed;



      (2)   A minimum front setback from the street of 15 feet shall
be observed at all times;



      (3)   A minimum side setback of 10 feet shall be observed to
prevent obstructing the view of traffic; and



      (4)   The improved parking area shall be well-maintained at
all times.



(Ord. 726, passed 7-9-91; Am. Ord. 951, passed 12-13-05)  Penalty, see  §
71.99



Statutory reference:



   Regulation of parking on public property, see Tex. Transp. Code §
542.202



   Regulation of parking on private property, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code
§ 431.001



§ 71.03  PARALLEL PARKING.



   At such places in the municipality as the Council shall, by ordinance,
determine that parallel parking shall be permitted and shall cause the same
to be marked or signed, every vehicle parked shall be parked so that the
right-hand wheels thereof are parallel to and within 18 inches of the
right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.



Penalty, see § 71.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to permit parallel parking, see Tex. Transp. Code § 545.303



§ 71.04  ANGLE PARKING.



   (A)   It shall be lawful to park vehicles at an angle not greater
than 45° to the line of traffic at such places in the municipality as the
Council shall, by ordinance, determine that angle parking shall be permitted
and shall cause the same to be marked or signed.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) of this
section, angle parking shall not be permitted on any federal-aid or state
highway within the municipality, unless an authorized official of the state
Department of Highways & Public Transportation has determined that the
roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering
with the free movement of traffic.



Penalty, see § 71.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to permit angle parking, see Tex. Transp. Code § 545.303



§ 71.05  PARKING IN MARKED SPACES.



   Whenever the municipality shall have designated the manner in which
motor vehicles shall be parked on any public street, by marking parking
spaces on such streets, it shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any
such street other than in the manner so designated and entirely within the
lines of such space.



Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.06  VEHICLE OWNER NOT TO PERMIT  PARKING VIOLATIONS.



   No person shall allow, suffer, or permit any vehicle registered in his
or her name to stand or be parked in any street in the municipality in
violation of any of the ordinances of the municipality or laws of the state
regulating the standing or parking of vehicles.



Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.07  IMPOUNDMENT OF UNLAWFULLY  PARKED VEHICLE.



   Any vehicle parked in violation of the traffic ordinances of the
municipality at a place where parking is prohibited or parking time is
limited may be removed and impounded by the Police Department, such removal
to be accomplished by an authorized wrecker service.  An impounding fee of
$20, plus the wrecker service charge, shall be assessed against and collected
from the owner or driver of the vehicle before the release of such vehicle. 
The payment of the impounding fee shall not excuse such owner or driver of
the vehicle from the charge of violating the regulation prohibiting or
limiting parking.



Cross-reference:



   Regulations regarding use of wrecker services and impoundment, see Ch.
72



§ 71.08  ON-STREET HANDICAPPED PARKING.



   (A)   On-street handicapped parking.  The City Superintendent as
authorized by the City Council may install and maintain on-street handicapped
parking spaces and designate the same by proper posting.  Such on-street
handicapped parking spaces shall be marked according to prevailing state and
federal standard for handicapped parking.



   (B)   Penalty.  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any
vehicle not displaying a distinguishing license plate, symbol, tag or other
devise issued to disabled persons pursuant to state law to stop, stand, park
or leave standing such vehicle in any parking space properly designated for
the exclusive use of physically handicapped persons pursuant to division
(A).  Such unlawful action shall pe punished as provided in § 71.99.



(Ord. 669, passed 2-4-86)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.09  PARKING REGULATIONS AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to park or store or allow
another to park or store a recreational vehicle, travel trailer, boat or boat
trailer on a public roadway in any residential zoned district.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person to park or store or allow
another to park or store a vehicle, boat, boat trailer, stock trailer or RV
in the front yard of any property, upon any surface other than an improved
surface. Improved surface shall be defined as a concrete, asphalt, crushed
rock, paving brick, brick, river rock, gravel or similar hard or solid
material other than dirt, grass or bare ground, to serve as a parking surface
for wheeled motor vehicles.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a person to park or store or allow
another to park or to store a vehicle in the side yard or in the rear yard of
a corner lot, upon any surface other than an improved surface, unless such
vehicle is concealed from view from all points along public street
rights-of-way, excluding alleys, by:



      (1)   A solid, opaque fence or wall providing full screening
from the ground to a minimum height of six feet;



      (2)   Vegetation consisting of a solid hedgerow of evergreen
shrubs, or trees and shrubs, providing full screening from the ground to a
minimum height of six feet; or



      (3)   Any combination of the above that effectively conceals
the vehicle from view and provides full screening from the ground to a
minimum height of six feet.



   (D)   Maintenance of improved parking surface.  It shall be
unlawful for any person to fail to maintain all improved parking surfaces in
good and safe condition, and free of any defects affecting the use, safety,
appearance or drainage of the surface or of the adjoining property.



(Ord. 857, passed 8-14-01; Am. Ord. 1021, passed 12-21-10)  Penalty, see §
71.99



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   Any violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine
not to exceed $500.



CHAPTER 72:  VEHICLE TOWING, REMOVAL, AND IMPOUNDMENT REGULATIONS



Section



   72.01   Definitions



   72.02   Wrecker to be invited to accident scene; exception



   72.03   Soliciting business prohibited



   72.04   Application for placement on rotation list



   72.05   Inspection by officials; notice to applicants seeking
placement on rotation list



   72.06   Annual requests for placement on rotation list



   72.07   Maximum charges



   72.08   Insurance



   72.09   Minimum equipment



   72.10   Inspection of equipment



   72.11   Driver registration



   72.12   Fencing of yards



   72.13   Rotation list



   72.14   Answering calls



   72.15   (Reserved)



   72.16   Wrecker used in absence of designation



   72.17   Police prohibited from influencing selection of wrecker



   72.18   Following vehicle in response to accident report prohibited



   72.19   Impoundment of wrecked vehicle



   72.20   Signs required on wreckers



§ 72.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every vehicle which is self-propelled.



   OWNER.  Any person who holds the legal title of a motor vehicle or who
has the legal right of possession thereof, or the legal right of such vehicle.



   STREET.  Any street, alley, public place, square, or highway within
the corporate limits of the municipality.



   VEHICLE.  Every device in or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a public highway except devices moved only by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rail or tracks, and shall
include trailers and semi-trailers.



   WRECKER.  Any motor vehicle used for the purpose of towing or removing
disabled or wrecked vehicles.



   WRECKER BUSINESS.  The business of towing or removing disabled or
wrecked vehicles on the public streets, regardless of whether the purpose of
the towing is to remove, repair, wreck, store, trade or purchase such
disabled or wrecked vehicles.



   WRECKER COMPANY.  Any person engaged in the wrecker business.



(Ord. 908, passed 4-12-04)



§ 72.02  WRECKER TO BE INVITED TO  ACCIDENT SCENE; EXCEPTION.



   No person shall drive a wrecker to or near the scene or situs of an
accident or collision on the streets of the municipality, unless such person
has been called to the scene by the Police Department; provided, that when it
is necessary to prevent death or bodily injury to any person involved in an
accident or collision, any other person may summon a wrecker and the
prohibition of this section shall be inapplicable.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.03  SOLICITING BUSINESS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly, on the
streets of the municipality, the business of towing any vehicle which is
wrecked or disabled on a public street, regardless of whether the
solicitation is for the purpose of soliciting the business of towing,
removing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading, or purchasing such
vehicle.  Proof of the presence of any person engaged in the wrecker
business or the presence of any wrecker or motor vehicle owned or operated by
any person engaged in the wrecker business, either as owner, operator,
employee, or agent, on any public street in the municipality, at or near the
scene or situs of a wreck, accident, or collision within one hour after the
happening of a wreck, accident, or collision, shall be prima facie evidence
of a solicitation in violation of this section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.04  APPLICATION FOR PLACEMENT ON  ROTATION LIST.



   (A)   All operators of a wrecker business desiring to be called for
wrecker service by the Police Department shall make application, in writing,
to the Chief of Police, and upon such application shall list the operator’s
qualifications and equipment for providing such service, provide a copy of
insurance policies or a certificate of insurance stating coverage, and agree
not to charge more than the amounts prescribed in § 72.07 and to abide by
the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Operators making application agree to pay the municipality $10
per call referred to offset the municipality’s costs in administering the
rotation system.  Operators failing to pay charges billed shall be removed
from the rotation list.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.05  INSPECTION BY OFFICIALS; NOTICE TO APPLICANTS SEEKING PLACEMENT ON
ROTATION LIST.



   After application is made, the Chief of Police shall inspect the
equipment of the applicant for compliance with the standards and
specifications as set out in this chapter.  The Chief of Police shall notify
all applicants complying with the provisions of this chapter that their name
has been placed on the approval list.  Applicants not complying with
provisions of this chapter shall be notified in writing of the reasons for
the rejection of the application.



§ 72.06  ANNUAL REQUESTS FOR PLACEMENT ON ROTATION LIST.



   During the month of September each year, the wrecker operators in the
municipality desiring to have their names retained or placed on the list
authorizing them to answer requests for wrecker service by the Police
Department shall make such requests in writing to the Chief of Police.



§ 72.07  MAXIMUM CHARGES.



   (A)   Operators under the municipality’s rotation system shall
agree to charge no more than the prices for services within the municipality
(Police Department calls) as prescribed in § 3.00 of the Fee Schedule set
forth in Appendix 1 of this code.



   (B)   No charges shall be made for calls or service in the
municipality except those listed charges.  A comprehensive list of service
rates must be posted in a public area for customer viewing.  For hauls to
points outside the municipality, or originating outside of the municipality,
the operator and owner shall negotiate a price and the municipality shall not
be responsible for supervision of this charge.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.08  INSURANCE.



   All wrecker operators shall carry standard liability insurance as
required in Tex. Transportation Code § 643.101.



(Ord. 908, passed 4-12-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.09  MINIMUM EQUIPMENT.



   All wrecker or towing equipment operators desiring to be called by the
Police Department shall have standard equipment on wreckers to remove
vehicles and debris from the roadway.



(Ord. 908, passed 4-12-04)



§ 72.10  INSPECTION OF EQUIPMENT.



   The Chief of Police shall have the right to inspect the equipment of
all operators providing wrecker service under the provisions of this
chapter.  Such inspection may be made at any and all reasonable hours and
places.  The Chief of Police, after inspection, may authorize the removal of
an operator’s name from the list for failure to operate and maintain its
equipment in an efficient and good manner.



§ 72.11  DRIVER REGISTRATION.



   All drivers for such wrecker operators shall be required to register
with the Police Department, and a driver’s license report from the
Department of Public Safety shall be requested.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.12  FENCING OF YARDS.



   All yards and storage areas for damaged vehicles which are towed in by
wrecker operators shall be fenced in order to provide protection for the
vehicles in custody.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.13  ROTATION LIST.



   The Police Department shall maintain a wrecker rotation list in
alphabetical order which shall contain the names and addresses of each
wrecker service operator who complies with the provisions of this chapter in
order that the operator might be called upon for wrecker service by the
Police Department in the absence of an expressed preference by the owner or
operator of the vehicle requiring assistance.  After the operator at the top
of the list receives a call, then that name shall be placed at the bottom of
the list and the next operator shall be moved to the top of the list to
receive calls.  This process shall be repeated until each operator providing
wrecker service under the provisions of this chapter has received calls. 
The Police Department shall notify each wrecker operator in sufficient time
prior to his rendering such wrecker service in order that the operator might
adequately provide the necessary personnel and equipment to answer such calls.



§ 72.14  ANSWERING CALLS.



   In the event a wrecker service operator is requested by the Police
Department to make a call and the operator agrees to make the call, then such
operator shall proceed immediately to the scene where he or she is directed
and shall be given a reasonable length of time (approximately 15 minutes) in
which to reach such location.  If the wrecker service operator answering the
call has not reached the location within the reasonable length of time, then
the officer at the scene may proceed to call the next wrecker service
operator on the list and that operator shall have priority in that particular
call.  In the event that the wrecker service operator called fails to comply
with the provisions of this section by proceeding to the designated place
within the time specified above, then this wrecker service operator shall be
removed from the top of the list and placed at the bottom of the list.  This
section shall not apply where the operator’s name at the top of the list is
called and he advises the officer requesting the wrecker service that he or
she will be unable to make the call nor will it apply where there has been a
delay caused by some act or commission of another person other than the
wrecker operator or his or her employees or by an act of God.



(Ord. 908, passed 4-12-04)



§ 72.15 (RESERVED)



§ 72.16  WRECKER USED IN ABSENCE OF DESIGNATION.



   If the owner of a disabled vehicle involved in an accident or collision
fails or refuses to designate a wrecker company, or if it becomes necessary
to have an abandoned or untended vehicle removed from public or private
property, the investigating officer shall cause the wrecker company then
first on the rotation list maintained by the municipality for such service to
be summoned to provide such service.



§ 72.17  POLICE PROHIBITED FROM INFLUENCING SELECTION OF WRECKER.



   No police officer shall, directly or indirectly, either by word,
gesture, sign, or otherwise, recommend to any person the name of any
particular person engaged in the wrecker service or repair business nor shall
any police officer influence or attempt to influence in any manner the
decision of any person in choosing or selecting a wrecker or repair service.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.18  FOLLOWING VEHICLE IN RESPONSE TO ACCIDENT REPORT PROHIBITED.



   No person in a wrecker shall follow any ambulance or police car which
is traveling on a public street in response to a report of an vehicular
collision or accident.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.19  IMPOUNDMENT OF WRECKED  VEHICLE.



   Any police officer may direct that any vehicle shall be taken by the
driver of the wrecker towing the vehicle directly to the municipal pound and
there held by the municipality for inspection or investigation to determine
the cause or reason for the accident such vehicle was involved in or such
vehicle’s disability or for any lawful purpose.



§ 72.20  SIGNS REQUIRED ON WRECKERS.



   Each wrecker doing business in the municipality shall be marked by
displaying a sign on each door with the name, address, and telephone number
of the wrecker service in letters at least one inch high.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Records required for garages and repair shops storing damaged vehicles,
see § 70.023



   Restrictions on wrecker drivers at scene of accident, see § 70.022



CHAPTER 73:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   One-way streets



      II.   Speed limits



      III.   Through trucks prohibited



      IV.   U-turns prohibited



      V.   Stop intersections



      VI.   School safety zones



SCHEDULE I.  ONE-WAY STREETS.



   (A)   One-way streets designated.  The following streets and alleys
are hereby declared by the City Council to be one-way streets for the periods
of time designated:



 

Street
 
Location
 

Direction

 

Times

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed



College Street
 
From Otis Street south to Hall Street
 

South

 

7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.  weekdays, while school is in session during the
regular school year

 

840

 

8-8-00



White Street
 
From Hall Street north to Otis Street
 

North

 

7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. weekdays, while school is in session during the
regular school year

 

854

 

3-13-01




 



   (B)   Penalty.  Any violation of any provision of this schedule
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.



(Ord. 840, passed 8-8-00; Am. Ord. 854, passed 3-13-01)



SCHEDULE II.  SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   Designated school safety zones described.  The following
highways and streets are hereby declared to be school safety zones.  It
shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any motor or other
vehicle upon these street or portions of street in such school safety zones
at a rate of speed in excess of 20 miles per hour between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m., except weekends, holidays and summer vacation.



 

Street
 
Location




College Street
 
From Main Street northerly to Otis Street


Fourth Street
 
From Union Street westerly to U.S. Highway 82


Hall Street
 
From Union Street westerly to White Street


Jordan Street
 
From Fourth Street to approximately 100 feet south of Fourth Street


Otis Street
 
From approximately 100 feet north of White Street to approximately 210 feet
west of Union Street


Patricia Lane
 
From Bois D’Arc Street westerly to Donna Circle


Susan Drive
 
From U.S. Highway 82 southerly to Patricia Lane


Wainwright Street
 
From approximately 100 feet west of White Street and from College Street to
approximately 170 feet west of Union Street


White Street
 
From Hall Street northerly to Fourth Street


White Street
 
From approximately 150 feet north of Otis Street to Hall Street




 



   (B)   Designated pedestrian safety zones described.  The following
street are hereby declared to be pedestrian safety zones by the City Council
due to special hazards with respect to children and the elderly within such
areas:



 

Street
 
Location


Beauty Lane
 
From Clark Avenue easterly to Sloan Street


Pecan Street
 
From Buchanan Street northerly to Beauty Lane


Morningside Drive
 
From State Highway 56 (Main Street) northerly through the entire length of
Morningside Drive



 



   (C)   Highways.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or
drive any motor or other vehicle upon any highway or portion of highway
within the city at a speed in excess of that specified for the following
highways or portions of highways:



 

Street
 
Speed limit and Location


Loop 441
 
For the purpose of the enforcement of this schedule may also be known as U.S.
Highway 377 Business or South and North Union Street: southerly from the
intersection of U.S. Highway 377, a distance of approximately 0.695 miles, a
speed limit of 40 miles per hour at all times; thence southerly a distance of
approximately 0.600 miles, a speed limit of 35 miles per hour at all times
except that a school speed limit of 20 miles per hour will be effective on
school days only at the school crossing zone from approximately highway
milepoint 0.785 to approximate highway milepoint 0.925 only during the
following hours: from 45 minutes before school opens until classes begin,
from the beginning to the end of the lunch period, if needed, and for a 30
minute period beginning at the close of the school; thence southerly to the
south city limits, a distance of approximately 0.220 miles, a speed limit of
50 miles per hour at all times.


State Highway 56
 
For the purpose of the enforcement of this schedule may also be known as East
or West Main Street: easterly from the west city limits to Chestnut Street
for a distance of approximately 0.375 miles, a speed limit of 50 miles per
hour at all times; thence easterly for a distance of approximately 1.643
miles, a speed limit of 35 miles per hour at all times, except that a school
speed limit of 20 miles per hour will be effective on school days, from
highway milepost 2.002 to highway milepost 2.102, only during the following
hours: from 45 minutes before school classes begin, from the beginning to the
end of the lunch period, if needed, and for a 30 minute period beginning at
the close of school; thence easterly a distance of approximately 0.400 miles,
a speed limit of 50 miles per hour at all times; thence easterly for a
distance of approximately 0.457 miles, to the east city limits, a speed limit
of 55 miles per hour at all times.


U.S. Highway 82
 
55 miles per hour at all times, easterly from the west city limits for a
distance of approximately 0.198 miles; thence, 60 miles per hour at all
times, easterly for a distance of approximately 2.123 miles to the east city
limits.


U.S. Highway 377
 
(1)   For southbound traffic, from the north city limits southerly for
approximately 409 feet, 55 miles per hour at all times; thence southerly to
Randy Drive, 45 miles per hour at all times; thence from Randy Drive
southerly to the south city limits, 55 miles per hour at all times.

(2)   For northbound traffic, from the south city limits northerly to
Randy Drive, 55 miles per hour at all times.



 



   (D)   Authority.  Authority to enforce this schedule shall be
vested in the Chief of Police or his or her assigns.



   (E)   Exceptions.  The provisions of this schedule shall not apply
to motor vehicles operated by the Fire Department responding to calls, nor to
police patrols or physicians and/or ambulances responding to emergency calls.



   (F)   Penalty.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this
schedule shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500.



(Ord. 621, passed 9-9-82; Am. Ord. 713, passed 5-8-90; Am. Ord. 716, passed
8-14-90; Am. Ord. 769, passed 11-14-95; Am. Ord. 776, passed 11-14-95; Am.
Ord. 777, passed 2-15-96; Am. Ord. 821, passed 8-11-98; Am. Ord. 863, passed
10-16-01)



SCHEDULE III.  THROUGH TRUCKS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this schedule, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      STREET.  Any street or alley within the limits of the city that
is not designated as a state or federal highway.



      TRUCK.  A truck, tractor, semi-trailer, or combination of
tractor with trailer with a rated capacity of 20,000 pounds gross vehicle
weight (gvw) or more which exceeds 35 feet in length.



   (B)   Providing for the posting of certain streets.



      (1)   The City Council shall have authority to post notices on
city streets and alleys within the limits of the city prohibiting the use of
certain streets and alleys by trucks within the city.



      (2)   For the purpose of this schedule, such notice shall be
in the form of street sign erected so as to be easily observed and is clearly
worded so as to restrict or prohibit truck traffic when observed by the
operators of vehicles attempting to make use of such streets, alleys or
portions thereof and that provides detour to avoid entry into the restricted
streets, alleys or portions thereof.



   (C)   Restricted streets.  It shall be a violation of this schedule
for an operator of any truck to drive on or into the following public
streets, alleys or portions thereof, when sign posted to prohibit or restrict
trucks from such streets, alleys or portions thereof:



 

Street
 
Restricted Location
 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed



Randy Street
 
From North Union Street easterly to U.S. Highway 377
 

770

 

10-10-95



Bois D Arc
 
From Highway 82 southerly to Highway 377
 

954

 

4-11-06




 



   (D)   Authority.  Authority to enforce the provisions of this
schedule shall be vested in the Chief of Police or his or her assigns.



   (E)   Penalty.  It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate
any of the provisions of this schedule, and every person convicted of a
misdemeanor for violation of any provisions of this schedule shall be
punished by a fine as provided in § 10.99.



SCHEDULE IV.  U-TURNS PROHIBITED



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person driving any type of a
motor vehicle to make a u-turn at the following intersections:



 

Intersection
 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed



Union Street and State Highway 56 or East Main
 

401

 

6-1-62



Center Street and State Highway 56 or East Main
 

401

 

6-1-62




 



   (B)   The definition of a u-turn will be considered making such a
turn at an intersection that the person and vehicle will turn and proceed in
the opposite direction from which the person and vehicle were traveling when
approaching the intersection.



   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this schedule will be
punished as provided in § 10.99



SCHEDULE V.  STOP INTERSECTIONS



   (A)   The following intersections are designated as stop
intersections and signs shall be posted designating either three-way or
four-way stops.



 


Street

 

Direction

 

Intersection

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





Bois D Arc
 
Southbound
 
Patricia Lane
 

985

 

9-9-08



Bois D Arc
 
Northbound
 
Patricia Lane
 

985

 

9-9-08



Bois D Arc
 
Southbound
 
Crow Road
 

985

 

9-9-08



Bois D Arc
 
Northbound
 
Crow Road
 

985

 

9-9-08



Crow Road
 
Westbound
 
Bois D Arc
 

985

 

9-9-08



Mulberry Street
 
Southbound
 
North Avenue
 

838

 

4-11-00



Mulberry Street
 
Northbound
 
North Avenue
 

838

 

4-11-00



North Avenue
 
Westbound
 
Mulberry Street
 

838

 

4-11-00



North Avenue
 
Eastbound
 
Mulberry Street
 

838

 

4-11-00



North Avenue
 
Westbound
 
Wilson Street
 

838

 

4-11-00



North Avenue
 
Eastbound
 
Wilson Street
 

838

 

4-11-00



North Jordan Street
 
Southbound
 
Third Street
 

819

 

7-14-98



North Jordan Street
 
Northbound
 
Third Street
 

819

 

7-14-98



North Jordan Street
 
Southbound
 
Otis Street
 

819

 

7-14-98



North Jordan Street
 
Northbound
 
Otis Street
 

819

 

7-14-98



Otis Street
 
Westbound
 
North Jordan Street
 

819

 

7-14-98



Patricia Lane
 
Westbound
 
Susan Drive
 

892

 

5- -03



Patricia Lane
 
Eastbound
 
Susan Drive
 

892

 

5- -03



Patricia Lane
 
Eastbound
 
Bois D Arc
 

985

 

9-9-08



Susan Drive
 
Northbound
 
Patricia Lane
 

892

 

5- -03



Susan Drive
 
Southbound
 
Patricia Lane
 

892

 

5- -03



Third Street
 
Westbound
 
North Jordan Street
 

819

 

7-14-98



Third Street
 
Westbound
 
White Street
 

828

 

10-13-98



Third Street
 
Eastbound
 
White Street
 

828

 

10-13-98



White Street
 
Northbound
 
Third Street
 

828

 

10-13-98



White Street
 
Southbound
 
Third Street
 

828

 

10-13-98



Wilson Street
 
Southbound
 
North Avenue
 

838

 

4-11-00



Wilson Street
 
Northbound
 
North Avenue
 

838

 

4-11-00





 



   (B)   Penalty.  Whoever violates any provision of this schedule
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $500.



(Ord. 819, passed 7-14-98; Am. Ord. 828, passed 10-13-98; Am. Ord. 838,
passed 4-11-00; Am. Ord. 892, passed 5- -03)



SCHEDULE VI.  SCHOOL SAFETY ZONES



   (A)   The following streets and portions of street are hereby
declared school safety zones:



 


Street

 

Location

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





College Street
 
From approximately 150 feet north of the intersection of College and Otis
Street to approximately 70 feet north of the intersection of College and Main
 

997

 

10-13-09



Jordan Street
 
From the intersection of Jordan Street and Fourth Streets to approximately
100 feet south of the intersection of Jordan and Fourth Streets
 

997

 

10-13-09



Fourth Street
 
From intersection Hwy. 82 and Fourth Street to approximately 185 feet west of
the intersection of Fourth and Union Streets
 

997

 

10-13-09



Hall Street
 
From approximately 100 feet west of the intersection of Hall and White
Streets to approximately 140 feet west of the intersection of Hall and Union
Streets
 

997

 

10-13-09



Hwy 82
 
From 550 feet east of Fourth Street intersection to 485 feet west of the
Fourth Street intersection
 

997

 

10-13-09



West Main Street
 
From approximately 20 feet east of the intersection of West Main and Quillen
to approximately 190 feet east of intersection of West Main and Church Street
 

997

 

10-13-09



Otis Street
 
From approximately 100 feet west of the intersection of Otis and White
Streets to approximately 160 feet west of the intersection of Otis and Union
Streets
 

997

 

10-13-09



North Union Street
 
From approximately 20 feet north of the intersection of North Union and Otis
to approximately 10 feet south of intersection of North Union and Hall Street
 

997

 

10-13-09



Wainwright Street
 
From approximately 200 feet west of the intersection of Wainwright and White
Streets, and from the intersection of Wainwright and College Streets to
approximately 110 feet west of the intersection of Wainwright and Union
Streets
 

997

 

10-13-09



White Street
 
From approximately 150 feet north of the intersection of White and Otis
Streets to the intersections of White and Hall Streets
 

997

 

10-13-09



White Street
 
From the intersection of White and Fourth Street to approximately 150 feet
south of the intersection of White and Fourth Streets
 

997

 

10-13-09





 



   (B)   The provisions of this schedule shall not apply to motor
vehicles operated by the Fire Department responding to calls, nor to police
patrols or physicians and/or ambulances responding to emergency calls.



   (C)   Any violation of this schedule is punishable by a fine not to
exceed $200.



(Ord. 997, passed 10-13-09)



CHAPTER 74:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Parking restrictions



      II.   Fire lanes



SCHEDULE I.  PARKING RESTRICTIONS



   (A)   Parking any motor vehicle, whether automobile, truck, tractor,
tractor trailer, recreational vehicle, or similar motor vehicle, except
emergency vehicles on a mission of public safety, is prohibited as follows:



   (B)   Any violation of any provision of this schedule is punishable
by a fine not to exceed $500.



 


Street

 

Location and Restrictions

 

Times

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





Center Street
 
West side between Grayson Street to Wainwright Street to Mineral Street
 

8:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on Sundays and 5:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Wednesday s

 

963

 

5-8-07



College Street
 
Either the east or west side between Wainwright Street to Hall Street, except
on weekends, holidays, and summer vacation
 

7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.

 

621

 

9-9-82



College Street
 
Either the east side or west side between Otis Street and Wainwright Street,
Monday through Friday
 

7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.

 

936

 

9-6-05



Fourth Street
 
Along either the south or north side, beginning at a point 25 feet east-
southeast of its intersection with U.S. Highway 82, thence proceeding
east-southeast along  its right-of-way to a point 1,316 feet east-southeast
of its intersection with U.S. Highway 82
 

All

 

818

 

7-14-98



Hall Street
 
100 block
 

All

 

1003

 

4-13-10



4th Street
 
100 and 200 block
 

7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m

 

1088

 

12-13-16



Hall Street
 
200 block, Monday through Friday
 

7:30 a.m. to



4:00 p.m.

 

804;



1003

 

9-9-97;



4-13-10



Highway 377 North
 
East and west sides, beginning at Highway 82 North access road and proceeding
north along Highway 377 to the northern city limits
 

All

 

902

 

1-13-04



Main Street
 
Center of Main Street, being that part of Main Street between its
intersection with Union Street and between points 16 feet out from the curb
of Main Street, and west of its intersection with Union Street and east of
its intersection with Collinsville Street and Center Street between points 8
feet from the curbs of Main Street
 

All

 

284

 

5-21-48



North Avenue
 
South side between Center Street and Virginia Avenue
 

8:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on Sundays and 5:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Wednesday s

 

963

 

5-8-07



Quillen Street
 
 

All

 

1003

 

4-13-10



Wainwright Street
 
From White Street to Elm Street
 

7:00 a.m. to 4:00 a.m.  weekdays, while school is in session during the
regular school year

 

854

 

3-13-01



Wainwright Street
 
North side between Center Street and North Union Street
 

8:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on Sundays and 5:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Wednesday s

 

963

 

5-8-07



White Street
 
From Hall Street to Otis Street
 

7:00 a.m. to 4:00 a.m. weekdays, while school is in session during the
regular school year

 

854

 

3-13-01



Union Street
 
East and west side from the north side curbline extended of its intersection
with Main Street to the south side curbline extended of its intersection with
Grayson Street
 

All

 

521

 

9-4-75





 



   (B)   Any violation of any provision of this schedule is punishable
by a fine not to exceed $500.



(Ord. 284, passed 5-21-48; Am. Ord. 521, passed 9-4-75; Am. Ord. 621, passed
9-9-82; Am. Ord. 804, passed 9-9-97; Am. Ord. 818, passed 7-14-98; Am. Ord.
854, passed 3-13-01; Am. Ord. 936, passed 9-6-05; Am. Ord. 1088, passed
12-13-16)



SCHEDULE II.  FIRE LANES.



   (A)   Designating a fire lane.  The following described area is
hereby declare a fire lane:



 

Street
 
Restricted Location
 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





Alley
 
Located directly behind the First Baptist Church and opening on Hall Street
and Wainwright Street
 

515

 

12-5-74



Collinsville Street
 
East side from Common Street to Charter Street
 

394

 

2-2-61



Hall Street
 
North three-fourths extending west from its intersection with College Street
to its intersection with White Street
 

311

 

5-5-52



Main Street
 
South three-fourths of East Main Street extending from the service station to
the northeast corner  of the property then owned by Mrs. Osie Stofle
 

311

 

5-5-52



Mineral Street
 
North side extending from Center Street on the east to North Union Street on
the west
 

496

 

8-7-73



Morningside Drive
 
East side curb, beginning 184 feet north of West Main Street (Highway 56) and
ending 4,040 feet north of West Main Street (601 West Main)
 

687

 

11-3-87



North Avenue
 
North side of North Avenue from north Center Street to  the west to Virginia
Avenue on the east
 

500

 

10-4-73



Union Street
 
420 feet north and south from the intersection of Walnut Street, such 420
feet beginning at the northeast corner of such intersection running north 420
feet on each side of the street
 

538

 

7-8-76



Union Street
 
North Union Street from Main Street to the north side of Mineral Street
 

399

 

12-7-61



Walnut Street
 
North side of Walnut Street 150 feet from the northwest curbline of its
intersection with South Union Street
 

538

 

7-8-76



Walnut Street
 
25 feet on the south side of Walnut Street from its southeast intersection
with South Union Street
 

538

 

7-8-76





 



   (B)   Prohibited use.  Except for authorized emergency vehicles, it
shall be unlawful to park or cause to stand any vehicle or equipment in the
designated fire lane.



   (C)   Penalty.  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions
of this schedule shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as provided in § 10.99



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ANIMALS



      91.   FAIR HOUSING



      92.   FIRE PREVENTION



      93.   HEALTH AND SANITATION



      94.   NUISANCES



      95.   JUNKED AND ABANDONED PROPERTY



      96.   PARKS AND RECREATION



      97.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      98.   CEMETERIES



      99.   CARGO OR SHIPPING CONTAINERS



CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section




General Provisions




   90.001   Definitions



   90.002   Penalty for violation of chapter



   90.003   Enforcement officer



   90.004   Authority to euthanize



   90.005   Public nuisance animals



   90.006   Confinement and abandonment of animals



   90.007   Cruelty to animals



   90.008   Disposal of dead animals



   90.009   Filing of complaints




Dogs




   90.014   Fighting of dogs upon exhibition



   90.015   Procedure for keeping of dogs which have bitten persons



   90.016   Dogs at large



   90.017   Impounding dogs



   90.018   Rabid or dangerous dog may be destroyed



   90.019   Vicious dogs



   90.020   Dangerous dogs




Rabies Control




   90.024   Reporting of rabies cases or suspected rabid animal
required   



   90.025   Authority to quarantine



   90.026   Animals subject to quarantine for biting



   90.027   Disposition of animals exposed to rabies




Animal Vaccination




   90.030   Vaccination required



   90.031   Vaccination certificate and tag




Domestic and Prohibited Animals




   90.035   Keeping exotic or dangerous wild animals and poisonous
reptiles prohibited



   90.036   Special provisions concerning fowl, rabbits, guinea pigs,
bees, potbellied pigs, pygmy goats, and ferrets



   90.037   Number of animals per household




Livestock and Swine




   90.040   Running at large prohibited



   90.041   Fencing required



   90.042   Places prohibited to livestock



   90.043   Minimum lot size



   90.044   Keeping swine prohibited



   90.045   Maintenance of premises



   90.046   Location of buildings



   90.047   Exceptions




Birds




   90.050   Municipality designated a bird sanctuary



   90.051   Trapping, hunting, molesting birds prohibited



   90.052   Abatement of nuisances created by congregation of birds




Impoundment of Animals




   90.060   Impoundment of animals generally



   90.061   Reclaiming impounded animal; fees



   90.062   Unclaimed animals



   90.063   Adoption of animals from city shelter



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED ANIMAL.  Any animal which has been:



      (1)   Intentionally or knowingly released from the owner’s
control with the apparent intention of no longer providing care for the
animal;



      (2)   Left at any location within the city by an owner and
that owner fails to return to the property;



      (3)   Impounded or otherwise placed under the temporary
control of the division of community services, and the person having been
previously deemed to be the lawful owner of the animal refused to claim or
properly redeem the animal.



   ALTERED ANIMAL.  Any animal, male or female, whose reproductive organs
have been surgically removed.



   ANIMAL.  Any living creature including, but not limited to, dogs,
cats, cows, horses, birds, fish, mammals, reptiles, insects, fowl and
livestock, but specifically excluding human beings.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.  The person or persons designated by the city
to represent and act for the city in the impoundment of animals, controlling
of stray animals and as otherwise required in this chapter.



   ANIMAL SHELTER.  Any facility operated by a county or municipal agency
or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals
held under the authority of this chapter.



   ASSISTANCE ANIMAL.  Any animal which has been specifically trained by
a recognized institution to assist its handicapped or disabled human partner
with daily activities and tasks.



   AT LARGE.  An animal that is not confined to the premises of its owner
by a containment device of sufficient strength and/or height to prevent the
animal from escaping from such premises, and so arranged that the animal will
remain upon such premises when a leash, cord, chain or similar direct
physical control of a maximum length of six feet, and not being kept
physically restrained from leaving the premises of the owner.  An animal
shall not be considered at large when held and controlled by a person by
means of a leash or chain of proper strength and length to control the action
of the animal.



   CAT.  Members of the feline species of all ages, both male and female.



   DANGEROUS DOG.  A dog that:



      (1)   Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes
bodily injury which would cause a reasonable person to seek medical treatment
whether or not that care was actually sought and occurs in a place other than
a secure enclosure in which the dog was being kept which was reasonably
certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or



      (2)   Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than a secure
enclosure in which the dog was being kept which was reasonably certain to
prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a
person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury
to that person; or



      (3)   Is accustomed to run, worry or kill goats, sheep or
water fowl or other animals considered to be property; or



      (4)   Makes an unprovoked attack on another dog causing injury
which would cause a reasonable person to seek veterinary care whether or not
that care was actually sought.



   DANGEROUS WILD ANIMAL.  Animals including:  venomous lizard,
poisonous snakes, constricting snakes, raccoon, skunk, fox, bear, elephant,
kangaroo, monkey, chimpanzee, antelope, deer, lions, tigers, ocelots,
cougars, leopards, cheetahs, jaguars, bobcats, servals, caracals, hyenas,
coyotes, jackals, orangutan, gorillas, baboons, or any other wild animal
capable of or inclined to do serious bodily harm to human or other animals or
fowl.



   DOG.  Members of the canine species of all ages, both male and female.



   DOMESTIC ANIMAL.  Includes, but is not limited to, dogs, cats, pygmy
goats, potbellied pigs and ferrets.



   EXOTIC ANIMAL.  Animals that are not normally considered to be
domesticated but may be reasonably kept as pet animals without posing any
immediate danger to persons or other animals including, but not limited to: 
iguanas, non-poisonous snakes, non-constricting snakes, hedgehogs, chameleons
and salamanders.



   FOWL.  Chickens, turkeys, pheasant, quail, geese, ducks or similar
feathered animals, regardless of age, sex or breed, excluding ostriches, emus
and/or rheas.



   GUARD DOG.  Any dog that will, due to training, handling or
conditioning, detect and warn its handler that an intruder is present in or
near an area that is secured, and that may respond on command or
independently, to protect its owner or handler or any property belonging to
them.



   LIVESTOCK.  Members of the equine, bovine, bird and ruminant species
including, but not limited to, horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, sheep,
ostriches, emus, rheas and swine, regardless of age, sex or breed.



   NUISANCE.  Any thing or animal which is injurious to the life, health
or morals, or indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the
free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of
life or property or which renders the ground, water, air or food a hazard or
that is or threatens to become detrimental to the public health.



   OWNER.  Any person who has legal or equitable title to any animal,
harbors or keeps any animal in his possession, or who permits any animal to
remain on or about his premises.



   PET SHOP.  Any person, partnership or corporation, whether operated
separately or in connection with another business enterprise, except a
licensed kennel, that buys, sells or boards any species of pets.



   POSSESSION.  Actual care, custody, control or management of a certain
animal.



   PREMISES.  A parcel of land of one or more continuous lots owned,
leased or controlled by one or more person.



   PROHIBITED ANIMALS.  A dangerous wild animal not normally considered
domesticated, including, but not limited to, venomous lizard, poisonous
snakes, boa, python, constricting snakes, raccoon, skunk, fox, bear,
elephant, kangaroo, monkey, chimpanzee, antelope, deer, lions, tigers,
ocelots, cougars, leopards, cheetahs, jaguars, bobcats, servals, caracals,
hyenas, coyotes, jackals, orangutan, gorillas, baboons, or any other wild
animal capable of or inclined to do serious bodily harm to humans or other
animals or fowl.



   PUBLIC NUISANCE ANIMAL.  Any animal that unreasonably disturbs humans,
endangers the life or health of other animals or humans, or substantially
interferes with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to the
enjoyment of life and property.  The term PUBLIC NUISANCE ANIMAL shall
include, but is not limited to, any animal that:



      (1)   Is repeatedly found at large;



      (2)   Damages the property of anyone other than its owner;



      (3)   Molests or intimidates pedestrians or passersby;



      (4)   Chases vehicles;



      (5)   Excessively makes disturbing noises including, but not
limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining or other
utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance or discomfort to
neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is
kept or harbored;



      (6)   Causes fouling of the air by odor and thereby creates
unreasonable annoyance, disturbance or discomfort to neighbors or others in
close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored;



      (7)   Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or
surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored;



      (8)   Attacks other domestic animals; or



      (9)   Damages, soils, defiles or defecates on private property
other than the owner’s property or on public walks or recreation areas
unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the
owner.



   SECURE ENCLOSURE.  A fenced area or structure that is:



      (1)   Locked;



      (2)   Capable of preventing the entry of the general public,
including children;



      (3)   Capable of preventing the escape of a dog;



      (4)   Clearly marked as containing a dangerous dog; or



      (5)   In conformance with the requirements for secure
enclosures as established within § 90.020.



   SENIOR CITIZEN.  Any person 65 years of age or older.



   STRAY.  To wander unrestrained upon a public place or upon property
belonging to a person other than the owner of the animal.



   UNPROVOKED.  With respect to an attack by a dog:  The dog was not
hit, kicked or struck by a person with any object or part of a person’s
body, nor was any part of the dog’s body pulled, pinched or squeezed by a
person.



   VACCINATION.  An injection of any vaccine for rabies approved by the
state Department of Health and administered or supervised by a licensed
veterinarian.



   VICIOUS ANIMAL.  Any animal, other than a dangerous dog, which bites,
scratches, or otherwise threatens to bite or scratch any person while such
person is on property other than that of the owner or keeper of such animal.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)



§ 90.002  PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF CHAPTER.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions or terms of
this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided for in § 10.99 of
this code, and shall further be subject to civil penalties pursuant to Tex.
Loc. Gov’t Code § 54.017.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)



§ 90.003  ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   The Animal Control Officer, health authority, or any police officer
shall have the authority to issue citations for any violation of this
chapter.  It shall be unlawful for any person, upon being issued a citation,
to intentionally or knowingly give the Animal Control Officer, health
authority or any police officer other than his true name and address.  It
shall be unlawful to intentionally or knowingly fail to appear in accordance
with the terms of a citation issued by the Animal Control Officer, health
authority or any police officer.  If the person being cited is not present,
the Animal Control Officer, health authority, or any police officer may send
the citation to the alleged offender by certified mail, or registered mail,
return receipts requested, whereupon service shall be deemed completed.  It
shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly interfere with
the Animal Control Officer, health authority, or any police officer in the
performance of his duties.  The Animal Control Officer, health authority, or
any police officer shall have the right to ingress and egress on private
property for the purpose of apprehending an animal at large.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)



Statutory reference:



   Animals generally, see Tex. Health & Safety Code Ch. 821



§ 90.004  AUTHORITY TO EUTHANIZE.



   The Animal Control Officer, health authority or any police officer
shall have the authority to humanely euthanize animals, by the provision of
the state penal code or any applicable state law.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)



§ 90.005  PUBLIC NUISANCE ANIMALS.



   (A)   Animals creating disturbances.  No person shall keep or
harbor on his premises or elsewhere in the city more than the maximum number
of animals permitted by this chapter.  No person shall keep or harbor on his
premises or elsewhere any animal or fowl of any kind that makes or creates an
unreasonable disturbance of the neighbors or the occupants of adjacent
premises or persons living in the vicinity thereof, or permit such animal to
make or create disturbing noises by howling, barking, crowing, bawling or
otherwise.



   (B)   Animals emitting odors.  It shall be unlawful for any person
to maintain any animal or fowl in such a manner that residents of adjacent or
nearby property are subject to obnoxious odors.  All persons keeping animals
shall keep their premises clean and free from obnoxious odors as well as
flies, mosquitoes and other insects.



   (C)   Animals trespassing, attacking or damaging property.  It
shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any animal in any area which
constitutes a nuisance by reason of repeated trespassing on public or private
property, attacks on other animals or damage to public or private property.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.006  CONFINEMENT AND ABANDONMENT OF ANIMALS.



   (A)   Confinement of animals by individuals.  If a stray animal is
found upon the premises of another, the occupant of the premises may confine
the animal only for so long as is reasonably necessary, to notify the Animal
Control Officer and have the animal impounded.  In attempting to confine the
animal, the occupant shall not use any force that is intended to be known by
the occupant to cause, or in manner of its use is capable of causing, death
or injury to the animal.



   (B)   Abandonment of animals.  It shall be unlawful for any person
to abandon any animal within the corporate limits of the city.



   (C)   Confinement of animals in vehicles.  It shall be unlawful for
any person to confine, or allow to be confined, any animal in a motor vehicle
or trailer under such conditions or for such a period of time as may endanger
the health or well-being of the animal due to heat, lack of food or water or
any other circumstance which may cause suffering, disability or death of the
animal.



   (D)   Inspection of premises where animals are kept.  Premises
where livestock, fowl or pets are kept or maintained shall be subject to
inspections, upon receiving a complaint, by the Animal Control Officer or
Police Department, at any reasonable hour of the day while in the presence of
the owner.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.007  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if he:



      (1)   Tortures or seriously overworks an animal;



      (2)   Fails unreasonably to provide necessary food, care or
shelter for an animal in custody;



      (3)   Abandons an animal in his custody;



      (4)   Transports or confines an animal in a cruel manner;



      (5)   Kills, injures or administers poison to an animal
belonging to another without legal authority or the owner’s effective
consent;



      (6)   Causes one animal to fight with another;



      (7)   Uses a live animal as a lure in a dog race training or
in dog coursing on a racetrack;



      (8)   Unnecessarily trips, in the case of a horse.



   (B)   Investigation; warrants; hearing.  The Animal Control Officer
or Police Department shall investigate all reported cases of possible cruelty
to animals.  If the Animal Control Officer or Police Department finds
evidence which leads him to believe that the animal has been or is being
treated cruelly, they shall request the municipal court judge to issue a
warrant to seize the animal.  A date and time for a hearing to determine if
the animal was cruelly treated shall be set within ten days of the seizure,
and the owner of the animal shall be notified, in writing, of such hearing. 
If at the hearing, it is determined that the animal was treated cruelly, the
court shall order the animal to be:



      (1)   Transferred to the City of Sherman Animal Shelter;



      (2)   Given to a nonprofit animal shelter or organization; or



      (3)   Humanely destroyed.



   (C)   If cruelty is determined, the owner shall be denied further
custody of the animal.  If cruelty is not proven, the court shall order the
animal returned to the owner.  If returned to the owner, no fees can be
charged.



   (D)   A person who knowingly or intentionally commits an act of
cruelty to animals may be prosecuted in a county court.  An offense under
this section is a class A misdemeanor.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.008  DISPOSAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.



   It shall be the responsibility of the owners of livestock to properly
dispose of all dead animals within a 24-hour period.  It shall be the
responsibility of the animal owner or property owner to dispose of dead dogs,
cats, and the like on his property or owned by him within six hours.  Animal
control has the authority to pick up any dead animal found on public property
and dispose of it and assist a citizen with such disposal, if requested. 
After 24 hours, an Animal Control Officer may enter private property and
remove any dead animal which the property owner has failed to dispose of. 
In any case, the property owner shall be responsible for the payment of fees
for the removal of any dead animal by animal control, such fees being set
forth in Appendix 1, Fee Schedule, § 4.00(B).



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.009  FILING OF COMPLAINTS.



   (A)   Any citizen, firm or corporation believing any provision of
this chapter to have been violated by a citizen may file a written complain
with the court.



   (B)   Any citizen, firm or corporation believing any provision of
this chapter to have been violated by an Animal Control Officer or other city
employee may file a written complaint with the City Secretary.  It shall
then be the duty of the employee’s immediate supervisor to investigate such
complaint and act as necessary on the results of that investigation.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)



Statutory references:



   Cruelty to animals, see Tex. Penal Code, § 42.09; Tex. Health and
Safety Code, §§ 821.023 and 821.024.



DOGS



§ 90.014  FIGHTING OF DOGS UPON EXHIBITION.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if he intentionally or knowingly:



      (1)   Causes a dog to fight with another dog;



      (2)   For a pecuniary benefit causes a dog to fight with
another dog;



      (3)   Participates in the earnings of or operates a facility
used for dogfighting;



      (4)   Uses or permits another to use any real estate,
building, room, tent, arena or other property for dogfighting;



      (5)   Owns or trains a dog with the intent that the dog be
used in an exhibition of dogfighting; or



      (6)   Attends as a spectator an exhibition of dogfighting.



   (B)   In this section, the term DOGFIGHTING means any situation in
which one dog attacks or fights with another dog.



   (C)   A conviction under division (A)(1) of this section may be had
upon the uncorroborated testimony of a party to the offense.



   (D)   It is a defense to prosecution that the person caused a dog to
fight with another dog to protect livestock, other property or a person from
the other dog, and for no other purpose.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.015  PROCEDURE FOR KEEPING OF DOGS WHICH HAVE BITTEN PERSONS.



   (A)   When any currently vaccinated dog has bitten, scratched or
otherwise attacked a person, that person or anyone having knowledge of such
incident shall immediately notify the Animal Control Officer or a police
officer and such dog shall be confined in the city pound for a period of ten
days at the expense of the owner.



   (B)   Such dog shall, during such a period of confinement, be
subject to inspection by the Animal Control Officer, or a licensed
veterinarian.  If, after the ten-day period, the owner fails to pick up the
animal, the owner is notified and granted five additional days to pick up the
animal.  After this time limit, the Animal Control Officer can then release
the animal for adoption or disposal.



   (C)   When any animal other than a currently vaccinated dog has
bitten, scratched or otherwise attacked a person, the above regulations
apply, as well as additional time required for the length of the quarantine
period, determined by species of the animal, as required by state law.



   (D)   An exception to these requirements is if the animal in
question has a valid and current rabies vaccination, the owner may be allowed
to secure the animal on his property if the owner can provide secure and
adequate facilities for confinement as approved by the Animal Control
Officer, and provided that the



animal be inspected by a veterinarian at the end of the quarantine period or
at any time the animal shows symptoms of rabies.



   (E)   The owner of any dog held in quarantine for rabies observation
shall be charged a fee for such quarantine in addition to any impoundment
fee.  This fee shall be charged on a per-day basis as set forth in Appendix
1, Fee Schedule, § 4.00.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Dangerous dogs; attacks by and requirements for owners of, see Tex.
Health & Safety Code §§ 822.041 et seq.



§ 90.016  DOGS AT LARGE.



   (A)   Any person owning, possessing or keeping animals within the
city, whether vaccinated or unvaccinated, licensed or unlicensed, shall
confine such animals within an adequate fence or enclosure or within a house,
garage or other building, or shall keep such animals confined by leash or
chain affixed to the animal’s collar and under the control of a person, and
adequate to prevent the animals from running at large.



   (B)   Retractable leashes must be locked at a distance of four feet
or less when in the immediate proximity of a passerby either on foot or on a
non- motorized vehicle.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.017  IMPOUNDING DOGS.



   The Animal Control Officer or any police officer may take into custody
any dog found at large within the city, and shall impound the dog in the city
shelter or other such place as may be designated for purposes of impoundment
to keep and properly care for all dogs impounded.  Such impounded dog shall
be held for a period of three days.  At the end of this time, if the dog has
not been claimed as prescribed in § 90.061 and the proper fee paid as set
forth in Appendix 1, Fee Schedule, § 4.00, the dog shall be transferred to
the City of Sherman Animal Control or the dog shall be released for adoption
or humanely destroyed.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to establish and regulate pounds and prohibit animals from
running at large, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 215.026



§ 90.018  RABID OR DANGEROUS DOG MAY BE DESTROYED.



   The Animal Control Officer or any law enforcement officer shall have
the right to shoot or kill any rabid dog or dangerous dog in the streets
which shall manifest a disposition to bite or render itself inaccessible to
impounding.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to destroy dangerous dogs, see Tex. Code Crim. Procedure,
Art. 18.182



§ 90.019  VICIOUS DOGS.



   (A)   VICIOUS DOG means that a determination that a dog is a VICIOUS
DOG may be found upon the filing of appropriate affidavits with the Animal
Control Officer and/or Police Department by affected or interested persons
and the attending physician or veterinarian, where appropriate, attesting to
the occurrence of the following acts:



      (1)   That on at least two separate occasions, a dog has
bitten or scratched a person in the city;



      (2)   That on at least one occasion, a dog has bitten or
scratched a person to an extent that the attending physician has presented a
signed affidavit to the Animal Control Officer and/or Police Department
stating that the person’s life may have been endangered by such dog; or



      (3)   That on at least one occasion, a dog, while running at
large, has killed another dog, cat or other domestic pet, fowl or livestock
or has seriously injured another such animal to an extent that the attending
veterinarian has presented a signed affidavit to the Animal Control Officer
and/or Police Department stating that the injured animal’s life was
seriously endangered or taken by such dog, or that such dog caused a
significant permanent impairment of the injured animal’s basic bodily
functions or mobility; provided, however, that when the incident occurred,
the killed or injured animal was not in violation of any provisions of this
code concerning the confinement or physical control of dogs, fowl, livestock
or other animals in the city.



      (4)   That the person and dog, cat or other domestic pet, fowl
or livestock so attacked was not at the time trespassing on the property of
the owner or person having control of such dog, or if it cannot be proved
beyond a reasonable doubt that the person, dog, cat or other domestic pet,
fowl or livestock so attacked was provoking or teasing such dog, the
Municipal Court shall have the authority to order and hold a hearing; and if
the court shall determine at the hearing that the subject dog is vicious or
dangerous to other persons, dogs, cats or other domestic pets, fowl or
livestock, the court may order that such animal be kept muzzled, and/or kept
within a sufficient enclosure, or be ordered to remove the dog from the city
limits or that such dog be delivered to the Animal Control Officer to be
destroyed.



   (B)   Private property.  Reasonable measures shall be taken by the
owners, handler or keeper of any dog kept on private property to protect the
public from accidental contact with any dog which, by its very nature or by
training, has propensities to be a vicious dog as defined in this section.



   (C)   Public places.  It shall be unlawful for any owner or person
in control of any vicious dog to keep or permit the same in and about any
public house, public place, street or alley in the city.



   (D)   Revocation of dog registration.  The Animal Control Officer
shall have the authority to revoke the dog registration of an owner of a dog
which is determined to be vicious after a hearing, as authorized by this code.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.020  DANGEROUS DOGS.



   As a public safety requirement, it shall be unlawful for any person to
keep or harbor any dangerous dog within the corporate limits of the city
without complying with Tex. Health & Safety Code §§ 822.041 – 822.047.



   (A)   A DANGEROUS DOG is a dog which:



      (1)   Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes
bodily injury which would cause a reasonable person to seek medical treatment
whether or not that care was actually sought and occurs in a place other than
a secure enclosure in which the dog was being kept which was reasonably
certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or



      (2)   Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than a secure
enclosure in which the dog was being kept which was reasonably certain to
prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a
person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury
to that person; or



      (3)   Is accustomed to run, worry or kill goats, sheep or
water fowl or other animals considered to be property; or



      (4)   Makes an unprovoked attack on another dog causing injury
which would cause a reasonable person to seek veterinary care whether or not
that care was actually sought.



   (B)   Investigation.  When a person reports a dangerous dog to the
Animal Control Officer or the Police Department, the authority shall
investigate the complaint and notify the owner of the report.  Any complaint
filed concerning a dangerous dog shall contain a sworn, written statement to
the city’s Animal Control Officer with the following information:



      (1)   Complainant’s and witness names, address and telephone
numbers;



      (2)   Dates, times and locations of incidents involving the
dog;



      (3)   Dog’s description;



      (4)   Dog owner’s name, address and telephone number, if
available;



      (5)   A statement regarding the facts of the complaint;



      (6)   A statement of the dog’s exhibited dangerous
propensities in past conduct, if known; and



      (7)   Other facts and circumstances concerning the incident.



   (C)   Declaration.  Based on the findings of an investigation
regarding a suspected dangerous dog, the investigating officer shall make a
determination to:



      (1)   Declare the animal dangerous and notify the owner of
that fact; or



      (2)   Request a hearing before the court and notify the owner
of such hearings;



      (3)   Close the case, citing insufficient evidence to
conclusively deem the animal dangerous at this time; however, closing the
case shall not prevent the case from being reopened in the future.



   (D)   Notification.  After a sworn complaint has been filed and an
investigation has been completed, if the Animal Control Officer determines
that the dog which is the subject of the investigation is a dangerous dog,
the Animal Control Officer will notify the animal’s owner by certified
mail, return receipt requested, that a determination has been made that the
dog is a dangerous dog.  In lieu of notice by certified mail, the Animal
Control Officer may elect to have the notice personally served by a police
officer of the city.  The following information shall be included in the
notice:



      (1)   The owner has the right to appeal the decision of the
Animal Control Officer to the municipal court and that such appeal must be
filed, in writing, not later than the fifteenth day after the date the owner
is notified.



      (2)   The owner may appeal that decision of the municipal
court in the same manner as appeal for other civil cases.  The intent to
file a second appeal must be made, in writing, to the court within 24 hours
of the conclusion of the first appeal.



   (E)   Appeals.  The owner may appeal the determination of the
Animal Control Officer to the Municipal Court within 15 days of the
determination for a hearing de novo.  If the Municipal Court Clerk receives
a written appeal notice within 15 days of the determination notice, the
Animal Control Officer’s determination that the dog should be considered a
dangerous dog shall be suspended pending the Municipal Court judge’s final
decision.  The Animal Control Officer or a representative shall furnish the
Municipal Court judge with all reports, memoranda and other tangible evidence
received by the Animal Control Authority, as well as a summary of the
evidence and the Animal Control Officer’s findings.  The Municipal Court
judge’s decision will be made by a de novo hearing with the appeal of such
judgment being in the same manner as in other civil cases.  Each day
following will constitute a violation of the chapter if the owner fails to
comply with state law requirements for dangerous dogs.  The Municipal Court
judge may also require the attendance of the complainant, any known
witnesses, the animal owner against whom the complaint was filed and the
Animal Control Officer or his representative.



   (F)   Necessary impoundment.



      (1)   Warrant to seize.  If the Animal Control Officer
determines that any dog which cannot be sufficiently contained by the owner
during the process of appeal, the Animal Control Officer may seek a warrant
to seize the animal from the Municipal Court.



      (2)   Hearing.  An owner whose animal has been seized by
Animal Control shall be entitled to a hearing, to be held not later than the
tenth day after the date on which the animal was seized.  This hearing shall
be held in the court issuing the warrant and shall be for the purpose of
appealing the dangerous dog declaration.



   (G)   Redemption.



      (1)   A dog which has been seized by animal control and
declared dangerous and that declaration has been upheld by the courts shall
be returned to the owner if the owner has met all criteria, paid all fees and
has established a secure enclosure in which to house the dog which complies
with regulations set forth by the chapter.



      (2)   If the determination that the animal is dangerous has
been reversed through appeal by a court of competent jurisdiction, the dog
shall be returned to its owner.  In this case, no fees will be charged to
the owner.



      (3)   Should the owner file a second appeal, the dog shall
remain impounded until the conclusion of that appearance.  The intent to
file must be made in writing within 24 hours of the conclusion of the first
appeal hearing.



      (4)   No dog shall be returned to the owner once an order has
been received by the courts to destroy the animal.



   (H)   Requirements for owners.



      (1)   For purposes of this section, a person learns that he or
she is the owner of a dangerous dog when:



         (a)   The owner knows of an attack described in
divisions (A)(1) through (A)(4) of this section; or



         (b)   The owner receives notice that a justice court or
municipal court has found that the dog is a dangerous dog under Tex. Health &
Safety Code, § 822.0423; or



         (c)   The owner is informed by an Animal Control Officer
that the dog is a dangerous dog.



      (2)   Not later than the thirtieth day after a person learns
that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog, the person shall:



         (a)   Register the dangerous dog with the animal control
authority for the area in which the dog is kept; and



         (b)   Obtain liability insurance coverage or show
financial responsibility in an amount of at least $100,000 to cover damages
resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a
person and provide proof of the required liability insurance coverage or
financial responsibility to the animal control authority for the area in
which the dog is kept.



      (3)   No person shall knowingly sell, offer for sale, breed,
attempt to buy or train a dangerous dog within the city.



      (4)   The pen, cage or enclosure for a dangerous dog must have
secure sides a minimum of eight feet in height, a secure top attached to the
sides and a secure bottom or floor which is either attached to the sides or
the sides of the structure must be embedded in the ground no less than two
feet.



      (5)   The dangerous dog shall be controlled at all times on a
leash in the immediate control of a responsible person when not within a
secure enclosure.



      (6)   No person shall remove a dog that has been declared
dangerous to another jurisdiction without the prior knowledge and approval of
the animal control authority for the area in which the dog was declared
dangerous.



   (I)   Registration.



      (1)   The animal control authority for the area in which the
dog is kept shall annually register a dangerous dog if the owner presents
proof of liability insurance or financial responsibility, as required; proof
of current rabies vaccination of the dangerous dog; two color photographs of
the dangerous dog; two color photographs of the secure enclosure in which the
dangerous dog will be kept; and pays an annual registration fee.



      (2)   If an owner of a registered dangerous dog moves to a new
address, the owner, not later than the fourteenth day after the date of the
move, shall notify the animal control authority for the area in which the new
address is located.



      (3)   An owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the
office in which the dangerous dog was registered of any attacks the dangerous
dog makes on people.



   (J)   Subsequent attacks.



      (1)   A person commits an offense if the person is the owner
of a declared dangerous dog and the dog makes an unprovoked attack on another
person or animal outside the dog’s secure enclosure and causes bodily
injury to the other person or animal.



      (2)   An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor,
unless the attack causes serious bodily injury or death, in which event the
offense is a class A misdemeanor.



      (3)   If a person is found guilty of an offense under this
section, the court may order the declared dangerous dog destroyed by the
animal control authority.



      (4)   In addition to criminal prosecution, a person who
commits an offense under this section is liable for a civil penalty not to
exceed $10,000.  An attorney having civil jurisdiction in the county or an
attorney for a municipality where the offense occurred may file suit in a
court of competent jurisdiction to collect the penalty.  Penalties collected
under this division shall be retained by the county or municipality.



   (K)   Violations.



      (1)   A person who owns or keeps custody or control of a
dangerous dog commits an offense if the person fails to comply with the
insurance or financial responsibility requirements of this section.



      (2)   An offense under this section is subject to a fine of up
to $2,000 if it is shown at the trial of the offense that the defendant has
previously been convicted under this section.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Dangerous dogs, see Tex. Health & Safety Code, § 822.041 et seq.



RABIES CONTROL



§ 90.024  REPORTING OF RABIES CASES OR SUSPECTED RABID ANIMAL REQUIRED.



   Any person having knowledge of the existence of any animal known to
have been, or suspected of being, exposed to rabies or having knowledge of an
animal bite or scratch to an individual that the person could reasonably
foresee as capable of transmitting rabies must immediately report such
knowledge or incident to the Animal Control Officer, health authority or any
police officer, and in no case longer than 24 hours from the time of the
incident.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.025  AUTHORITY TO QUARANTINE.



   The Animal Control Officer or any police officer shall have the
authority to order the quarantine of animals responsible for bite incidents
or suspected of having any zoonotic disease considered to be a hazard to
human population or other animals.  Any animal having rabies or symptoms of
rabies, suspected of  having rabies, or which have been exposed to rabies,
shall be immediately released by the owner for quarantined confinement in the
city shelter or in a veterinary hospital approved by the city.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.026  ANIMALS SUBJECT TO  QUARANTINE FOR BITING.



   (A)   When a dog or cat which has bitten or scratched a human or
attacks another animal has been identified, the owner shall be required to
produce the animal for ten days confinement to determine whether such dog or
cat has been exposed to rabies.  Any unclaimed animal may be destroyed for
rabies diagnosis prior to the end of this observation period.  The dog or
cat may be released from quarantine if a veterinarian determines that the
animal does not show the clinical signs of rabies; provided, the owner has
paid all reasonable costs associated with the quarantining.  Refusal to
produce such animal is a misdemeanor and each day of such refusal constitutes
a separate and individual violation.



   (B)   No animal which has a high probability of transmitting rabies,
including skunks, bats, foxes and raccoons, will be placed in quarantine for
observation.  All such animals involved in biting incidents will be humanely
killed in such a manner that the brain is not mutilated.  The brain shall be
submitted to a laboratory certified by the state Department of Health for
rabies diagnosis.



   (C)   The health authority may require an animal which has inflicted
multiple bite wounds, punctures, or lacerations to the face, head, or neck of
a person to be humanely killed and the brain tested for rabies.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.027  DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS  EXPOSED TO RABIES.



   (A)   Domestic animals.



      (1)   Vaccinated animals which have been bitten or otherwise
significantly exposed to a rabid animal should be humanely destroyed or if
sufficient justification for preserving the animal exists, the exposed
vaccinated animal should be immediately given a booster rabies vaccination
and placed in strict isolation for 45 days.  Unvaccinated animals shall be
immediately given a rabies vaccination and placed in strict isolation for 90
days and given booster vaccinations during the third and eighth weeks of
isolation. If the unvaccinated animal is under three months of age at the
time of the second vaccination, an additional booster should be given when
the animal reaches three months of age.



      (2)   If a veterinarian determines that a quarantined animal
does not show the clinical signs of rabies, it may be released to the owner
prior to or upon expiration of the quarantine period; provided, the owner has
paid all of the reasonable costs of such quarantine and any veterinarian
bills.  However, if the quarantined animal shows the clinical sign of the
disease of rabies, the animal shall be humanely destroyed and its head or
brain submitted to the nearest laboratory certified by the state Department
of Health for rabies diagnosis.



   (B)   Wild or exotic animals.  No wild or exotic animal will be
placed in quarantine.  All wild or exotic animals will be humanely destroyed
in such a manner that the brain is not mutilated.  The brain will then be
submitted to a laboratory certified for rabies diagnosis in order to be
tested.



   (C)   Quarantining facilities.  Any animal to be placed in
quarantine must be placed in an animal control facility approved by the state
Department of Health as directed by the health authority.  However, the
owner of the animal may request permission for home quarantine if the
following criteria can be met:



      (1)   Secure facilities must be available at the home of the
animal’s owner and must be approved by a licensed veterinarian.



      (2)   The animal is currently vaccinated against rabies.



      (3)   A licensed veterinarian must observe the animal at least
on the first and last days of the quarantine period.  If the animal becomes
ill during the observation period, the municipality and veterinarian must be
notified by the person having possession of the animal.  At the end of the
observation period, the release from quarantine must be provided in writing
by the attending veterinarian and approved by the municipality.



      (4)   The animal was not a stray at the time of the bite
incident.



      (5)   If the biting animal cannot be maintained in secure
quarantine, it shall be humanely destroyed and the brain submitted to a
laboratory certified by the state Department of Health for rabies diagnosis.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Rabies control, see Tex. Health & Safety Code Ch. 826



ANIMAL VACCINATION



§ 90.030  VACCINATION REQUIRED.



   The owner or custodian of each domestic dog or cat shall have the
animal vaccinated against rabies by four months of age.  The animal must
receive a booster within the 12-month interval following the initial
vaccination.  Every domestic dog or cat must be revaccinated against rabies
at a minimum of at least once every three years with a rabies vaccine
licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture.  The vaccine must
be administered according to label recommendations.  Any person moving into
the municipality shall comply with this requirement within ten days after
having moved into the municipality.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Vaccinations of dogs and cats required, see Tex. Health & Safety Code
§ 826.022



§ 90.031  VACCINATION CERTIFICATE AND TAG.



   (A)   Rabies vaccinations shall only be given by a duly licensed and
practicing veterinarian and upon vaccination, the veterinarian shall execute
and furnish a certificate to the owner of the dog or cat as evidence of such
vaccination.  Such certificate shall contain at least the following
information:



      (1)   Owner’s name, address and telephone number;



      (2)   The date of vaccination;



      (3)   The type of rabies vaccine used, producer, expiration
date and serial number;



      (4)   The year and number of rabies tag; and



      (5)   A description of the dog or cat.



   (B)   Concurrent with the issuance and delivery of the certificate
of vaccination, the veterinarian shall also issue a metal tag, serially
numbered to correspond with the vaccination certificate number and bearing
the year of issuance and the name of the issuing veterinarian and his or her
address.  The owner of such dog or cat shall cause the metal vaccination tag
to be attached to a collar to be worn by his or her dog or cat at all times.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



DOMESTIC AND PROHIBITED ANIMALS



§ 90.035  KEEPING EXOTIC OR DANGEROUS WILD ANIMALS AND POISONOUS REPTILES
PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to harbor, keep, or maintain any wild or exotic
animals, including but not limited to, a lion, tiger, ocelot, cougar,
leopard, cheetah, jaguar, bobcat, lynx, serval, caracal, hyena, bear, coyote,
jackal, baboon, chimpanzee, orangutan, gorilla, lesser panda, binturong,
wolf, ape, elephant, rhinoceros, or any hybrid of an animal listed, or
poisonous reptiles within the municipal limits.



(Am. Ord. 865, passed 1-8-02; Am. Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 90.036  SPECIAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING FOWL, RABBITS, GUINEA PIGS, BEES,
POTBELLIED PIGS, PYGMY GOATS AND FERRETS.



   (A)   Keeping of fowl.  No person shall maintain fowl within the
municipal limits unless the following requirements are met:



      (1)   There shall be a minimum of five square feet for each
fowl kept in the municipal limits.  An enclosure shall be provided on the
premises which shall be no closer than 100 feet to any dwelling.  The
enclosure must be of such construction as will allow for ease in cleaning and
airing and kept in such a manner as not to become offensive to adjacent
neighbors or the public.  No more than 25 fowl may be maintained on any
single lot or tract.



      (2)   Each premises where fowl are kept shall be required to
have built an impervious (for example, concrete) bin which will act as a
storage place for all manure from such fowl.  It shall be covered with an
approved cover that will not allow the ingress or egress of flies and will
prevent any water from entering it.  The bin shall be a minimum of 30 cubic
feet in size.



      (3)   It shall be the duty of every person raising, keeping or
harboring any fowl to keep the  premises, pen or other enclosure in a
sanitary condition.



      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning chickens,
turkeys, ducks, geese, guineas or other fowl to permit such fowl to run at
large within the corporate limits of the municipality.



   (B)   Keeping of rabbits and guinea pigs.  Any pen enclosure in
which rabbits or guinea pigs are kept must be secure and must be cleaned and
disinfected daily.  Litter and droppings from such rabbits and guinea pigs
must be collected daily and hauled away.



   (C)   Keeping of bees.  It shall be unlawful to keep bees in such a
manner as to deny the reasonable use and enjoyment of adjacent property or
endanger the personal health and welfare of the inhabitants of the city.



   (D)   Sale of baby fowl and ducks.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to sell or offer for sale, lease, rent or in any way transfer, barter
or give away baby fowl or ducklings as pets or novelties, whether dyed or not
dyed, colored or otherwise artificially treated; provided, however, that this
division shall not be construed to prohibit the display or sale of natural
chicks or ducklings in proper breeding facilities for hatcheries or stores
engaged in the business of selling the same to be raised for legitimate
commercial purposes.



   (E)   Keeping of potbellied pigs.  Potbellied pigs may not exceed
18 inches at the shoulders nor weigh more than 60 pounds.  These animals
shall be kept inside of the residence other than at those times necessary for
the elimination of waste or for exercise.  These animals must be spayed or
neutered and have their tusks removed.



   (F)   Keeping of ferrets.  Ferrets shall be kept inside of the
residence at all times.  Cages used for the keeping of these animals must be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.



   (G)   Keeping of pygmy goats.  Pygmy goats must be spayed or
neutered.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.037  NUMBER OF ANIMALS PER HOUSEHOLD.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor:



      (1)   More than four dogs and/or more than four cats, six
months of age or older on any premises zoned or used, either partially or
totally, for residential purposes and less than two acres in area.



      (2)   In addition, it shall be unlawful to keep or harbor, per
household, more than two potbellied pigs, two pygmy goats or four ferrets,
six months of age or older.



      (3)   In no event shall the aggregate number of domestic
animals exceed a total of four.



      (4)   Registration of all animals is required.



   (B)   Animals in excess permit.



      (1)   An animals in excess permit, in accordance with the
provisions of this division, shall be required for any number of animals in
excess of the number allowed in division (A) of this section.  An animals in
excess permit shall be renewed annually.  The animals in excess permit
application shall include the following:



         (a)   The name and address of the applicant;



         (b)   The number of animals to be kept at the premises;



         (c)   The facilities used to house all animals;



         (d)   A statement giving permission for the Animal
Control Officer to inspect the premises where the animals are kept;



         (e)   Signature of the applicant; and



         (f)   Signature of the Animal Control Officer approving
the permit.



      (2)   Upon receipt of a complete application for an animals in
excess permit, the Animal Control Officer or his or her designee shall
inspect the premises to determine the suitability of conditions for harboring
such animals under the requested permit.  The officer may consider the
totality of health and safety factors including, but not limited to, the
following:



         (a)   Amount of area;



         (b)   Cleanliness;



         (c)   Safety of confinement;



         (d)   Breed of animals;



         (e)   Age of animals;



         (f)   Altered or unaltered status; and



         (g)   Complaint history for the animals or owner.



      (3)   The officer may grant a conditional animals in excess
permit as is appropriate under the circumstances for the harboring of the
animals.  The Animal Control Officer may revoke or deny any animals in
excess permit and impound any animal under certain conditions including, but
not limited to:



         (a)   After determining, with the assistance of a
veterinarian, that an animal was abused or neglected;



         (b)   That violations of any applicable law or ordinance
have occurred; or



         (c)   If it is found that animals in addition to those
specified on the permit are harbored at the location.



   (C)   Application procedures; fees.  Application for initial
issuance or renewal of each permit and/or registration must be made by the
owner, in writing or in person, and be accompanied by a fee as set forth in
Appendix 1, Fee Schedule, § 4.00.  If the original current registration or
permit is lost or destroyed, the owner must pay the required fee to obtain a
duplicate.



   (D)   Registration renewal or transfer, charges.  Registrations
shall be renewed annually and new tags issued at renewal.  If there is a
change in ownership, the new owner shall have the registration transferred to
his name within ten days.  If the registration is current and valid, there
shall be no charge for the transfer.



   (E)   Registration fee exemptions. 



      (1)   The following shall be exempt from any registration
fees.  However, registration of these animals is still required:



         (a)   Assistance animals;



         (b)   Foster care animals; and



         (c)   Senior citizens’ animals.



      (2)   Owners of assistance and foster care animals shall be
prepared to provide documentation of the status or training of these animals
by supporting organizations.  Senior citizens may be asked to show
verification of their age.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



LIVESTOCK AND SWINE



§ 90.040  RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to cause to be
confined any and all horses, mules, jacks, jennets, cattle, sheep, goats, and
swine that may be found running at large upon any street, alley, or other
public place in the municipality and cause the same to be placed and kept in
a secure enclosure to be provided for that purpose until the same are
disposed of in the manner hereinafter provided.  He or she shall immediately
after confining such animal notify the owner thereof, if known to him or her,
or post written notices at three or more public places in the municipality,
describing therein the marks, brands, color, and other description of such
animal and giving notice that the same will be sold five days after the date
of such notice unless the owner shall come forward and reclaim the same.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate animals running at large, see Tex. Local Gov’t
Code § 215.026(b)



§ 90.041  FENCING REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on premises under his
control any livestock without providing adequate fences or barriers that will
prevent such livestock from damaging shrubbery or other property situated on
adjacent property.  Such fences or barriers must also be sufficient to
prevent the animals from escaping.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.042  PLACES PROHIBITED TO LIVESTOCK.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or allow any type of
livestock upon any public school grounds, college grounds, public park
property or municipal grounds within the city except those designated as
bridle paths or other designated riding or exhibiting areas for animals.  On
streets, horses shall be ridden as close as possible to the curb.  The only
streets that horses may be ridden upon are “residential streets,” as
defined in the city’s thoroughfare plan.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to ride or allow any type of livestock upon the property of another
within the city except with the express consent of the owner or the person in
charge of such property obtained prior thereto.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.043  MINIMUM LOT SIZE.



   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided in this section, no horse, cow,
goat, sheep, or other livestock may be kept on a tract of less than five
acres in size.  The ratio of animals to acreage shall be no greater than one
animal to each two acres over the five acre minimum.  Thus, no more than two
animals are permitted on a seven acre tract, three animals on a nine acre
tract, and the like.



   (B)   For tracts or parcels of land situated adjacent to the city
limits, or in areas specifically designated as Country Estates, or similar
designation, by the City Council, the keeping of horses or ponies is
permitted on tracts or parcels which contain a minimum enclosed or fenced
space of one-half acre (21,780 square feet) for each head of horse or pony
kept within the city.  Such one-half acre shall be in addition to the area 
on which a residence or business structure is located.  Additionally, the
tract or parcel shall contain a barn or shed used for the protection of
livestock, which barn or shed may not be located nearer than 100 feet from
the nearest occupied residence whether or not such residence is presently
constructed or occupied or whether or not such residence is constructed or
occupied after the passage of Ordinance 931.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04; Am. Ord. 931, passed 7-12-05)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 90.044  KEEPING SWINE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or entity to
keep any swine within the municipal limits.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prohibit swine, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 215.026(b)



§ 90.045  MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES.



   All barns, sheds, and enclosures in which livestock is kept shall be
maintained in a clean, sanitary manner.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.046  LOCATION OF BUILDINGS.



   No barn, shed, or building in which livestock is kept shall be located
within 100 feet of a residential structure.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.047  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be permissible for livestock to be kept on
school-owned property within the city limits under the supervision and
instruction of a vocational agriculture teacher who shall certify, as
required, that such animals are maintained in the course of instruction for
the student who shall own and/or raise the animals under the teacher’s
supervision.



   (B)   Premises where livestock are kept on school- owned property
within the city limits shall be subject to inspection by the city inspector
for sanitation and odor control.



(Ord. 810, passed 1-13-98; Am. Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see §
10.99



BIRDS



§ 90.050  MUNICIPALITY DESIGNATED A  BIRD SANCTUARY.



   The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the
municipality is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04) 



§ 90.051  TRAPPING, HUNTING, MOLESTING BIRDS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to trap, hunt, shoot, or attempt to
shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or
wild fowl nests within the municipality.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.052  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES  CREATED BY CONGREGATION OF BIRDS.



   If birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular
locality that they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property,
in the opinion of the Health Officer, such officer shall attempt to abate
such nuisance.  If all other feasible alternatives fail, the birds may be
destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the
Health Officer, under the supervision of the Chief of Police, notwithstanding
the provisions of § 90.051.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04) 



IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS



§ 90.060  IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS  GENERALLY.



   (A)   Any animal found in violation of any provision of this chapter
or any animal that is treated in a cruel or inhumane manner may be impounded
by the municipality and placed in an animal shelter or veterinary hospital. 
Any such animal shall be held for at least three days, before any measure of
disposition of such animal shall be taken.  Unless there is reason to
believe that it has an owner, any impounded animal, dangerous or wild, may be
immediately disposed of as may be deemed appropriate.



   (B)   A reasonable effort will be made by the Animal Control Officer
to contact the owner of any impounded animal which is wearing a license
tag.  However, the ultimate responsibility for location of an impounded
animal is that of the owner.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04) 



§ 90.061  RECLAIMING IMPOUNDED ANIMAL; FEES.



   (A)   The owner of any dog or cat impounded may redeem such dog or
cat at any time prior to the sale or destruction by the payment of an
impounding fee as provided for in § 4.00 of the Fee Schedule set forth in
Appendix 1 of this code.  At any time after the expiration of the period of
time for redemption of impounded dogs or cats as herein provided, the Animal
Control Officer or any of his or her deputies or a police officer, without
further notice or without advertising in any manner, shall sell at private
sale or public auction any dog or cat not redeemed or reclaimed.  All dogs
or cats impounded and not redeemed, reclaimed, or sold after the period of
time for redemption has expired shall be destroyed by the Animal Control
Officer or any of his or her deputies or a police officer.



   (B)   The owner of any livestock, swine, or other animal impounded
may redeem such animal at any time prior to sale or destruction by the
payment of an impounding fee as provided for in § 4.00 of the Fee Schedule
set forth in Appendix 1 of this code, plus any feeding or other expenses
incurred during the impoundment.



   (C)   The disposition of any animals impounded on grounds of cruel
or inhumane treatment shall be determined by the court of jurisdiction.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer, or any of
his or her deputies, or any police officer to pay all moneys collected under
the terms of this chapter to the Municipal Secretary.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04) 



§ 90.062  UNCLAIMED ANIMALS.



   (A)   Dogs.  If not redeemed within six days from the date of
impounding, a licensed dog shall be disposed of by sale or destruction.  If
there is no license tag for the current year attached to any dog impounded
and if such dog has not been redeemed by its owner within three days from the
time of impounding, such dog shall be destroyed or sold.



   (B)   Livestock and swine.  Any livestock or swine found running at
large within the municipality may be sold if not redeemed within five days.



   (C)   Other animals. Any other animal, except dangerous and wild
animals, not reclaimed by the owner may be humanely euthanized after being
impounded for three days.



   (D)   Wild animals.  Wild animals may be taken to some point which
is a substantial distance from the municipality and released into the wild or
may be humanely euthanized at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer.



   (E)   Generally.  Any impounded animal may be given up for adoption
or given to a nonprofit humane organization after the impoundment period. 
Any person desiring to adopt an impounded animal shall pay the daily
impoundment fee and licensing and rabies vaccination fees, if required, prior
to the release of the animal.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04) 



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate the capture of animals and to establish public
pounds, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 215.026



§ 90.063  ADOPTION OF ANIMALS FROM CITY SHELTER.



   (A)   Requirements.  Any person who desires to adopt an animal
directly from the city shelter shall:



      (1)   Pay the required adoption fee as set forth in § 40.01
of the Fee Schedule in Appendix I of this code;



      (2)   Have any animal four months of age or older, for which
no proof exists of a current and valid vaccination, vaccinated for rabies
before leaving the shelter;



      (3)   Have any animal not yet vaccinated due to the age of the
animal being less than four months vaccinated as soon as the animal becomes
eligible;



      (4)   Secure city registration, where applicable; and



      (5)   Sign an agreement to have the animal sterilized pursuant
to Tex. Health and Safety Code, Ch. 828, within ten days after the adoption
or as soon as the animal reaches the proper age for such a procedure.



   (B)   Determination of eligibility.  The Animal Control Officer
shall make the final determination whether a dog or cat is suitable for
adoption.  The Animal Control Officer will consider such factors as the
health and temperament of the animal.  However, such a decision by the
Animal Control Officer to permit adoption of a particular dog or cat shall
not constitute a warranty, expressed or implied, of the health, suitability
or age of the animal.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 91:  FAIR HOUSING



Section



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing



   91.03   Discrimination in the financing of housing



   91.04   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services



   91.05   Exemptions and exclusions



   91.06   Complaints



   91.07   Investigation



   91.08   Cumulative legal effect



   91.09   Unlawful intimidation



 



   91.99   Penalty



§ 91.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE.  An act that is unlawful under §§
91.02, 91.03, and 91.04.



   DWELLING.  Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is
occupied as or designed and intended for occupancy as a residence by one or
more families, and vacant land which is offered for sale or leased for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion
thereof.



   FAMILY.  Includes a single individual.



   OFFICER.  The individual designated as Human Relations and Equal
Opportunity Officer by the Mayor.



   PERSON.  Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries, and any other organization or
entity of whatever character.



   TO RENT.  Includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to
grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the
occupant.



§ 91.02  DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR  RENTAL OF HOUSING.



   Except as exempted by § 91.05, it shall be unlawful:



   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide
offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, sex,
religion, national origin, physical/mental handicap, or familial status (i.e.
children under 18).



   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions,
or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services
or facilities in connection therewith because of race, color, sex, religion,
national origin, physical/mental handicap, or familial status (i.e. children
under 18).



   (C)   To make, print, or publish or cause to be made, printed, or
published any notice, statement, or advertisement with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination based on race, color, sex, religion, national origin,
physical/mental handicap, or familial status (i.e. children under 18) or any
intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination.



   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, color, sex,
religion, national origin, physical/mental handicap, or familial status (i.e.
children under 18) that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale,
or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.



   (E)   For profit, or with the hope or expectation of profit, to
induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by
representations regarding the entry into the neighborhood of the person or
persons of a particular race, color, sex, religion, national origin,
physical/mental handicap, or familial status (i.e. children under 18).



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.03  DISCRIMINATION IN THE  FINANCING OF HOUSING.



   It shall be unlawful for any bank, savings and loan association,
insurance company or other corporation, association, firm, or enterprise
whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real
estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person
applying therefor the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving,
repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against such person
in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or
conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race,
color, sex, religion, national origin, physical/mental handicap, or familial
status (i.e. children under 18) of such person or of any person associated
with him or her in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or
the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or
prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or
dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to
be made or given.



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.04  DISCRIMINATION IN THE  PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES.



   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers
organizations or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against such
person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or
participation, on account of race, color, sex, religion, national origin,
physical/mental handicap, or familial status (i.e. children under 18).



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.05  EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.



   (A)   There shall be exempted from the application of § 91.02:



      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner,
provided that such private individual owner does not own more than three such
single- family houses, wherever located, at any one time; provided further,
that in the case of the sale of such single-family house by a private
individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who
was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the
exemption granted by this section shall apply only with respect to one such
sale within any 24 month period; provided further, that such bona fide
private individual owner does not own any interest in nor is there owned or
reserved on his or her behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement,
title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or
rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided
further, the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted
from the application of this chapter only if such house is sold or rented
without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales
or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesperson, or of
such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or
renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent,
salesperson or person, and without the publication, posting or mailing of any
advertisement or written notice in violation of § 91.02(C) hereof; but
nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents,
abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as
necessary to perfect or transfer the title.



      (2)   The rental of rooms or units in dwellings containing
living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four
families living independently of each other if the owner actually maintains
and occupies one of such living quarters as his or her residence.



      (3)   The rental of a single room in a dwelling containing
living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than one
family if the person offering such room for rental actually maintains and
occupies the remainder of such dwelling as his or her residence and not more
than four such rooms are offered.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious
organization, association, or society or any nonprofit institution or
organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with
religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale,
rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference
to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account
of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, physical/mental handicap, or
familial status (i.e. children under 18).



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a bona fide private
club, not in fact open to the public and which as an incident to its primary
purpose provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to
its members or from giving preference to its members.



§ 91.06  COMPLAINTS.



   (A)   Only the person who claims to have been injured by a
discriminatory housing practice or who believes he or she will be irrevocably
injured by a discriminatory housing practice that has occurred or is
occurring (“person aggrieved”) may file a complaint under this chapter. 
Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to
have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice
and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory
housing practice are based.  The municipality shall prepare complaint forms
and furnish them without charge to any person, upon request.



   (B)   The municipality shall receive and accept notification and
referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and the Secretary of
Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of Title VII, Fair
Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints
hereunder in the same manner as complaints filed pursuant to division (A) of
this section.



   (C)   All complaints shall be filed within 60 days following the
occurrence of an alleged discriminatory housing practice.  Upon the filing
or referral of any complaint, the municipality shall provide notice of the
complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the person named therein
who allegedly committed or was threatening to commit an alleged
discriminatory housing practice.  The accused may file an answer to the
complaint within 15 days of receipt of the written complaint.



   (D)   All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to
before an officer authorized to administer oaths.



§ 91.07  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided,
the municipality shall cause to be made a prompt and full investigation of
the matter stated in the complaint.



   (B)   During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the
mailing of the notice of complaint, the municipality shall, if it appears
that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to
occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including
voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and adequate
assurance of future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.  Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may
be made public by the municipality, by the complainant, or by any other party
to the proceedings without the written consent of all persons concerned.



   (C)   Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at
conciliation by the municipality, but within 30 days of the filing of the
complaint with the municipality, if the efforts of the municipality to secure
voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful, and if the municipality has made
a determination that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred,
the Municipal Attorney shall make a determination as to whether to proceed
with prosecution of such complaint in municipal court.  If the Municipal
Attorney determines to prosecute, he or she shall institute a complaint and
prosecute same to conclusion within 30 days after such determination, or as
soon thereafter as practicable.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.08  CUMULATIVE LEGAL EFFECT.



   This chapter is cumulative in its legal effect and is not in lieu of
any and all other legal remedies which the aggrieved person may pursue.



§ 91.09  UNLAWFUL INTIMIDATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage,
or otherwise penalize any individual, group, or business because he, she or
they have complied with the provisions of this chapter, because he, she or
they have exercised their rights under this chapter or enjoyed the benefits
of this chapter, or because he, she or they have made a charge, testified, or
assisted in any manner in any investigation, or in any proceeding hereunder
or have made any report to the municipality.



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
fined a sum not to exceed $200 for each violation.  Each day a violation
continues after passage of 75 days from date of the filing of the initial
complaint with the municipality shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of
this chapter may be enjoined by suit filed by the municipality in a court of
competent jurisdiction, and this remedy is in addition to any other penalty
provision.



CHAPTER 92:  FIRE PREVENTION



Section




Fire Marshal




   92.001   Office of Fire Marshal created



   92.002   Appointment of Fire Marshal



   92.003   Duty to investigate fires



   92.004   Authority to take testimony



   92.005   Power to summon witnesses



   92.006   Investigations may be private



   92.007   Filing criminal charges



   92.008   Refusal to provide testimony or evidence unlawful



   92.009   Authority to enter buildings where fire occurred



   92.010   Inspections generally



   92.011   Fire records to be kept



   92.012   Monthly reports to State Fire Marshal




Fire Prevention Code




   92.020   Adoption of International Fire Code



   92.021   Code enforcement



   92.022   Definitions



   92.023   Conflicts with Code



   92.024   Modifications to Code



   92.025   Appeals



   92.026   Delaying firefighters



   92.027   Fire lanes



   92.028   Obstructing fire station



   92.029   Smoking in places of public assemblage



   92.030   Destruction of buildings



   92.031   Liability of firefighters for property damage



   92.032   Penalties for violations



   92.033   (Reserved)



   92.034   Collection of fees




Fireworks




   92.050   Fireworks prohibited; exceptions




Fire Department




   92.060   Authority to create




Outdoor Burning




   92.070   Definitions



   92.071   Burning prohibited




Flammable Liquids




   92.080   Flammable liquids defined



   92.081   Sale of flammable liquid in quantities of five gallons or
less regulated



Cross-reference:



   Arson reward, see § 31.111



FIRE MARSHAL



§ 92.001  OFFICE OF FIRE MARSHAL  CREATED.



   The office of Fire Marshal is hereby created.  Such office shall be
independent of other municipal departments.



§ 92.002  APPOINTMENT OF FIRE MARSHAL.



   The Fire Marshal shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to
confirmation by the Council.  The Fire Marshal shall be properly qualified
for the duties of his or her office and shall be removed only for cause.  He
or she shall receive such compensation as provided for by the Council.



§ 92.003  DUTY TO INVESTIGATE FIRES.



   The Fire Marshal shall investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances
of every fire occurring within the municipality by which property has been
destroyed or damaged.  Such investigation shall be commenced within 24
hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire.



§ 92.004  AUTHORITY TO TAKE TESTIMONY.



   When in his or her opinion further investigation is necessary, the Fire
Marshal shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all
persons thought to be cognizant of any facts or to have knowledge relative to
the matter under investigation and shall cause the same to be reduced to
writing.



§ 92.005  POWER TO SUMMON WITNESSES.



   The Fire Marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses to testify
relative to any matter which is a subject of investigation and may require
the production of any document deemed pertinent thereto.  The Fire Marshal
is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmation to any
persons appearing before him or her as witnesses.



§ 92.006  INVESTIGATIONS MAY BE  PRIVATE.



   All investigations held by or under the direction of the Fire Marshal
may, in his or her discretion, be private.  Persons other than those
required to be present may be excluded from the place where such
investigation is held and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each
other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been
examined.



§ 92.007  FILING CRIMINAL CHARGES.



   If the Fire Marshal shall be of the opinion that there is evidence
sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt
to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal
conduct in connection with any fire, he or she shall cause such person to be
lawfully arrested and charged with such offense, and shall furnish to the
proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of
witnesses and all the information obtained by him or her, including a copy of
all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case.



§ 92.008  REFUSAL TO PROVIDE TESTIMONY OR EVIDENCE UNLAWFUL.



   Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or
testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the Fire Marshal or who fails or
refuses to produce any document touching any matter under examination, or who
is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the
Fire Marshal in the matter of such investigation or inquiry, after being
summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.  It shall be the duty of the Fire
Marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.009  AUTHORITY TO ENTER BUILDINGS WHERE FIRE OCCURRED.



   When necessary in the performance of his or her duties, the Fire
Marshal shall have the authority to enter upon and examine any building or
premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises
adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with
reason and good discretion.



§ 92.010  INSPECTIONS GENERALLY.



   The Fire Marshal shall have the right at all reasonable hours, for the
purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises
within the municipality.  It shall be his or her duty to enter upon and make
or cause to be entered upon and made a thorough examination of all
mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings together with the premises
belonging thereto.  Whenever he or she shall find any building or other
structure which is especially liable to fire and which is so situated as to
endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that the fire would
endanger other persons or property therein, and whenever he or she shall find
an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces, or other
heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues and
pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of
lighting devices or electrical wiring or a dangerous or unlawful storage of
explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals,
vegetable products, ashes, combustible, flammable refuse materials,
wastepaper, rags, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or
liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to
firefighters combatting a fire or to occupants, he or she shall order the
same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied
with by the owner or occupant of the building or premises.  If the owner or
occupant deems himself or herself aggrieved by such order, he or she may,
within five days, appeal such order to the Mayor, who shall investigate the
cause of the complaint and, unless such order is revoked by the Mayor, such
order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by the owner or
occupant.  Any owner or occupant who fails to comply with such order within
a ten day period from the date of such notice shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.011  FIRE RECORDS TO BE KEPT.



   The Fire Marshal shall keep in his or her office a record of all fires,
together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin
of the fires and the amounts of the loss, which may be determined by the
investigation required by this chapter.



§ 92.012  MONTHLY REPORTS TO STATE  FIRE MARSHAL.



   At the end of each month, the Fire Marshal shall report to the State
Fire Marshal all existing hazardous conditions together with a separate
report on each fire in the municipality during the month.



FIRE PREVENTION CODE



§ 92.020  ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.



   There is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion
that certain code known as the International Fire Code, recommended by the
International Code Council, being particularly the most recently published
edition thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted,
modified or amended.  A copy of such code is on file in the office of the
Municipal Secretary and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully
as if set out at length herein.  The provisions of the International Fire
Code shall be controlling and apply to the repair, equipment, use and
occupancy, and maintenance of every existing building or structure within the
municipality.



(Ord. 919, passed 9-9-04; Am. Ord. 920, passed 9-9-04)



Statutory reference:



   Municipal fire protection authority, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code Ch. 342



   Authority to establish fire regulations, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code
§§ 342.002 and 342.003



§ 92.021  CODE ENFORCEMENT.



   The code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the Chief of the Fire
Department, or the Fire Marshal if such officers are different individuals.



§ 92.022  DEFINITIONS.



   Whenever the word “applicable governing body” is used in the code
hereby adopted, it shall be held to mean this municipality.



§ 92.023  CONFLICTS WITH CODE.



   Whenever the International Fire Code conflicts with any other provision
of this code or any other municipal ordinance, state law or federal law, such
code provision, ordinance, or state or federal law shall be controlling.



(Ord. 920, passed 9-9-04)



§ 92.024  MODIFICATIONS TO CODE.



   The Fire Marshal shall have power to modify any of the provisions of
the International Fire Code hereby adopted upon application in writing by the
owner or lessee, or his or her duly authorized agent, when there are
practical difficulties to carrying out the strict letter of the code,
provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety
secured, and substantial justice done.  The particulars of such modification
when granted or allowed and the decision of the Fire Marshal thereon shall be
submitted to the Municipal Secretary and a signed copy shall be furnished the
applicant.



(Ord. 920, passed 9-9-04)



§ 92.025  APPEALS.



   Whenever the Fire Marshal shall disapprove an application or refuse to
grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the
code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the Fire Marshal to the Council within ten days from the date the
permit is refused or a decision is made regarding the applicability of the
provisions of such code.



§ 92.026  DELAYING FIREFIGHTERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully delay or prevent any
firefighter from attending any fire or in any manner hinder any firefighter.



Penalty, see § 10.99



92.027  FIRE LANES.



   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to establish fire lanes during
any fire when, in his or her judgment, it becomes necessary or advisable, and
to prohibit anyone from going within such fire lanes except as authorized by
some member of the Fire or Police Department, and when such fire lanes are
established it shall be the duty of all other persons to remain on the
outside thereof.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.028  OBSTRUCTING FIRE STATION.



   It shall be unlawful for anyone to obstruct in any manner the access
way to and from any fire station.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.029  SMOKING IN PLACES OF PUBLIC  ASSEMBLAGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any theater, church,
meeting room, auditorium, tent, or other place of public assemblage with a
capacity of 25 or more persons.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.030  DESTRUCTION OF BUILDINGS.



   The Fire Department, in the course of attempting to extinguish a fire,
may destroy buildings deemed hazardous by the Fire Chief and the Mayor. 
Such destruction and the payment of damages, if any is to be made, shall be
done in accordance with the provisions of Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 342.005.



§ 92.031  LIABILITY OF FIREFIGHTERS FOR  PROPERTY DAMAGE.



   No volunteer firefighter or volunteer fire department in this state
shall be liable to any person for any damage done to his or her property
resulting from the volunteer firefighter’s or volunteer fire department’s
reasonable and necessary action in fighting or extinguishing any fire on the
property.



§ 92.032  PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.



   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby
adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no
appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as
affirmed or modified by the Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction
within the time fixed herein shall severally for each and every such
violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.033 (RESERVED)



§ 92.034  COLLECTION OF FEES.



   (A)   The Chief of Whitesboro Volunteer Fire Department, or his or
her designee, shall collect all fees and costs for fire prevention services
and for other public safety in emergency services.  Such fees include, but
are not limited to, the use of equipment, materials, maintenance and overhead
expenses and costs of whatever nature which constitute full reimbursement to
the Whitesboro Volunteer Fire Department for services actually rendered and
as hereinafter authorized.  The fees shall be deposited to the city.



   (B)   Within 30 days of the date of providing fire prevention and
protection services or other public safety and emergency services, the Chief
of the Whitesboro Volunteer Fire Department, or his or her designee, shall
submit an invoice for all costs, fees, charges and expenses related to
providing such services, to include but not be limited to, all actual
expenses including: costs of equipment operations;  cost of materials
utilized; costs of specialists, experts or other contract labor not in the
full-time employment of the city; and other incidental costs incurred by the
city as a result of the incident, to the customer, client, owner, designated
agent, representative and/or insurance company who received, covered and/or
otherwise benefited from these services.



   (C)   Any bills, fines or penalties, including but not limited to
clean-up costs, fees or expenses that are imposed upon the city or the
Whitesboro Volunteer Fire Department by any local, state or federal agency,
related to the rendering of fire protection or prevention services or other
public safety and emergency services, may be included in the billing or
billed separately within 30 days of receipt.



   (D)   Any fees or expenses billed by the Chief, or his or her
designee, shall be payable in full within 60 days of the date of the invoice.



(Ord. 876, passed 8-13-02)



FIREWORKS



§ 92.050  FIREWORKS PROHIBITED;  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Fireworks prohibited.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful to possess, keep, store,
manufacture, assemble, sell, handle, transport, receive, or purchase or offer
for sale, use or discharge any fireworks of any description within the limits
of the city.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or
custodian of a child or ward in their care to permit the child or ward to
violate the provisions of this section within the limits of the city.



   (B)   Affirmative defense.  It shall be an affirmative defense to
the provisions of this section that the possession, sale, or use was for
signaling devices for current daily consumption by railroads, or other
transportation businesses requiring them; or that the possession, sale, or
use was for normal stocks of flashlight compositions by photographers, or
dealers in photograph supplies; or that the possession, sale or use was for
signal flares or rockets for military, police, fire or emergency medical
services, marine or aircraft related emergencies.



   (C)   Applicability.  The provisions of this section shall not
apply to the possession of firearm ammunition and components by licensed
firearms and ammunitions dealers or the possession by an individual of
ammunition or gun powder and the related components of ammunition for the
purpose of the personal manufacture of firearms ammunition or reloading by
the individual.



   (D)   Fireworks displays and shows.  It is provided that the
possession, sale, or use for supervised public displays of fireworks or shows
by organizations or groups of individuals may be conducted, provided that a
permit for such fireworks display has theretofore been obtained from the city
of Whitesboro with the authorization of the Fire Marshal.  The Fire Marshal
shall have the power to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the
granting of such permits to include but not be limited to the following:



      (1)   Application for permits shall be made in writing at
least 15 days in advance of the date of display.  After such privilege shall
have been granted, the sale, possession, use, and distribution of fireworks
for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only.  No permit granted
hereunder shall be transferable.



      (2)   The permittee shall furnish proof of a liability
insurance policy in coverage amounts of $100,000 per person, $300,000 per
incident, and $100,000 property damage conditioned for payment of damages
which may be caused either to a person or persons or to property by reason of
the permitted display and arising from any acts of the permittee, his or her
agents, employees or subcontractors.



   (E)   Authority.  Authority to enforce this section shall be vested
in the Chief of Police or his or her assigns.



(Ord. 798, passed 8-18-97)



   (F)   Permit fee.  The permit fee for fireworks displays and shows
shall be as provided for in § 7.00 of the Fee Schedule, set forth in
Appendix 1 of this code.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate fireworks, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code §§
217.003 and 342.003(a)(8)



FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 92.060  AUTHORITY TO CREATE.



   The Council may, at its discretion, create a Fire Department, incur all
lawful debts, and contribute funds for the maintenance of a Fire
Department.  Such department may be volunteer, paid, or both. 



OUTDOOR BURNING



§ 92.070  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARBAGE.  Includes all animal or vegetable matter, such as waste
material and refuse from kitchens, residences, grocery stores, butcher shops,
hotels, rooming houses, boarding houses, restaurants, cafes, and other
deleterious substances.



   TRASH.  Rubbish such as feathers, coffee grounds, ashes, tin cans,
paper, boxes, glass, grass, shrubs, yard cleanings, yard clippings, leaves,
tree trimmings, and similar matter.



§ 92.071  BURNING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any trash, garbage, or
weeds at any place within the corporate limits, except in an emergency with
the approval and in the presence of the Fire Marshal or the Chief of the Fire
Department.



Penalty, see § 10.99



FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS



§ 92.080  FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS DEFINED.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the term FLAMMABLE LIQUID shall have
the meaning ascribed to it in § 202 of the Standard Fire Prevention Code.



§ 92.081  SALE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUID IN  QUANTITIES OF FIVE GALLONS OR
LESS  REGULATED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or dispose of any
flammable liquid in a container of five gallons or less in capacity, unless
such container meets the requirements of this section.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, or tenant of any
building or structure of any kind, where people are housed as a home,
apartment, boarding house, or any other type of occupancy of any kind or
character, whether they be housed or employed therein, to keep any flammable
liquid in, upon, or about such premises in quantities of five gallons or
under, unless such flammable liquid is kept in a container meeting the
requirements of this section.



   (C)   The container required by this section shall be an air-tight
container of five gallons capacity or under, constructed of metal or the
equivalent thereof, other than glass or materials that are breakable,
properly equipped and fitted with a metal lid or the equivalent thereof, in
such a manner and to the extent that the container will be air-tight and will
not leak, break or erupt, if dropped or turned over, and the contents will
not ignite when exposed to open flame or ignition, and so that neither the
liquid nor the vapor will escape from it at ordinary temperatures.  Such
container shall be so designed and cared for that persons who are unaware of
the danger of flammable liquids will not have easy access to the contents of
the container and will not be exposed to the danger of the liquid or its
vapor.



Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 93:  HEALTH AND SANITATION



Section




Health Officer




   93.001   Appointment; term; qualifications; compensation



   93.002   Duties



   93.003   Records to be kept



   93.004   Cooperation with State Health Officer




Mosquito Control




   93.010   Accumulations of water prohibited




Contaminated Water




   93.020   Collections of water containing bacillus coli declared
public nuisance



   93.021   Collections of water contaminated with bacillus coli to be
eliminated




Impairing Drainage




   93.030   Impairing of drainageways prohibited




Public Toilets




   93.040   Public toilets to be kept in sanitary condition




Health and Sanitation Nuisances




   93.050   Nuisances described



   93.051   Public health nuisances specified



   93.052   Offensive odors



   93.053   Notice; abatement by municipality




Cemeteries




   93.070   Authorized cemeteries



   93.071   Extension of cemeteries



   93.072   Burial outside authorized cemeteries



   93.073   Disinterment of certain bodies buried on private ground



   93.074   New cemeteries; application




Food Regulations




   93.080   Texas Food Establishment Rules adopted



   93.081   Definitions



   93.082   Permits and exemptions



   93.083   Application for permit and fees



   93.084   Review of plans



   93.085   Inspections



   93.086   Examination and condemnation of food



   93.087   Food sanitation training



   93.088   Procedure when infection is suspected



   93.089   Grease traps



   93.090   Suspension of permit



   93.091   Revocation of permit



   93.092   Administrative process



   93.093   Penalty




Enforcement




   93.100   Enforcement through courts



Cross-reference:



   Disposal of dead animals, see § 90.006



   Transporters of grease trap, sand trap and septic waste, see § 50.16



HEALTH OFFICER



§ 93.001  APPOINTMENT; TERM; QUALIFICATIONS; COMPENSATION.



   The office of Health Officer is hereby created.  The office shall be
filled by appointment of the Mayor with the consent of the Council for an
indefinite term.  The Health Officer shall be person trained in the field of
sanitary science and technology who is qualified to carry out educational and
inspection duties and enforce the laws in the field of sanitation.  He or
she shall be compensated in an amount as determined by the Council.



§ 93.002  DUTIES.



   (A)   The Health Officer shall have the authority and power of a law
enforcement officer.  He or she shall have the right to enter and examine
any place within the municipality for the purpose of making inspections and
carrying out his or her duties.



   (B)   The Health Officer shall perform the following duties:



      (1)   Make inspections and report all violations of the laws
of the state and of this municipality pertaining to public health and
sanitation.



      (2)   Enforce the laws and ordinances having the purpose of
securing and assuring the public of pure food, drink, and medicine, and in
carrying out such duty, he or she shall inspect all premises where food,
drink, or medicine is sold, bartered, or offered for sale.



      (3)   Make the necessary inspections and enforce the
ordinances and laws governing the slaughtering, display, and sale of meat and
meat products.



      (4)   Such further duties as may be given to him or her by the
Council.



§ 93.003  RECORDS TO BE KEPT.



   A complete record of all inspections made by the Health  Officer shall
be kept on all complaints, orders issued, notices served, and nuisances
abated.



§ 93.004  COOPERATION WITH STATE  HEALTH OFFICER.



   The Health Officer of the municipality shall cooperate fully with the
State Health Officer in all activities for health protection and conservation.



MOSQUITO CONTROL



§ 93.010  ACCUMULATIONS OF WATER  PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause, or permit
within the municipality any collection of standing or flowing water in which
mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, unless such collection of water is
treated so as to effectually prevent such breeding.



   (B)   Any collections of water considered in division (A) of this
section shall be held to be those contained in ditches, pools, ponds,
excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains,
cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs (except livestock troughs in
frequent use), urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective house
roof gutters, automobile tires, tanks, or flush closets, or other similar
water containers.



   (C)   The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running
water shall be deemed sufficient evidence to assume that mosquitoes are
breeding there and failure to prevent such breeding within three days after
due notice has been given by the Health Officer shall constitute a violation
of this section.



   (D)   The methods of treatment of collections of water directed
toward the prevention of breeding of mosquitoes shall be approved by the
Health Officer and shall be one or more of the following:



      (1)   Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the
inch each way or with any other material which will prevent the ingress or
egress of mosquitoes;



      (2)   Complete emptying every seven days of unscreened
containers, together with their thorough drying or cleaning;



      (3)   Using a larvacide approved by and applied under the
direction of the Health Officer;



      (4)   Covering completely the surface of the water with
kerosene, petroleum, or paraffin oil once every seven days.



      (5)   Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable
growth and other obstructions and stocking with mosquito-destroying fish;



      (6)   Filling or draining to the satisfaction of the Health
Officer or his or her authorized representative; or



      (7)   Proper removal or destruction of tin cans, tin boxes,
broken or empty bottles, and similar containers likely to hold water.



   (E)   Should the person responsible for conditions giving rise to
the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take measures necessary to
prevent the same within three days after due notice has been given to him or
her by the Health Officer or his or her authorized agent, the municipality is
authorized to do so, and all necessary costs incurred by the municipality for
this purpose shall be levied as a lien against the property.



   (F)   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
subchapter, the Health Officer or his or her duly accredited agent acting
under his or her authority may at all reasonable time enter in and upon any
premises within his or her jurisdiction, and any person charged with any of
his or her duties imposed by this subchapter failing within the time
designated by this subchapter or within the time stated in the notice of the
Health Officer, as the case may be, to perform such duties or to carry out
the necessary measures to the satisfaction of the Health Officer, shall be
deemed guilty of violation of this section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate stagnant water or any other condition that may
produce disease, see Tex. Health & Safety Code § 342.001



CONTAMINATED WATER



§ 93.020  COLLECTION OF WATER CONTAINING BACILLUS COLI DECLARED PUBLIC
NUISANCE.



   Any pool, well, spring, or collection of water within the municipality
containing the bacillus coli germ or bacteria is a public nuisance and
dangerous to public health, and any person maintaining or allowing to be
maintained such well, pool, spring, or collection of water on premises owned
or controlled by him or her shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.021  COLLECTION OF WATER CONTAINING BACILLUS COLI TO BE ELIMINATED.



   If any well, pool, spring, or collection of water within the
municipality is contaminated with bacillus coli, the Health Officer shall
instruct the person owning or controlling the property upon which same is
located to seal, fill, or drain such well, pool, spring, or water collection
so that same can no longer be used for drinking, bathing, or domestic
purposes.  If such person owning or controlling the premise fails
immediately to so fill, drain or seal such well, pool, spring, or collection
of water, the Health Officer shall file a complaint against such person in
the municipal court and shall report the condition, together with his or her
recommendations, to the Council.  If the Council shall deem it for the best
interest of the public health that such well, pool, spring, or collection of
water shall be closed up, filled in, or sealed over, it shall instruct the
Police Chief to carry out the required work and the cost thereof shall be
charged to the person owning or controlling the property and may be collected
by suit in any court of competent jurisdiction.



IMPAIRING DRAINAGE



§ 93.030  IMPAIRING OF DRAINAGEWAYS  PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or place in any street,
alley, drainage ditch, or gutter any trash, tin, shavings, refuse, or other
matter whatsoever so as to prevent the free passage of water or cause same to
stagnate therein.  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person installing
or repairing water, gas, or service pipes to leave any street, alley,
drainage ditch, or gutter in such condition as to impair the drainage of same.



Penalty, see § 10.99



PUBLIC TOILETS



§ 93.040  PUBLIC TOILETS TO BE KEPT IN SANITARY CONDITION



   Sufficient and suitable approved toilet accommodations, well-lighted
and ventilated, and separated for each sex, shall be provided at all public
buildings, filling stations, camps, and all places of public assemblage. 
Such accommodations must be kept in a thoroughly clean and sanitary condition.



Penalty, see § 10.99



HEALTH AND SANITATION NUISANCES



§ 93.050  NUISANCES DESCRIBED.



   Whatever is dangerous to human life or health, or whatever renders the
ground, the water, the air, or food a hazard or injury to human life or
health or that is offensive to the senses or that is or threatens to become
detrimental to the public health, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and,
as such, liable to be abated, and the person guilty of causing, permitting,
or suffering a nuisance to exist upon any premises or upon any building
occupied or controlled by him or her, or in any street, alley, sidewalk, or
gutter immediately adjacent to such premises shall, upon conviction, be
punished as provided in § 10.99.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.051  PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCES  SPECIFIED.



   The following are specifically declared to constitute public nuisances
and are prohibited within the municipal limits and within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction:



   (A)   Bakeries, restaurants, food markets, and other places where
food is prepared, kept for sale, or served and not kept in a clean, sanitary
condition, or in which persons who do not have valid health certificates or
who have any communicable disease are employed, or in connection with which
suitable sanitary toilet facilities are not provided, or in which there is
evidence of insects, flies, rats, mice, or vermin and with food which is
accessible to their contamination.



   (B)   Spoiled or diseased meats or other foods, whether stored or
offered for sale or being transported for purpose of sale.



   (C)   Barns, stables, hog pens, chicken yards, cow lots, manure
piles, or any accumulations of organic materials of whatever kind, so
maintained as to be breeding places of insects, flies, or mosquitoes or
convenient harborage for rats and mice.



   (D)   The discharge or exposure of sewage, human excreta,
wastewater, garbage, or other organic filth into or on any place in such a
manner that transmission of disease from the infected material may result, or
the placing or maintaining of such materials as tin cans or rubbish of any
sort that might constitute a breeding place for mosquitoes or flies or offer
a hiding place or protection for rodents.



   (E)   Privies not protected against flies or privies and cesspools
the drainage from which is likely to pollute the soil, surface water, or
water supply from which water for public or private consumption is obtained.



   (F)   All cellars, vaults, drains, pools, privies, sewers, yards,
grounds, or premises which have for any cause become foul, nauseous, or not
provided with adequate means of ingress or egress or not sufficiently
supported, ventilated, sewered, drained, cleaned, or lighted.



   (G)   The transportation of garbage, human excreta, or other organic
waste, except in tight covered wagons or containers which prevent leakage or
access to flies.



   (H)   Stagnant water on private or public premises likely to afford
breeding places for mosquitoes.



   (I)   Hide houses, bone boiling, or rendering establishments, tallow
soap work, or other trades deleteriously affecting public health.



   (J)   All carcasses, all decaying flesh, fish, fowls, fruit, or
vegetables, all deposits of manure, all flesh of any kind or description
whatever, all filthy or offensive water or slops in any private yard or
premises, and all other unwholesome substances when thrown upon or conducted
into or upon any street, alley, public ground, or enclosure in such manner as
to render such substances unwholesome and offensive or liable to become
unwholesome or offensive.



   (K)   The act of sweeping or depositing any trash, paper, or rubbish
into any street, alley, public thoroughfare, or other public place while
driving, walking, or by any other means.



   (L)   The act of burning any substance of any kind which may cause
or produce an offensive smell, smoke, or odor capable of annoying persons
living in the vicinity or persons passing along the streets, alleys, or
public thoroughfares.



   (M)   The act by any person of permitting or allowing any weeds,
filth, or rubbish of any kind to remain on any sidewalk in front of or at the
side of any premises owned by such person or in the street to the middle
thereof, in front or at the side of any premises owned or controlled by such
person, or upon any alley that may be at the rear or side of any lots owned
or controlled by such person.



   (N)   The act of scattering or distributing any advertisements,
circulars, handbills, printed or written announcements, or paper of like
character, or any medicines, upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, or within
the public buildings or grounds within the municipality.



   (O)   The act of conducting or causing to be conducted into any
alley or gutter, drain, or public ground, except such articles as are
permitted by ordinance, in such manner as to obstruct such passageway.



   (P)   Buildings, barns, sheds, filling stations, construction camps,
junk shops, camp houses, or any part thereof, which are in such a dilapidated
or filthy condition as to harbor vermin or endanger the life or health of
persons living in the vicinity or the public generally.



   (Q)   Displaying of food in the open air, unless in proper cases
constructed so as to protect such food from insects, flies, dust, filth,
dogs, rodents, and insects.



   (R)   Every trade, business, or occupation injurious to the health
or comfort of persons who reside in the vicinity, and any can or receptacle
containing water or slops suffered to become stagnant or offensive or
unwholesome from any cause.



   (S)   The act of conducting any business or enterprise upon any
premises or within any building which through negligence allows paper, paper
cups, or any other debris to escape from such premises or building and litter
any sidewalk, alley, street, or other public place or private property.



   (T)   Allowing weeds, grass, or other uncultivated plants to attain
a height greater than 12 inches on any lot or tract within the municipality.



   (U)   Allowing rubbish, brush, or any other unsightly,
objectionable, or unsanitary matter to grow or accumulate on any lot within
the municipality.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Dangerous buildings, see §§ 150.060 et seq.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to suppress disease, see Tex. Health & Safety Code § 122.005



   Authority to regulate stagnant water or any other condition that may
produce disease, see Tex. Health & Safety Code § 342.001



   Authority to regulate sewers and privies, see Tex. Health & Safety Code
§ 342.002



   Authority to regulate weeds and other unsanitary matter, see Tex.
Health & Safety Code §§ 342.003 and 342.004



§ 93.052  OFFENSIVE ODORS.



   Any unreasonable noxious, unpleasant, or strong odor which causes
material distress, discomfort, or injury to persons of ordinary sensibilities
in the immediate vicinity thereof is declared to be a nuisance and as such is
liable to be abated and the person guilty of causing such odor shall upon
conviction be punished as provided in § 10.99.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.053  NOTICE; ABATEMENT BY  MUNICIPALITY.



   (A)   The municipality shall provide notice to any person allowing
conditions prohibited in §§ 93.051 through 93.052 of the alleged
violation.  Such notice may be in writing served upon such owner in person
by an officer or employee of the municipality or may be by letter, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to such owner at his or
her postal address.  If personal service is not feasible and the owner’s
address not known, notice may be given by publishing a brief summary of the
order two times within ten consecutive days in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality.  The notice shall describe the prohibited
conditions and specify a period of not less than ten days from the date of
receipt or publication of the notice in which the prohibited conditions are
to be abated.



   (B)   If the conditions have not been abated by the date specified
in the notice, the municipality may abate the conditions and may pay therefor
and charge the expenses incurred in doing such work or having such work done
or improvements made to the owner of such lot or real estate.  If such work
is done or improvements made at the expense of the municipality, such expense
shall be assessed on the real estate or lot or lots upon which such expense
was incurred.



   (C)   The doing of such work by the municipality shall not relieve
the owner or occupant of the lot or premises from prosecution for failure to
comply with such notice of violation cited in this section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Collection and disposal of garbage, trash, and other refuse, see Ch. 50



   Junked motor vehicles as nuisances, see §§ 95.10 — 95.18



   Nuisances on private property, see §§ 94.30 —94.34



CEMETERIES



§ 93.070  AUTHORIZED CEMETERIES.



   The existing dedicated cemeteries now established within the
municipality are recognized and authorized as legal and proper places for the
interment of a person who may die in the municipality or may be brought to
the municipality for burial.



§ 93.071  EXTENSION OF CEMETERIES.



   The limits of the existing cemeteries or any other that may be
hereafter established or authorized by ordinance shall never be extended
unless authority has been granted by the Council.



§ 93.072  BURIAL OUTSIDE AUTHORIZED  CEMETERIES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to bury the body of any deceased
person anywhere within the municipality other than in a cemetery duly
authorized and recognized as a public burying ground under the terms of this
subchapter, except by special permission granted by the Health Officer and
confirmed by the Council.  If the body of any deceased person is buried
anywhere within the municipality except in a legally authorized cemetery or
burying ground without such permission, then the Health Officer may require
the person so burying such body to disinter such body and bury the same in a
duly authorized cemetery or burying ground.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.073  DISINTERMENT OF CERTAIN  BODIES BURIED ON PRIVATE GROUND.



   If the body of any deceased person be found buried on any lot or ground
in the municipality, the owner or agent of which lot or ground cannot be
found, it shall be lawful and is hereby made the duty of the Health Officer
to cause the body to be disinterred and buried in a cemetery established by
this chapter.



§ 93.074  NEW CEMETERIES; APPLICATION.



   (A)   Any person wishing to establish or enlarge a cemetery,
mausoleum, or other facility for the burial, interment, or other final
disposition of the remains of dead persons shall make application to the
Council to establish or enlarge such facility.



   (B)   Any person making such application shall provide the following
information:



      (1)   A survey of all real property to be included in such
facility.



      (2)   A plat of all burial lots or structures included on such
real property.



      (3)   Proof of ownership of all real property so included.



      (4)   Proof of compliance with all statutory requirements
relating to cemeteries and perpetual care trusts or funds.



      (5)   A bond sufficient to hold the municipality and all
adjacent property owners harmless from any activities for the burial of any
human remains on the property of another.



   (C)   Upon the presentation of the application, the Council shall
hold a hearing on the application and shall, if no objection is filed, grant
a permit to operate a facility for the final disposition of human remains as
set forth in the application.  If objections are filed, the application
shall be treated as an application for a zoning variance.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate cemeteries and burial of dead persons, see Tex.
Health & Safety Code §§ 694.003 and 713.001 et seq.



FOOD REGULATIONS



§ 93.080 TEXAS FOOD ESTABLISHMENT RULES ADOPTED.



   The city adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules or
rules as amended by the Texas Board of Health found in 25 Texas
Administrative Code, Chapter 228, regarding the regulation of food
establishments in this jurisdiction.



(Ord. 768, passed 8-24-95; Am. Ord. 837, passed 4-11-00; Am. Ord. 1075,
passed 11-10-15; Am. Ord. 1078, passed 4-12-16)



§ 93.081  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTHORIZED AGENT OR EMPLOYEE.  An employee of the regulatory authority.



   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT.  A food service establishment, a retail food
store, a mobile food unit, and/or a roadside flood vendor.



   REGULATORY AUTHORITY.  The local enforcement body having jurisdiction
over food establishments.



   STATE RULES. The state rules found at 25 Texas Administrative Code,
Chapter 228. These rules are also known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules.



(Ord. 768, passed 8-24-95; Am. Ord. 837, passed 4-11-00; Am. Ord. 1075,
passed 11-10-15; Am. Ord. 1078, passed 4-12-16)



§ 93.082  PERMITS AND EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   A person may not operate a food establishment without a permit
issued by the regulatory authority. Permits are not transferable from one
person to another or from one location to another location, except as
otherwise permitted by this subchapter. A valid permit must be posted in or
on every food establishment regulated by this subchapter.



   (B)   A food establishment operated solely by a non profit
organization, charitable or religious organization including those run by
churches and service organizations as well as those affiliated with public
and private schools, shall be exempt from the requirements of this ordinance
except that the regulatory authority may offer food sanitation training and
advice to assist the non profit organization in the safe handling of food. 
The regulatory authority may require any information necessary to determine
whether an organization is non profit for purposes of this exemption.



(Ord. 768, passed 8-24-95; Am. Ord. 837, passed 4-11-00; Am. Ord. 1075,
passed 11-10-15; Am. Ord. 1078, passed 4-12-16)  Penalty, see § 93.093



§ 93.083  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT AND FEES.



   (A)   Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make
a written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory
authority. The application must contain the name and address of each
applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment and the
applicable fee. An incomplete application will not be accepted. Failure to
provide all required information, or falsifying information required may
result in denial or revocation of the permit. Renewals of permits are
required on an annual basis and the same information is required for a
renewal permit as for an initial permit.



   (B)   Prior to the approval of an initial permit or the renewal of
an existing permit, the regulatory authority shall inspect the proposed food
establishment to determine compliance with state laws and rules. A food
establishment that does not comply with state laws and rules will be denied a
permit or the renewal of a permit.



   (C)   The following fee schedule applies to permits issued under
this subchapter:



      (1)   All permit fees shall be paid to the regulatory
authority.



      (2)   Religious and/or non-profit charitable agencies and
organizations shall be exempt from fees, but must have permit.



(Ord. 768, passed 8-24-95; Am. Ord. 837, passed 4-11-00; Am. Ord. 868, passed
4-9-02; Am. Ord. 1075, passed 11-10-15; Am. Ord. 1078, passed 4-12-16) 
Penalty, see § 93.093



§ 93.084  REVIEW OF PLANS.



   (A)   Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively
remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food
establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such
construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory
authority for review before work is begun. Extensive remodeling means that
20% or greater of the area of the food establishment is to be remodeled. The
plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout equipment
arrangement, mechanical plans and construction of materials of work areas,
and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The plans
and specifications will be approved by the regulatory authority if they meet
the requirements of the rules adopted by this ordinance. The approved plans
and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling or conversion.



   (B)   Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will
result in a permit denial, suspension, or revocation.



(Ord. 768, passed 8-24-95; Am. Ord. 837, passed 4-11-00; Am. Ord. 1075,
passed 11-10-15; Am. Ord. 1078, passed 4-12-16)



§ 93.085  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Inspection frequency.



      (1)   An inspection of a food service establishment shall be
performed at least once every six months.



      (2)   Additional inspections of the food service establishment
or retail food store shall be performed as often as are necessary for the
enforcement of these rules.



   (B)   Access.



      (1)   Agents of the regulatory authority, city government, or
official, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any food
service establishment at any reasonable time, for the purpose of making
inspections to determine compliance with these rules.



      (2)   The agents shall be permitted to examine the records of
the establishments to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies
purchased, received, or used, or to persons employed when and who pumped the
grease trap, and where the contents were taken.



(Ord. 768, passed 8-24-95)  Penalty, see § 90.093



§ 93.086  EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF FOOD.



   (A)   General.  Food maybe examined or sampled by the regulatory
authority as often as necessary for enforcement of these rules.



   (B)   Hold order.



      (1)   The regulatory authority may, upon written notice to the
owner or person in charge, specifying with particularity the reasons
therefor, place a hold order on any food which it believes is in violation of
the rules or any other provision of the rules.



      (2)   The regulatory authority shall tag, label, or otherwise
identify any food subject to the hold order.



      (3)   No food subject to the hold order shall be used, served,
or moved from the establishment.



      (4)   The regulatory authority shall permit storage of the
food under conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not
possible without risk to the public health, in which case immediate
destruction shall be ordered and accomplished.



   (C)   Hearing.



      (1)   The hold order shall state that a request for hearing
may be filed within ten days and that, if no hearing is requested, the food
shall be destroyed.



      (2)   A hearing shall be held if so requested, and on the
basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated, or
the owner or person in charge of the food maybe directed by written order to
denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the
provisions of these rules.



(Ord. 768, passed 8-24-95)  Penalty, see § 90.093



§ 93.087  FOOD SANITATION TRAINING.



   (A)   No person shall operate a food establishment unless the
manager of the establishment, or if multiple shifts are worked the manager of
each shift has a valid current food service manager's certificate issued by
the regulatory authority certifying that the bearer has completed the food
sanitation program for managers approved by the regulatory authority.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or manager of
any food establishment to employ or allow any food handler to work therein
unless such food handler has the permit required by this section, or an
approved food handler permit.



(Ord. 768, passed 8-24-95; Am. Ord. 1078, passed 4-12-16)  Penalty, see §
90.093



§ 93.088 PROCEDURE WHEN INFECTION IS SUSPECTED.



   (A)   When the regulatory authority has reasonable cause to suspect
the possibility of disease transmission from any food service establishment
employee, it may secure morbidity history of the suspected employee or make
any other investigation as may be indicated and shall take appropriate action.



   (B)   The regulatory authority may require any or all of the
following measures:



      (1)   The immediate exclusion of the employee from all food
service or retail food establishments;



      (2)   The immediate closing of the food service establishment
or retail food store concerned until, in the opinion of the regulatory
authority, no further danger of disease outbreak exists;



      (3)   Restriction of the employee’s service to some area of
the establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting the disease;
and



      (4)   Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the
employee’s body discharges and, if necessary, other employees’ body
discharges.



(Ord. 768, passed 8-24-95)  Penalty, see § 90.093



§ 93.089  GREASE TRAPS.



   (A)  Grease traps (interceptors) for removal of oil, grease, fats,
blood, and other wastes shall be used in cafes, restaurants, bars, private
clubs, cafeterias, grocery markets, taverns, lunchrooms, cocktail lounges,
saloons, soda fountains, bakeries, food commissaries, food manufacturing,
public and parochial schools, and other places that may discharge grease,
fats, oils, blood, or other wastes to the sewer.



   (B)   Floor drains in all the above establishments must be plumbed
through the grease trap where feasible and for all new construction.



   (C)   Wastes from garbage grinders in all the above establishments
will not generally be allowed to enter the sewer system.



   (D)   Traps (interceptors) will not be installed near the plumbing
that discharges greasy wastewater and will be readily accessible for cleaning.



   (E)   A dual-chambered trap that separates then stores grease shall
be utilized for maximum efficiency.  When a dual chamber is installed, the
hot grease is conveyed to the secondary chamber where it accumulates, cools,
and solidifies.



   (F)   Grease trap sizing will depend on the particulars of the
application.  City officials, the Health Department, and/or trap
manufactures will be consulted prior to sizing the unit.



   (G)   No grease trap (interceptor) with a liquid holding capacity of
less than 100 gallons shall be approved for any food preparation
establishment.



   (H)   Grease traps (interceptors) shall be sized using the Southern
Standard Plumbing Code to determine maximum flow rate and are required to
have at least two compartments.



      (1)   The primary compartment shall hold seven times the
maximum gallons-per-minute flow rate.



      (2)   The secondary compartment shall hold five times this
flow rate.



      (3)   Where variances are granted for garbage disposals, they
shall be plumbed into the unit and the unit size to hold ten times the
maximum gallons-per-minute flow rate in the secondary compartment.



   (I)   The Texas Natural Resource and Conservation Commission
requirements state that businesses that generate grease trap waste are
responsible to assure proper handling.



      (1)   If the business has someone to collect and/or transport
the waste to a processing or disposal facility (sewer treatment plants), that
person’s business must be registered.



      (2)   If the business collects or transports their own waste
for processing or disposal, they must comply with the same requirements as
any other handler or transporter.



      (3)   Generators (persons whose process produces grease trap
wastes) whose waste is collected by a transporter are responsible to ensure
that the transporter disposed of the waste at a site approved by the Texas
Water Commission.



      (4)   The Health Department requires transporters to use water
control records and to provide a copy of the record (trip ticket) to the
generator showing final disposition of the waste.



      (5)   The waste control record (trip ticket) must include the
following information: 



         (a)   The name, Texas Natural Resource and Conservation
Commission and Grayson County Health Department registration number of the
transporter;



         (b)   The name and address of the person who generates
the waste;



         (c)   The date the waste was collected;



         (d)   The type and amount of waste collected or
transported;



         (e)   The name of the responsible driver collecting,
transporting, and depositing the waste;



         (f)   The date and place where the wastes were deposited;



         (g)   The name of the facility representative who
acknowledged receipt of the waste and the amount of waste received.



      (6)   The generator is required to obtain a signed copy of the
record and retain it for 12 months from the date the waste is received by the
transporter for review by city officials, the Grayson County Health
Department, and annual reports required from the transporters to the Texas
Natural Resource and Conservation Commission.



      (7)   Transporters of grease trap waste must be registered
with the Texas Water Commission.



      (8)   Have a five-digit registration that is preceded by
“TNRCC” and followed by a two-digit number assigned by the Grayson County
Health Department for identification.



         Example:  TNRCC 23099-12



      (9)   Transporters are required to prominently mark all
vehicles (tanks) used for the collection or transportation of these wastes
(grease traps) to show their company name and Texas Water Commission’s and
Grayson County Health Department assigned registration and identification
numbers and without such marking, the transporter should be considered
unregistered.       



(Ord. 768, passed 8-24-95; Am. Ord. 837, passed 4-11-00; Am. Ord. 867, passed
3-12-02)  Penalty, see § 93.093



§ 93.090  SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or
hearing suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if the operation
of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health.
Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by division (B)
of this section. When a permit is suspended, food operations shall
immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit
shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within 20 days of receipt of a
request for a hearing.



   (B)   Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or
the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon
service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a
hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the
regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within ten days. If no
written request for hearing is filed within ten days, the suspension is
sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if
reasons for suspension no longer exist.



(Ord. 768, passed 8-24-95; Am. Ord. 837, passed 4-11-00; Am. Ord. 1075,
passed 11-10-15; Am. Ord. 1078, passed 4-12-16)



§ 93.091  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for
a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the
requirements of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority
in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory
authority shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in
writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that
the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of
such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the
regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within such ten day period.



   (B)   If no request for hearing is filed within the ten day period,
the revocation of the permit becomes final.



(Ord. 768, passed 8-24-95; Am. Ord. 837, passed 4-11-00; Am. Ord. 1075,
passed 11-10-15; Am. Ord. 1078, passed 4-12-16)



§ 93.092  ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS.



   (A)   A notice as required in these rules is properly served when it
is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or when it
is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be
filed in the records of the regulatory authority.



   (B)   The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by
the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the
recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make final
findings, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered
in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished
to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority.



(Ord. 768, passed 8-24-95; Am. Ord. 837, passed 4-11-00; Am. Ord. 1075,
passed 11-10-15; Am. Ord. 1078, passed 4-12-16)



§ 93.093  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates a provision of these rules, and any
person who is the permit holder of, or who otherwise operates, a food service
establishment that does not comply with the requirements of these rules, and
any responsible officer of that permit holder or those persons, shall be
fined not more than $1,000.



   (B)   The regulatory authority may seek to enjoin violations of
these rules.



(Ord. 768, passed 8-24-95; Am. Ord. 837, passed 4-11-00; Am. Ord. 1075,
passed 11-10-15; Am. Ord. 1078, passed 4-12-16)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 93.100  ENFORCEMENT THROUGH  COURTS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as abridging the right of
the municipality to resort to the courts of this state for the enforcement of
this chapter or of the rights of any owner to resort to the courts of this
state in an attempt to enjoin the enforcement of this chapter.



CHAPTER 94:  NUISANCES



Section




General Provisions




   94.01   Filing of statement of expenses




Littering




   94.10   Definitions



   94.11   Littering prohibited



   94.12   Placing litter in receptacles to prevent scattering



   94.13   Sweeping or blowing litter into street or gutter prohibited



   94.14   Duty to keep property free of litter



   94.15   Owner to remove litter upon notice



   94.16   Municipality may abate nuisance; provision for lien




Refrigerators and Freezers




   94.20   Definitions



   94.21   Deemed public nuisance



   94.22   Owner to remove latches and locks




Nuisances on Private Property




   94.30   Nuisance on private property defined



   94.31   Duty to maintain private property



   94.32   Notice to remove or abate nuisance



   94.33   Municipality may remove or abate nuisance



   94.34   Filing statement of expenses; lien



   94.35   Penalty for violation




Loud Noises




   94.50   Loud noises prohibited



   94.51   Loud noises enumerated



Cross-reference:



   Transporters of grease trap, sand trap and septic waste, see § 50.16



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 94.01  FILING OF STATEMENT OF  EXPENSES.



   Whenever any work is done by the municipality under the provisions of
this chapter, the Municipal Secretary shall file a statement of the expenses
incurred thereby with the County Clerk.  Such statement shall give the
amount of such expenses, the name of the owner of such lot or premises, a
description of such lot or premises, and the date or dates on which such work
was performed.  The municipality shall have a privileged lien.  Such lien
shall bear 10% interest per annum from the date the statement of expenses was
filed.  It is further provided that for any such expenditures and interest,
suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of said lien may be had
in the name of the municipality and the statement of expenses so made, or a
certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for
such work or improvements.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to define, abate, remove and punish for nuisances, see Local
Gov’t Code § 217.002



   Authority to enforce laws to protect the public health, see Tex. Health
& Safety Code Ch. 121 and § 122.005



   Regulation of weeds and other unsanitary matter, see Tex. Health &
Safety Code § 342.004



LITTERING



§ 94.10  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LITTER.  Any quantity of uncontainerized paper, metal, plastic, glass,
garbage, refuse, rubbish, weeds, grass, lawn clippings or other solid waste
material.



   LITTERING.  Dumping, throwing, placing, depositing, leaving, sweeping,
blowing, or causing to be dumped, thrown, placed, deposited, or left any
refuse or waste of any kind or any object or substance which tends to
pollute, mar, or deface any public street, highway, alley, road,
right-of-way, park, or other public place and private property.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY.  All property not owned by a governmental entity
including vacant land or any land, building, or structure, together with any
yard, grounds, walk, driveway, fence, porch steps, or other appurtenant
structure.



(Am. Ord. 966, passed 7-10-07)



§ 94.11  LITTERING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, sweep, blow, or deposit
litter on any private or public property within this municipality, whether
owned by such person or not, except in authorized trash receptacles for the
collection of litter and in such manner that the litter may be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or
other private or public property within the municipality.



(Am. Ord. 966, passed 7-10-07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.12  PLACING LITTER IN RECEPTACLES  TO PREVENT SCATTERING.



   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place
or upon private property.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.13  SWEEPING OR BLOWING LITTER INTO STREET OR GUTTER PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep or blow into or deposit in
any gutter, street, or other public place within the municipality the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway.  Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the
sidewalk in front of their premises free from litter.



(Am. Ord. 966, passed 7-10-07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.14  DUTY TO KEEP PROPERTY FREE OF  LITTER.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of property within the
municipality to place, deposit, throw, or permit litter to accumulate on any
lot or premises located in the municipality unless the same has been
deposited in an authorized receptacle for collection.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.15  OWNER TO REMOVE LITTER UPON  NOTICE.



   It shall be the duty of any owner or occupant of property within the
municipality to remove or cause to be removed all such litter as may be
necessary to comply with these provisions hereof.  Whenever any such
condition as described in §§ 94.11 through 94.14 is found to exist on a lot
or premises within the municipality, the owner or occupant shall be notified
in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to correct, remedy,
or remove the condition within ten days after such notice is given.  Such
notice shall either be served personally or by registered mail with a return
receipt requested to the last known address of the owner.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.16  MUNICIPALITY MAY ABATE NUISANCE; PROVISION FOR LIEN.



   If the owner or occupant of any lot or premises upon which any
condition described in §§ 94.11 through 94.14 is not corrected, remedied,
or removed within ten days after notice to do so is given, the municipality
may do such work at the expense of the municipality on the account of owners
of the premises and charge the expenses incurred to the owner of such lot
upon which such expenses are incurred.  The doing of such work by the
municipality shall not relieve the owner or occupant of the lot or premises
from prosecution for failure to comply with such notice for violation of §§
94.11 through 94.14.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Procedures for filing of a statement of expenses, see § 94.01



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate rubbish, other unsanitary matter and places, see
Tex. Health & Safety Code §§ 342.001 and 342.004



   Texas Litter Abatement Act, see Tex. Health & Safety Code Ch. 365



REFRIGERATORS AND FREEZERS



§ 94.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDON.  The throwing away of an icebox, refrigerator, or freezer on
vacant property, junk heaps, trash piles, or debris accumulations or any
other act which at common law would constitute an abandonment of personal
property.



   DANGEROUS EXPOSURE.  The placing of an icebox, refrigerator, or
freezer not in use in a garage, barn, outbuilding, porch, yard, lot, or other
portion of premises where persons may come upon it and be attracted to it.



§ 94.21  DEEMED PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   The abandonment or dangerous exposure of an icebox, refrigerator, or
freezer with its doors in normal latching or locking condition is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and a serious menace to life because of the
danger of persons, especially children, entering such an icebox,
refrigerator, or freezer and becoming locked inside and suffocating.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.22  OWNER TO REMOVE LATCHES AND LOCKS.



   (A)   The owner of an abandoned or dangerously exposed icebox,
refrigerator, or freezer and the owner or occupant of the premises where an
abandonment or dangerous exposure occurs shall remove the door or dismantle
or remove the latch or lock holding the door shut on the icebox,
refrigerator, or freezer.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if he or she abandons or
dangerously exposes, or causes or permits to be abandoned or dangerously
exposed, an icebox, refrigerator, or freezer unless the latch or lock holding
each door shut is dismantled or removed so that the door may be opened from
within by pushing on it.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Abandoned refrigerators, see Tex. Health & Safety Code §§ 756.011 -
756.013



NUISANCES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY



§ 94.30  NUISANCE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY  DEFINED.



   (A)   For the purposes of this subchapter, the term NUISANCE ON
PRIVATE PROPERTY is defined to mean any condition or use of premises or of
building exteriors which is detrimental to the property of others or which
causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in the value of other
property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located.



   (B)   This term includes but is not limited to the keeping, the
depositing on, or the scattering over the premises of any of the following:



      (1)   Lumber, building materials, junk, trash, or debris;



      (2)   Storage of furniture (other than furniture designed for
outside use), household items, or products of a commercial trade or business
enterprise, whether or not such items are used outside;



      (3)   Abandoned, discarded, or unused objects or equipment
such as automobiles and equipment parts, furniture, fixtures, appliances,
cans, bottles, or containers;



      (4)   Items of salvage such as scrap metals, rags, papers,
bottles, cans, and similar items;



      (5)   Any compost pile which is of such a nature as to spread
or harbor disease, emit unpleasant odors or harmful gas, or attract rodents,
vermin, or other disease-carrying pests, animals, or insects;



      (6)   Any deleterious or septic material upon any premise,
unless such material is retained in containers or vessels which deny access
to humans, flies, insects, rodents, and animals.



§ 94.31  DUTY TO MAINTAIN PRIVATE  PROPERTY.



   No person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge of any premises
shall maintain or keep any nuisance thereon nor shall any such person keep or
maintain such premises in a manner causing substantial diminution in the
value of the other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are
located.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.32  NOTICE TO REMOVE OR ABATE  NUISANCE.



   Upon becoming aware of nuisance conditions set forth herein, the Mayor
or his or her designated representative shall make a determination whether or
not the conditions and circumstances constitute a nuisance as herein
defined.  If it is determined that the conditions constitute a nuisance, the
Mayor shall cause a written notice to be given to the owner, tenant, or
person in control of the premises, or an agent thereof, to remove or abate
the nuisance.  Such notice shall state the nature of the nuisance and that
it must be removed or abated within ten days and that failure to do so may
cause a complaint to be filed in municipal court for violation of maintaining
a nuisance.  Such notice shall be given by delivering the written notice
personally or by mailing the written notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested.  If the location of the owner of the property is unknown, the
notice shall be mailed, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
last known address listed on the tax roll and by publication in the official
newspaper and a regional newspaper of general circulation in the area for at
least two successive days.  If the notice is mailed, it shall be prima facie
evidence of service if an executed return receipt is received.



§ 94.33  MUNICIPALITY MAY REMOVE OR  ABATE NUISANCE.



   If the owner, tenant, or person in control of the premises, or agent
thereof, fails to comply with the order to remove or abate any nuisance, the
municipality may then cause the nuisance to be removed or abated and the
expenses of such procedure shall be charged against the owner and shall
thereupon become a valid and enforceable personal obligation of the owner of
such premises which may be recovered by the municipality in a suit brought
for the purpose.  The municipality may assess the expenses on the property
on which the nuisance is located or situated and make the same a lien thereon.



§ 94.34  FILING STATEMENT OF EXPENSES;  LIEN.



   (A)   Whenever the municipality shall have performed any work or
paid any necessary expenses in connection with any work done in the removal
or abatement of any nuisance, it shall be the duty of the Mayor or his or her
designated agent to immediately prepare and deliver or mail to the owner of
the property upon which the nuisance was located an itemized statement in the
form of an affidavit, duly sworn to, of all such work performed and all costs
and expenses incurred and paid by the municipality in connection therewith. 
The statement shall be sent to the owner of the property if his or her true
address is known; if not, the statement shall be sent to the owner of record
according to the last official tax roll of the municipality at the address
carried in connection therewith.  Such affidavit, among other things and
provisions, shall contain the following:



      (1)   Name and address of owner, and name and address of
tenant or agent of property, if known, and if unknown recite the fact;



      (2)   Description of the property sufficient to identify same,
and where property has been subdivided a description by lot and block number
of any particular subdivision, or the description as per the map of the
municipality;



      (3)   Statement of the action of the municipality;



      (4)   Itemized statement of the work done and performed,
together with the cost thereof opposite each item; and



      (5)   Statement of payment made by the municipality to other
parties, and to whom made, or reasonable charges by any concerned municipal
department.



   (B)   Upon delivery or mailing of the statement and affidavit
provided for above, the municipality shall be entitled to the payment of the
aggregate amount so expended, or reasonable charges for municipal work, or
costs paid, as therein set forth.  Should the owner fail or refuse to pay
the amount due within 30 days thereafter, the affidavit containing the
information as set out herein above, signed by the Mayor, shall be filed with
the County Clerk.  Such statement, when filed, shall constitute a lien upon
the property on which the expense was incurred, second only to tax liens and
liens for street improvements, and the amount remaining unpaid on such
statement shall accrue interest at the rate of 10% per annum from the date of
expenditure by the municipality, or from the date that the municipality
itself performed such work and incurred such expense, as provided for in Tex.
Health & Safety Code §§ 342.006 and 342.007.



§ 94.35  PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.



   The municipality may file charges in the municipal court for violation
of the provisions of § 94.31.  Any person found guilty of maintaining such
nuisance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a fine for each
offense and the municipal court shall order the removal and abatement of the
nuisance.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Health nuisances, see §§ 93.050 et seq



Statutory reference:



   Abatement of sanitation nuisances, see Tex. Health & Safety Code Ch. 342



LOUD NOISES



§ 94.50  LOUD NOISES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for a person to make or cause to be made any loud
and raucous noise in the city of which is offensive to the ordinary
sensibilities of the inhabitants of the city, which noise renders the
enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable or interferes with public peace
and comfort.



(Ord. 702, passed 4-11-89)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.51  LOUD NOISES ENUMERATED.



   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing,
and unnecessary noises in violation of this section; provided, however, that
such enumeration shall not be construed to be exclusive to other noises:



   (A)   Horns and signal devices.  The sounding of any horn or signal
device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, or other motor driven vehicle
while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is
apparently approaching out of control; or, if in motion, only as a danger
signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle
is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any
unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for any
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time, except as the same may be used
only by authorized emergency vehicles as may be otherwise required while on
duty, shall be deemed as unnecessary noise.



   (B)   Radios, phonographs, and musical instruments.  The playing of
any radio, phonograph, or any musical instrument in such a manner, or with
such volume, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., so
as to create a noise which could be reasonably calculated to disturb a person
of ordinary disposition under the same or similar circumstances, residing in
a dwelling or other type of residence in the vicinity shall be deemed to be a
violation of this section.



   (C)   Motor vehicles. The use of any motor vehicle of any
description so out of repair, or loaded or operated in such a manner as to
create a loud or unnecessary noise, such as spinning or squealing of tires,
grating, grinding, rattling, or other noises, shall be deemed a violation of
this section.



   (D)   Building and demolition procedures.  The erection,
excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building in a
residential or business district other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m., except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of
public safety and then only with a permit from the city allowing work to
continue during such hours, shall be deemed a violation of this section.



   (E)   Shouting or crying by peddlers.  The shouting and crying of
peddlers, hawkers, and vendors which disturbs the quiet and peace of the
neighborhood shall be deemed unnecessary noise and a violation of this
section.



   (F)   Drums, loudspeakers, and the like.  The use of any drum,
loudspeaker, or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting
attention to any performance, show, or sale or merchandise by creation of
noise shall be deemed unnecessary noise and a violation of this section,
except those activities of an official celebration, athletic event or similar
activity by a school, or sanctioned by school officials or events
unauthorized by permit by the officials of the city.  The use of loud
speakers for whatever purpose shall be prohibited between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. regardless of whether such activity is authorized by any
official of the schools or city.  Use of a loudspeaker during such
prohibited hours shall be considered a violation of this section.  The
playing of loudspeakers and amplifiers on motor vehicles with such volume as
to create a noise which would reasonably be calculated to disturb a person or
ordinary disposition under the same or similar circumstances, residing in the
vicinity shall be deemed to be a violation of this section.



(Ord. 702, passed 4-11-89)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Loud noises in a public park, see § 96.08



CHAPTER 95:  JUNKED AND ABANDONED PROPERTY



Section




General Provisions




   95.01   Definitions



   95.02   State law applicable



   95.03   Relationship to other regulations




Junked Vehicles




   95.10   Presence of junked vehicles deemed public nuisance; exception



   95.11   Abatement order, private property



   95.12   Abatement order, public property



   95.13   Public hearing



   95.14   Filing complaint



   95.15   Trial



   95.16   Removal of junked vehicle with permission



   95.17   Removal from unoccupied premises



   95.18   Notice to Texas Department of Transportation required




Abandoned Motor Vehicles and Other Property




   95.30   Declaration of nuisance; duty to impound



   95.31   Lien on impounded property



   95.32   Redemption



   95.33   Sale of property



   95.34   Records; fees



 



   95.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 95.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle which:



      (1)   Is inoperable and more than five years old and left
unattended on public property for more than 48 hours;



      (2)   Has remained illegally on public property for a period
of more than 48 hours;



      (3)   Has remained on private property without the consent of
the owner or person in control of the property for more than 48 hours; or



      (4)   Is left unattended on a right-of-way of any designated
county, state, or federal highway, or any street, alley, or public
right-of-way within the municipality for more than 48 hours.



   ANTIQUE AUTO.  A passenger car or truck that was manufactured in 1925
or before or a passenger car or truck that is at least 35 years old.



   COLLECTOR.  The owner of one or more antique or special interest
vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires, trades, or disposes of special
interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to
restore, preserve, and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for
historic interest.



   DEMOLISHER.  Any person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle
into processed scrap or scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck or dismantle motor
vehicles.



   IN ORDINARY PUBLIC VIEW.  Means that the vehicle or part thereof or
the tarp or cover thereon is visible from any public right-of-way, or
adjacent land, or the first floor level of a building thereon which is owned
or occupied by a person other than the owner or occupant of the property on
which the junked vehicle or part thereof is located or parked.



   JUNKED VEHICLE.  Any junked vehicle as defined in Tex. Transp. Code §
683.071, as amended, which:



      (1)   Is inoperative; and



      (2)   Does not have lawfully affixed to it either an unexpired
license plate or a valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate and is
wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, or discarded, or that remains
inoperable for a continuous period of more than 45 days.  Evidence that a
vehicle in public view has not been driven under its own power for a period
of 45 days or more shall constitute prima facie evidence that the vehicle was
inoperative for the same period.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  A motor vehicle subject to registration under the
Certificate of Title Act, being Tex. Transp. Code §§ 501.001 et seq.,
except that for purposes of this chapter, the term also includes a motorboat,
outboard motor, or vessel subject to registration under Tex. Parks & Wildlife
Code Ch. 31.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.



   SPECIAL INTEREST VEHICLE.  A motor vehicle of any age that has not
been altered or modified from original manufacturer’s specifications and,
because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists.



§ 95.02  STATE LAW APPLICABLE.



   Tex. Transp. Code §§ 683.001 et seq. is adopted by reference and the
provisions of these sections shall control and take precedence over any
conflicting provisions of this chapter.



§ 95.03  RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER  REGULATIONS.



   Nothing in this chapter is intended to relieve any person of any
condition, restriction, or requirement imposed by any other law, ordinance,
or code of the municipality.  Where any other ordinance, law, or code is in
conflict with the provisions of this chapter, this chapter shall govern.



JUNKED VEHICLES



§ 95.10  PRESENCE OF JUNKED VEHICLES  DEEMED PUBLIC NUISANCE; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   The location or presence of any junked motor vehicle on any
private or public property, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved,
within the municipality shall be deemed a public nuisance.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such
public nuisance by wrecking, dismantling, partially dismantling, rendering
inoperable, abandoning, or discarding any motor vehicle on the real property
of another or to suffer, permit, or allow the same to be placed, located,
maintained, or exist upon his or her own real property.



   (C)   This section shall not apply to:



      (1)   A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed
within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street
or other public or private property;



      (2)   A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a
lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a
licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard;



      (3)   A vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository
maintained in a location officially designated and in a manner approved by
the municipality;



      (4)   A motor vehicle in operable conditions specifically
constructed for racing or operation on privately owned drag strips or race
strips;



      (5)   An unlicensed, inoperable antique or special interest
vehicle stored on property, provided that the vehicle and outdoor storage
area are maintained so that they do not constitute a health hazard and are
screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing
trees, shrubbery, or other appropriate means; or



      (6)   A motor vehicle stored as the property of a member of
the armed forces of the United States while on active duty assignment.



Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.11  ABATEMENT ORDER, PRIVATE  PROPERTY.



   (A)   Whenever such public nuisance as described in § 95.10 exists
on private property within the municipality, the Chief of Police or other
designated official enforcing this chapter shall order the owner of the
premises, or the occupant of the premises if in possession thereof, to abate
or remove the same.  Such order shall:



      (1)   Be in writing;



      (2)   Specify the public nuisance and its location;



      (3)   Specify the corrective measure required:



      (4)   Provide for compliance within ten days from service
thereof; and



      (5)   Inform the owner or occupant of his or her right to a
hearing before the Council if notice of a demand for hearing is given in
writing within ten days of the issuance of the order.



   (B)   Such order shall be served upon the owner or occupant of the
premises wherein the nuisance is located by sending the order by certified
United States mail with a five-day return receipt requested to:



      (1)   The address of the premises;



      (2)   The address listed on the certificate of title of the
offending vehicle; and



      (3)   The address of any lien holder.



   (C)   If the owner or the occupant of the premises fails and refuses
to comply with the notice stating the order of the Chief of Police or his or
her duly authorized agent within ten days after service thereof, the Chief of
Police or his or her duly authorized agent shall take possession of the
junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises.



   (D)   If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States
Postal Service, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a
date not less than ten days from the date of such return.



   (E)   The Chief of Police or his or her duly authorized agent shall
thereafter dispose of the junked motor vehicle in such a manner as the
Council may provide.



   (F)   The owner or occupant of the premises may, within the ten day
period after service of notice to abate the nuisance, request of the Chief of
Police, either in person or writing and without the requirement of bond, that
a date and time be set when he or she may appear before the municipal judge
for a hearing to determine whether he or she is in violation of this chapter.



   (G)   If a request is made under the provisions of division (F)
above, no action to remove the vehicle shall be taken pending the hearing.



Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.12  ABATEMENT ORDER, PUBLIC  PROPERTY.



   (A)   Whenever such public nuisance as described in § 95.10 exists
on public property within the municipality, the Chief of Police or other
designated official enforcing this chapter shall order the owner of the
premises, or the occupant of the premises if in possession thereof, to abate
or remove the same.  Such order shall:



      (1)   Be in writing;



      (2)   Specify the public nuisance and its location;



      (3)   Specify the corrective measure required:



      (4)   Provide for compliance within ten days from service
thereof; and



      (5)   Inform the owner or occupant of his right to a hearing
before the Council if notice of a demand for hearing is given in writing
within ten days of the issuance of the order.



   (B)   Such order shall be served upon the owner of the vehicle and
any lien holder of record thereof by sending the order by certified United
States mail with a five-day return receipt requested to the address listed on
the certificate of title of the offending vehicle, and the address of any
lien holder.



   (C)   If the owner of the offending vehicle fails and refuses to
comply with the notice stating the order of the Chief of Police or his or her
duly authorized agent within ten days after service thereof, the Chief of
Police or his or her duly authorized agent shall take possession of the
junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises.



   (D)   If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States
Postal Service, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a
date not less than ten days from the date of such return.



   (E)   The Chief of Police or his or her duly authorized agent shall
thereafter dispose of the junked motor vehicle in such a manner as the
Council may provide.



   (F)   The owner of the vehicle may, within the ten day period after
service of notice to abate the nuisance, request of the Chief of Police,
either in person or writing and without the requirement of bond, that a date
and time be set when he or she may appear before the municipal judge for a
hearing to determine whether he or she is in violation of this chapter.



   (G)   If a request is made under the provisions of division (f)
above, no action to remove the vehicle shall be taken pending the hearing.



   (H)   Nothing in this section shall affect laws that permit
immediate removal of a vehicle left on public property which constitutes an
obstruction to traffic.



Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.13  PUBLIC HEARING.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a request for a hearing made pursuant to §
95.11(F) or § 95.12(F), the Chief of Police or his or her duly authorized
agent shall set a date and time for such hearing before the municipal
judge.  The Chief of Police or his or her duly authorized agent shall notify
the owner of the vehicle or the owner or occupant of the premises, as the
case may be, in writing as to the date and time of such hearing.



   (B)   The municipal judge shall hear any case brought before it and
as set out herein determine whether the subject vehicle is a junked vehicle
under the provisions of this chapter.  The judge may summon any witnesses or
solicit any information it deems necessary in determining the status of the
vehicle.



   (C)   If the judge determines that the subject vehicle is junked,
under the provisions of this chapter, the owner of the vehicle or the owner
or occupant of the premises, as the case may be, shall be ordered to remove
or cause to be removed the vehicle from either public or private property
within five days from the date of the order of the judge.  Any resolution or
order requiring the removal of a vehicle or part thereof shall include a
description of the vehicle, the correct vehicle identification number, and
license number of the vehicle, if available.



§ 95.14  FILING COMPLAINT.



   If the order of the municipal judge is not complied with, the Municipal
Attorney shall forthwith cause to be prepared, filed, and served on the
defendant a written complaint charging that the owner of the vehicle or the
owner or occupant of the premises, as the case may be, has violated the
provisions of this chapter.



§ 95.15  TRIAL.



   (A)   The judge of the municipal court shall hear any case brought
before the court and shall determine whether the defendant is in violation of
this chapter.  Upon finding that the defendant is in violation of this
chapter, the defendant shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to
a fine as provided in § 10.99 of this code.  Each day that the nuisance
continues shall be considered a separate occurrence.



   (B)   The judge shall further order such offense removed and the
nuisance abated within ten days, same being a reasonable time.



   (C)   If the defendant shall fail and refuse to abate and remove the
nuisance within ten days, the judge may issue an order directing the Chief of
Police or his or her duly authorized agent to have the same removed and the
Chief of Police or his or her duly authorized agent shall take possession of
the junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises.



   (D)   The Chief of Police or his or her duly authorized agent shall
thereafter dispose of the junked motor vehicle in such manner as the Council
may provide.



Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.16  REMOVAL OF JUNKED VEHICLE  WITH PERMISSION.



   The owner of the vehicle or the owner or occupant of the premises, as
the case may be, if after receipt of ten day’s notice from the Chief of
Police or his or her duly authorized agent to abate the nuisance as herein
provided, may give his or her written permission to the Chief of Police or
his or her duly authorized agent for removal of the junked motor vehicle and
the giving of such permission shall be considered in compliance with the
terms and provisions of this chapter.  Once a vehicle has been removed, it
shall not be reconstructed or made operable.



Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.17  REMOVAL FROM UNOCCUPIED  PREMISES.



   If a junked vehicle, as defined in § 95.01, is located on premises
that are unoccupied and the owner of the premises is notified to remove same
but cannot be found, then upon a showing of such facts to the judge of the
municipal court, the court may issue an order directing the Chief of Police
or his or her duly authorized agent to have the same removed, and the Chief
of Police or his or her duly authorized agent shall take possession of the
junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises.  The Chief of Police
or his or her duly authorized agent shall thereafter dispose of the junked
motor vehicle in such manner as the Council may provide.



§ 95.18  NOTICE TO DEPARTMENT OF  TRANSPORTATION REQUIRED.



   When a junked motor vehicle is removed from any premises by the Chief
of Police or his or her duly authorized agent, notice shall be given to the
state Department of Transportation within five days after the date of removal
of the junked vehicle or part thereof and identifying the junked vehicle or
part thereof.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to abate and remove junked vehicles, see Tex. Transp. Code
§§ 683.071 et seq.



ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES AND OTHER PROPERTY



§ 95.30  DECLARATION OF NUISANCE; DUTY  TO IMPOUND.



   When an abandoned motor vehicle or any property other than a junked
motor vehicle, as defined in § 95.01, is placed, left standing, parked,
erected, or lying in violation of any ordinance or code of the municipality
or left unattended for more than 48 continuous hours in or on any public
street, alley, sidewalk, park, or other public place of the municipality is
declared to be a nuisance.  Any such property when so found shall be removed
summarily by any officer of the municipality and taken to the municipal pound
and shall be kept there until redeemed or sold as herein provided.



§ 95.31  LIEN ON IMPOUNDED PROPERTY.



   The municipality shall have a lien on such impounded personal property
for all costs incurred in impounding, storing, and advertising such property
and such lien shall be prior and superior to all other liens of every kind,
save and except liens for ad valorem taxes.  The municipality may retain
possession thereof until all costs are paid and may sell the same as herein
provided.



§ 95.32  REDEMPTION.



   The owner or any person legally entitled to possession of such
impounded personal property may redeem the same as follows:



   (A)   Before sale.  By paying to the Chief of Police the impounding
fee and any other actual expenses incurred by the municipality in impounding
and keeping the impounded property, as determined by the Chief of Police.



   (B)   After sale.  By paying to the buyer at the auction sale
double the amount paid by him or her for such personal property and any
reasonable expenses incurred by him for keeping same; provided, that the
property must be redeemed from the auction buyer within 30 days after the
date of auction sale, excluding the date of sale.  If not redeemed within 30
days after the date of auction sale, title to the property shall become
absolute in the auction buyer.



§ 95.33  SALE OF PROPERTY.



   (A)   Sale.  When any personal property, other than a motor
vehicle, is not redeemed within 60 days after being impounded, and when any
motor vehicle, other than a junked motor vehicle, is not redeemed after
compliance by the Chief of Police with the provisions of this chapter, the
Chief of Police shall sell the same at public auction to satisfy the lien of
the municipality.



   (B)   Procedures for sale of property other than motor vehicles.



      (1)   Before selling such personal property, other than motor
vehicles, the Chief of Police shall post two notices thereof, one at the
United States Post Office, and one at the entrance to the Municipal Hall, and
shall cause a copy thereof to be published in a newspaper published in the
municipality once a week for two consecutive weeks, the date of the first
publication to be at least 14 days prior to the day of the auction sale.



      (2)   The notice of sale shall describe the impounded
property, state that the same is unredeemed, state that the same shall be
sold at public auction, designate the place of sale, and state a time and
date of sale which shall not be less than 14 days from the date of posting
such notices as herein required.



   (C)   Procedures for sale of motor vehicles.



      (1)   When any motor vehicle has not been redeemed within 30
days from the date of its impounding, it shall be the duty of the Chief of
Police to submit to the Texas Department of Transportation, and similar
agency of the proper state when the vehicle is registered in another state,
all information that the department supply to him or her all information the
records of the department contained on the vehicle.



      (2)   Immediately upon receipt of such information from the
Department, the Chief of Police shall notify the owner and lienholders as
shown by the records of the Department by registered mail with return receipt
requested that the vehicle has been impounded and of the provisions of this
division in regard to redemption and sale of impounded property.



      (3)   In the event a motor vehicle has not been redeemed
within 15 days from receipt of the return receipt or notice of nondelivery of
registered mail, the Chief of Police shall prepare a notice of sale of such
vehicle, in the manner described in division (B)(2) above, and shall send a
copy of the notice to owner and lienholders, as shown by the records and
advertise the notices in the manner required in division (B)(1) above. 
Notice by registered mail to the address shown on the records of the
Department of Transportation shall constitute notice of the pending sale to
such owner and lienholders.



      (4)   When the Chief of Police is unable to ascertain the
names of the owner and lienholders, and the motor vehicle has not been
redeemed with 45 days from its impounding, no notice of sale other than
posting and advertising as herein prescribed shall be required.



   (D)   Public auction.  When any impounded property, including motor
vehicles, is not redeemed by the date and time designated in the notice of
sale, the Chief of Police shall sell such property at public auction, and, as
auctioneer, shall execute bill of sale of the property to the purchaser
thereof.  He or she shall not execute or deliver any but a conditional bill
of sale unless and until the title of the buyer has become absolute by an
expiration of 30 days, exclusive of the date of sale, without being redeemed
by the owner of the impounded property.



   (E)   Disposition of proceeds.



      (1)   After deducting the impounding fee and all other actual
expenses incurred by the municipality in impounding, storing, and selling of
the property, as determined by the Chief of Police, not to exceed a
reasonable amount for each impounded article, he or shall pay the balance of
the proceeds of such sale, if any, to the owner of the property.



      (2)   If the owner fails to call for such proceeds, they shall
be paid into the general fund.  Within six months after such auction sale,
the owner may apply in writing to the Chief of Police and upon satisfactory
proof of ownership, shall be entitled to receive the amount of the proceeds
delivered to the general fund.



   (F)   Junk property.  Impounded property which is offered for sale
at public auction in accordance with the procedures herein prescribed and
upon which no person bids shall thereafter be sold or otherwise disposed of
as junk.  Money received for junk property shall be disposed of in the same
manner as proceeds from an auction under this section.



§ 95.34  RECORDS; FEES.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall keep a record book which shall
contain a description of all property impounded, the date and time of such
impounding, the date notices of sale were posted and advertised and mailed to
owners and lienholders, the return of receipts of registered notices, the
date of the sale at auction, the amount realized for each article at such
sale, the name and address of the owner and lienholders, if known, the name
and address of the auction buyer, and any such other information as he or she
may deem necessary.



   (B)   The fees shall be charged as specified in § 5.00 of the Fee
Schedule, as set forth in Appendix 1 of this code, and shall be set by the
Council and paid into the general fund.



Cross-reference:



   Unclaimed, seized, and surplus property, see §§ 31.020 - 31.027



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   If any person is found guilty after a trial held according to § 95.15
and shall fail and refuse within ten days to remove and abate such nuisance
as ordered by the court, he or she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined
according to the provisions of § 10.99.  Each day of continuing violation
shall be considered a separate offense.



CHAPTER 96:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section




General Provisions




   96.01   Safety of patrons generally



   96.02   Injuries to trees, shrubs, fences, and the like



   96.03   Abusive or obscene language or act



   96.04   Dogs at large



   96.05   Vehicles, human propelled devices and horses



   96.06   Sale of merchandise



   96.07   Possession of alcoholic beverages in parks



   96.08   Noises interfering with enjoyment of public park areas



   96.09   Hours of operation




Parks and Recreation Department; Parks and Recreation Board




   96.20   Department and Board creation; membership; terms;
compensation



   96.21   Procedures



   96.22   Dual office holding prohibited



   96.23   Duties



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 96.01  SAFETY OF PATRONS GENERALLY.



   It shall be unlawful for any individual or group of individuals to
participate in any activity on any public park area when such activity will
create a danger to the public or may be considered a public nuisance.  The
Council may designate particular locations within park areas for specific
activities and, when deemed necessary, it may limit the conduct of such
activities by the issuance of special permits upon application, which permits
will set out the particular conditions under which such activity is permitted.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.02  INJURY TO TREES, SHRUBS, FENCES, AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, break, deface or in any way
injure the trees, shrubs, plants, grass, turf, fountains, seats, fences,
structures, improvements, ornaments, monuments, or property within or upon
any of the public parks.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.03  ABUSIVE OR OBSCENE LANGUAGE  OR ACT.



   No person shall use or speak any threatening, abusive, insulting, or
indecent language in any of the public parks, and no person shall commit in
any such parks any obscene, lewd, or indecent act or create any nuisance.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.04  DOGS AT LARGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner, keeper, or person having the
custody or control of any dog to cause or permit such animal to go into or
upon the grounds of any public park within the municipality, unless such dog
is led by some person and retained in custody by having such animal securely
fastened by means of a chain, rope, or strap.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Dogs running at large generally, see § 90.017



§ 96.05  VEHICLES, HUMAN PROPELLED DEVICES AND HORSES.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   HUMAN PROPELLED DEVICE.  Any wheeled device propelled by human power
including but not limited to a bicycle, skate board or roller skates.



   MOTOR DRIVEN VEHICLE.  Includes but is not limited to a motorcycle,
motorbike, mini-bike, all terrain vehicle, automobile, and truck.



   OFFICIAL.  For the purpose of this section, an “official of the
city” who is authorized to grant temporary permission to violate the
provisions of this section shall include the City Administrator, Supervisor
or Director, or the Chief of Police



   PARK.  For the purpose of this section, the term shall refer to
publicly owned property within the city designated for recreation purposes by
the city for use by the general public without charge for admission.



   PUBLICLY OWNED PROPERTY.  That property owned or under the control of
a political subdivision of the state.



   (B)   Driving a motor vehicle within the city park prohibited.  No
person shall drive or operate a motor driven vehicle within the city on or
within a park owned by the city without the consent of an official of the
city.



   (C)   Riding human propelled device in certain areas within park
prohibited.



      (1)   No person shall drive, ride or operate a human propelled
device of any description upon the designated walking path within the Godwin
City Park without the consent of an official of the city.



      (2)   No person shall drive, ride or operate a human propelled
device of any description upon or within an area which has been sign posted
with written notice or symbol sign by the Director of Parks and Recreation or
other official to prohibit certain human propelled devices.



   (D)   Riding horse within city park prohibited.  No person shall
ride a horse or horse drawn device within any portion of any city park.



   (E)   Reckless bicycle riding within the city park prohibited.  No
person shall ride a bicycle or other human propelled device within a park in
a willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property.



   (F)   Parent or guardian allowing a minor to violate section
prohibited.  No parent, guardian or custodian of a ward or child less than
17 years of age shall knowingly permit their child or ward to violate the
provision of this section.



   (G)   Seizure of vehicle.  Any officer of the Police Department
having probable cause to believe that a person has violated the provisions of
this section shall have the authority to seize any motor driven vehicle or
human propelled device and arrest the violator without warrant.  The officer
may hold the seized vehicle or device as evidence for court purposes or, if
the violator is a minor, release it to the parent, guardian or custodian of a
child or ward accused of violating the provisions of this section.



   (H)   Parking of vehicles.



      (1)   A person commits an offense if in any park or
recreational area he or she knowingly:



         (a)   Stops, stands, or parks a motor vehicle;



         (b)   Parks a motor vehicle so as to obstruct entrance
to or exit from a roadway, parking area, or trail established for public
motor vehicle use; or



         (c)   Fails to park the entire motor vehicle within the
limit lines of a designated parking stall, where such lines have been
provided.



      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (H)(1)
that the stopping, standing or parking:



         (a)   Was along a roadway, trail, or parking area
established for public motor vehicle use;



         (b)   Was due to temporary mechanical failure of the
vehicle;



         (c)   Was ordered by a police or park officer or a
person charged with supervision of a park or recreation area within the
municipality; or



         (d)   Was performed by an employee of the municipality
while in the course of his or her official duties.



   (I)   Applicability.  The provisions of this section do not apply
to the following:



      (1)   Persons operating and vehicles being operated as
emergency vehicles to include but not limited to police, fire and ambulance
personnel or employees of the city, county or state when operated within the
scope of their duties.



      (2)   Persons operating devices such as fork lifts or moving
dollies used in the movement of the property or to facilitate the movement of
stocks of items for recreation purposes.



      (3)   Persons using motorized or human propelled wheel chairs
or similar devices that are either temporarily or permanently handicapped or
disabled, or the use of a human powered device for the transport of infants
such as a baby stroller.



      (4)   Equipment used and operated by city employees,
contractors employed by the city in an official capacity or vehicles and
equipment operated by citizens volunteering their labor under the supervision
of a city official.



   (J)   Authority to enforce.  Authority to enforce this section
shall be vested in the Chief of Police or his or her assigns.



(Ord. 724, passed 6-3-91)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.06  SALE OF MERCHANDISE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any food,
drinks, confections, merchandise, or services in public park or recreation
areas unless such person has a written agreement with the municipality or a
permit issued from the office of the Municipal Secretary permitting the sale
of such items.  Application for such agreement or permit shall be made to
the office of the Municipal Secretary.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.07  POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PARKS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.   Alcohol or any beverage containing alcohol
which is capable of being used for beverage purposes, either alone or when
diluted.  The term includes but is not limited to beer, wine, distilled
spirits and mixed beverages containing alcohol.



   CITY PARK.  Any property in the city which is designated as a park by
resolution of the City Council and includes all buildings, recreation
facilities, playgrounds, parking lots, driveways, pedestrian paths and other
areas within a park.  Designation of property as a “city park” pursuant
to this section is solely for the purposes of identifying areas where
alcoholic beverages may not be possessed, sold or consumed and shall not be
deemed a legal dedication of any such property for park purposes unless it is
already dedicated.



   ROADWAY.  The portion of a street, alley or highway designated or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.



   SIDEWALK.  All portions of a street, alley or highway between the curb
lines, or the lateral lines of the roadway and the adjacent boundary lines,
whether or not the same have been improved for pedestrian travel.



   STREET, ALLEY, HIGHWAY or PARKING AREA.  The entire width between the
boundary lines of every publicly maintained way when any part thereof is open
to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.  STREET, ALLEY or
HIGHWAY shall include both the roadway and the sidewalk, and PARKING AREA
shall mean any area owned by the city that is set aside for the parking of
vehicles.



   (B)   Offenses.



      (1)   No person shall possess, sell, give away, make available
or consume alcoholic beverage in any city park.



      (2)   No person shall possess, sell, give away, make available
any container containing an alcoholic beverage, or consume an alcoholic
beverage in or upon any street, alley highway or parking area which is
adjacent to or abuts any city park.



   (C)   Defense.  It shall be a defense to prosecution under division
(B)(2) if at any time of the offense the person charged was on privately
owned property or was transporting alcoholic beverage to or from privately
owned property.



(Ord. 744, passed 11-9-93)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.08  NOISES INTERFERING WITH  ENJOYMENT OF PUBLIC PARK AREAS.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if he or she knowingly makes or
causes to be made any loud and raucous noise in any public park and
recreation area in the municipality.



   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (A) of this
section that the person:



      (1)   Is a municipal employee acting within the scope of his
or her official duties; or



      (2)   First obtained the written permission of the Council
authorizing a special event.



   (C)   The following enumerated acts are presumed to create loud and
raucous noises for purposes of this section:



      (1)   The sounding of any horn or signal device on any
automobile, motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle, except as a danger signal, as
required by state law.



      (2)   The use of any mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplifier
for the purpose of attracting the attention of other persons by the creation
of noise.



      (3)   The playing of any radio, television, tape machine,
compact disc player, musical instrument, or other machine or device for the
production or reproduction of sound at such a volume that the sound produced
is audible at a distance in excess of 150 feet.



      (4)   The operation of any automobile, motorcycle, bus, or
other vehicle or mechanical device in such a manner so as to produce a sound
that is audible at a distance in excess of 150 feet.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Prohibition of loud noises generally, see §§ 94.50 and 94.51



§ 96.09  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   Hours of operation.  The city parks known as Whitecotton Park
and Center Street Parks shall be open to the public for public attendance and
use between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. daily, unless the City
Administrator, Parks and Recreation Director or Chief of Police, or their
designated representatives, shall otherwise order.



   (B)   Exemptions.  City Parks and Recreation Department and
Whitesboro I.S.D. sanctioned or sponsored events are exempt from these hours
of operation.



   (C)   Penalties.  Any person found violating the terms of these
hours of operation at the named and described city parks shall be subject to
a penalty or fine not to exceed $500.



(Ord. 1010, passed 9-14-10)



PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT; PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD



§ 96.20  DEPARTMENT AND BOARD CREATION; MEMBERSHIP; TERMS;  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   A department is hereby created within the framework of the
governmental organization of the city which shall be known as the Parks and
Recreation Department and it shall function according to the laws of the
state, laws of the city, and the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   The city hereby accepts all gifts, moneys and equipment
heretofore made of the Whitesboro Youth Committee and Whitesboro Summer
Recreation Program with grateful thanks to the donors and it is ordained that
such gifts, moneys and equipment, together with such additions as may be made
from time to time, shall constitute and become a part of the annual budget of
the Whitesboro Parks and Recreation Department.



   (C)   A Parks and Recreation Board is created and shall consist of
five members.  Members shall be residents of the municipality and shall be
appointed by the Council.  Two of the original five members shall be
appointed for one year terms and three shall be appointed for two year
terms.  Subsequent members shall serve for two year terms and until their
successors are duly appointed and qualified.  Members of the Board shall
serve without pay.



   (D)   The Parks and Recreation Board shall administer and supervise
the operation of the Parks and Recreation Department under the supervision
and control of the city.  Such Board may formulate such rules as it shall
deem necessary for the orderly use of parks and recreation facilities and in
governing the performance of duties of the parks and recreation department
employees and personnel.



(Ord. 582, passed 2-8-80)



§ 96.21  PROCEDURES.



   The Board shall select from among its members a chairperson and
vice-chairperson and may adopt, subject to the approval of the Council, such
rules and regulations for the government of its proceedings as it may deem
proper.



§ 96.22  DUAL OFFICE HOLDING  PROHIBITED.



   No member of the Parks and Recreation Board shall hold any other office
or position with the municipality.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.23  DUTIES.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Parks and Recreation Board to:



      (1)   Recommend policies and procedures for the proper
administration of the parks and recreation program of the municipality
subject to the approval of the Council;



      (2)   Encourage and facilitate the establishment and
maintenance of parks, playgrounds, play fields, centers, swimming pools, and
other park and recreational facilities of the properties owned and controlled
by the municipality or on private or public properties with the consent of
the owners and managers thereof;



      (3)   Encourage the establishment of a supervised recreation
program for all ages, on properties owned and controlled by the municipality
or on private or public properties with the consent of the owners and
managers thereof;



      (4)   Recommend acquisition by the municipality of such land
and buildings as are deemed necessary for a parks and recreation program and
subject to location approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission;



      (5)   Study and submit recommendations for improvement and
expansion of the parks and recreation facilities and programs of the
municipality;



      (6)   Cooperate with all agencies, groups, and clubs concerned
with recreation in the municipality; and



      (7)   Make such studies concerning parks and recreation as may
be requested by the Council.



   (B)   The Parks and Recreation Board shall have such additional
duties as may be conferred on such Board by ordinance.



   (C)   The Parks and Recreation Board shall have no power to obligate
the city in any manner whatsoever; its finances shall be handled in the same
manner as any division of the city government.



(Ord. 582, passed 2-8-80)



CHAPTER 97:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



   97.01   Cuts into the right-of-way, streets, alleys or public
places; permits



   97.02   Street numbering



§ 97.01  CUTS INTO THE RIGHT-OF-WAY, STREETS, ALLEYS OR PUBLIC PLACES;
PERMITS



   (A)   Compliance required.  Any person, firm, or corporation now
owning and operating or hereafter installing and operating any utility within
the right-of-way of any street or easement in the city, or any person, firm,
or corporation doing any repair in any street right-of-way shall do so only
in accordance with the terms and conditions of this section.



   (B)   Permit required.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation to make a cut of any portion of a right-of-way, street, alley
or other public place within the city limits without first applying for and
obtaining a permit from the city prior to making said cut.  No permit shall
be issued until the permittee has presented a utility location request number
from DIGTESS meeting the 72-hour requirement of notification, except in the
case of emergencies.



   (C)   Notification by employees required.  Employees of the water
and sewage department of the city will likewise notify and make a record of
proposed cuts of any right-of-way, street, alley, or public place in the city
in the same manner as any private person or entity.



   (D)   Application.  The application shall be made to the City
Inspector and shall be accompanied by the plats or drawings showing the
location of the cut and such other information as may be required by the city.



   (E)   Emergencies.  The term EMERGENCY shall mean the repair of a
utility which must be made to restore service, to avoid property damage, or
to eliminate danger to the public.  In an emergency, when the office of the
City Inspector is closed, cuts may be made, provided the person or entity
needing to make said cut notifies the Whitesboro Police Department prior to
making said cut, with the Police Department issuing a temporary permit on a
form prescribed by the city.  In the case of an emergency, where a temporary
permit is issued, the person or entity to which the permit is issued shall
notify the City Inspector by 10:00 a.m. on the next day that business is
conducted by the city.  At that time a full report and application shall be
made to the city with appropriate plats and drawings of where the cut was
made and for what reason the cut was made, and such other information as may
be required.



   (F)   Indemnity.  The person, firm or corporation wanting to make a
cut within any right-of-way, street, alley, or other public place shall be
solely responsible and hold the city harmless as a result of said person,
firm, or corporation, and shall indemnify the city for any and all amounts
which the city may be required to pay as a result of any judgments rendered
against the city and including but not limited to any court costs and
attorney’s fees which the city may incur to defend itself against an action
for damages or personal injury that was as a result of any cuts made in the
right-of-way, street, alley, or other public place being cut.  Said
restoration shall be at the sole expense of that person, firm or corporation
making the cut.



   (G)   Relocation of utilities at cost of the owner.  In the event
of the abandonment, widening, repair, installation, construction or
reconstruction by or for the city and/or TXDOT of any road, bridge, culvert,
traffic signal, street light, water distribution system, sewage collection
system, storm drain system, or any other city facility within a street
right-of-way, the owner of any utility shall move, relocate, or renew such
facility, upon request of the city, when necessary for public safety and
welfare and when a suitable site is available, all at the cost and expense of
the owner of such utility.  The city will give as much advance notice to the
affected utilities as possible to facilitate their planning.



   (H)   TXDOT permits recognized.  A city street cut permit will be
required in addition to the TXDOT Encroachment Permit for work on TXDOT-
maintained roads.



   (I)   Bond may be required.  The city may require that a bond be
posted by the individual, person or corporation prior to the granting of a
permit under this section to insure that all of the requirements of this
section have been adhered to, and that all repairs to that portion of the
right-of-way, street, alley, or other public place have been made to the
specifications of the city.



   (J)   Maintenance of safeguards, barriers, and lights.  Every
person, firm, or corporation making or causing to be made any construction
ditch or any other excavation, road maintenance, utility maintenance, or
utility construction in a street right-of-way shall do so in careful,
prudent, and professional manner so as to properly safeguard and protect the
work site and to prevent injury to persons or property in at least the
following manner:



      (1) By placing substantial and adequate barricades in, around and
along the sides of the work area.



      (2)   By providing and maintaining adequate light to disclose
to the public the existence of any construction in the street, whether night
or day.



      (3)   During the night time, to place at least one blinking
light at the end of each work area and the placing of other blinking lights
spaced at intervals recommended for the traffic speed within and adjacent to
the construction area.



   (K)   Excavation, back-filling, and restoration of service.



      (1)   The width of a trench cut shall be kept to the minimum
width necessary to install and properly tamp around the pipe or any new
installation.  If rock or adverse soil conditions are encountered and
shoring is required, then the trench cut shall be of sufficient additional
width to provide for the protection of the workers and proper installation of
the pipe or other structure.



      (2)   All drain, water, sewer, or gas pipes shall be installed
in any street, sidewalk, or easements of the city and/or TXDOT so that the
pipe will be buried for a depth of not less than three feet.  Exceptions may
be made where required by unusual conditions on a case-by-case basis by the
City Inspector.



      (3)   When soil conditions permit and there are no conflicting
utilities, gas, water, telephone, electric, and cable TV service lines shall
be installed through a jacking or boring process.  Sewer service lines may
be installed through a jacking or boring process. In the event the jacking
procedure is attempted and unsuccessful, then the pipe may be installed using
an open cut procedure.



      (4)   Before back-filling of any cuts in streets or street
rights-of-way, the utility contractor shall request an inspection by the City
Inspector.



      (5)   All back-fill material will be free from cinders, ashes,
refuse, vegetable or organic matter, boulders, rocks or stones, wet material,
or other materials which render same unsuitable to obtain a firm and compact
cover for the installed pipe.



      (6)   The back-fill shall be placed in layers not to exceed
six inches and each layer shall be thoroughly compacted to not less than 95%
of the maximum dry density as defined by a Standard Proctor Test.  Flowable
fill will be substituted for compacted back-fill when directed by the City
Inspector.



      (7)   In the event a dispute arises as to the suitability of
trench compaction, a Standard Proctor Text shall be conducted by an
independent soil testing firm.  In the event the test reveals that the same
has not been made in accordance with this section, then the cost shall be
borne by the person, firm or corporation doing the back-fill.  If the test
fails to support the opinion of the Inspector, the city will pay the cost of
the test.



      (8)   Prior to completing the back-filling operation in all
streets in the city, pavement shall be cut 12 inches on each side of the
trench and a depth of 12 inches.  If the cut is to be repaired by the city,
then a temporary patch of either six inches of compacted crusher run stone or
a combination of three inches of crusher run stone and three inches of
compacted cold mix may be used.  Back-fill shall be brought up flush with
the sub-base of the street or sidewalk.



      (9)   Where the existing pavement sub-base is soil, soil
cement, or crushed stone, the base for the permanent pavement repair in all
streets shall consist of a minimum of ten inches of compacted crushed stone
or flowable fill.  Where the existing pavement base is concrete, the
permanent pavement repair shall consist of a minimum of ten inches of
concrete.  If the existing pavement surface is asphalt or tar and gravel,
then the permanent pavement repair shall consist of two inches of asphalt. 
Where sidewalks are cut, a minimum section shall be removed and replaced from
the nearest joints and curb.



      (10)   The entire surface of asphalt roadways will be
overlayed on all longitudinal cuts. Where numerous random utility cuts are
made, the street or lane shall be resurfaced for its entire width, if so
determined by the Inspector.  Work shall be completed by a city-approved
paving contractor.



      (11)   No cuts will be permitted to be opened if, in the
opinion of the Director of Public Works, the cut cannot be back-filled and
resurfacing restored within a reasonable amount of time, or if traffic flows
cannot be maintained.  Exceptions will be made for emergencies with due
notice to the Inspector.



      (12)   If any settlement occurs, the city may take such
corrective action as it deems appropriate and charge the permittee for such
costs, including the restoration of such excavation, or give notice to the
permittee to restore such excavation or pavement within ten days of such
receipt of notice or be in violation of this section.



   (L)   Cost of restoration of street cuts to be paid to the city. 
For those contractors and utilities that do not perform their own pavement
cut restorations, the cost of restoring pavements shall be paid to the city
on completion of the restoration and measurement of the dimensions of the cut
by the Public Works Department.  The cost shall be invoiced by the city to
the person performing the cut according to the latest Cut Restoration Fee
Schedule established by the city.  The maximum area of sidewalk or pavement
to be restored by city maintenance crews is 75 square feet.  Restoration
exceeding this limit will be the permittee’s responsibility and will be
performed in the presence of the Inspector.



   (M)   Cuts restored by authorized agencies/utilities.  Any utility
will be permitted to repair the cuts made by such utility if it has a
permanent pavement repair operation and performs such restorations in
accordance with this section.



(Am. Ord. 898, passed 9-9-03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.02  STREET NUMBERING.



   (A)   Display of street numbers required.



      (1)   It shall be the duty of the owner, owner’s agent,
renter or lessee, or occupant of residential property or the owner, owner’s
agent, lessee, renter whether a person, firm, business, partnership,
corporation or other occupant for business purposes of commercial or business
property situated in the city to fail to place thereon in some conspicuous
place an officially assigned street number that meets or exceeds the
specifications described in this section so that such number may be plainly
seen and observed from the street.



      (2)   When a plat delineating and prescribing the manner and
method of numbering houses in the city has been approved by the City Council
and Zoning Board, the number thereon designated shall be termed the official
number, and it shall be the duty of the building inspector, or such other
official or employee as the City Council may designate, upon application, to
give the correct and official number for houses, businesses and be required
to state the street upon which the house, business or building is situated
from the nearest cross street.



      (3)   It shall be the duty of the owner, owner’s agent,
renter or lessee, or occupant of residential home property or the owner,
owner’s agent, lessee, renter whether a person, firm, business,
partnership, corporation or other occupant for business purposes of
commercial or business property situated in the city to have placed an
official and correct number thereon, but in case the owner is a nonresident
of the city, it shall be the duty of his or her agent, when such owner, agent
or occupant is notified by the Building Inspector, or such other official as
the City Council may designate, to replace such official number on such home,
business or building; provided, that such owner, agent or occupant so
notified shall be allowed five days from the date of receipt of the notice to
place such official number on the home, business or building.



      (4)   The official number herein referred to shall be at least
be at least three inches high and composed of a material which will resist
tarnish, corrosion or weathering from action of the elements; provided
however, that nothing herein shall prohibit any number from being painted by
any person when such character of material is used as will, in the judgment
of the Building Inspector, be sufficient in strength, durability and service
to prevent becoming obscured and unreadable.



   (B)   Specifications for residential house numbering on curb and
gutters.  Hereafter no numbers indicating the house number shall be painted
on the curb and gutters of streets and highways within the city unless they
shall meet the following specifications, to wit:



      (1)   Paint.



         (a)   White background paint shall be regular street
marking paint.



         (b)   Black number paint shall be flat black industrial
grade.



      (2)   Numbers.



         (a)   Numbers used shall be three inches high gothic
style.



         (b)   Numbers to be in black.



      (3)   Background.



         (a)   Background shall be rectangular four by nine
inches in size.



         (b)   Background shall be white.



         (c)   Businesses with a store front constructed
primarily of display glass and doorways may chose to display the number from
the interior side of the glass without the background paint required in this
subsection.



      (4)   Workmanship.



         (a)   Background and numbers shall be neatly applied
with straight distinct lines for the rectangular background.



         (b)   Numbers shall be formed by using stencils or
methods giving results equal to stencils.



   (C)   Permit required.  Any person, firm, business, partnership,
corporation, or organization that is engaged or employed within the city
capable of meeting the specifications herein obtained by the exhibition and
demonstration satisfactory to the City Administrator, Building Inspector or a
representative official of the city shall first secure a permit from the city
to become engaged in the business of placing residential house numbers on the
curb or gutters of streets and highways in the city at the property owner’s
expense.



   (D)   Authority to enforce.  Authority to enforce this section
shall be vested in the City Administrator, Building Inspector or their
designated official city employee and the Police Department.



(Ord. 747, passed 4-12-94)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 98:  CEMETERIES



Section




General Regulations




   98.001   Rules and regulations of Oakwood Cemetery



   98.002   Use of lots



   98.003   Transfer or assignment of lots



   98.004   Perpetual care by city



   98.005   Enforcement authority



   98.006   Sale of lots or spaces




Deeds and Records




   98.020   Records and deed requirements



   98.021   Information required by city



   98.022   Notification of transfer




Markers and Monuments




   98.030   Requirements for monuments, markers and gravestones



   98.031   Approval by city required



   98.032   Owners right to erect monument and marker



   98.033   Quality of monuments and headstones




Visitors




   98.040   Hours



   98.041   Prohibited activities



   98.042   Assemblies prohibited



   98.043   Alcoholic beverages prohibited



   98.044   Proper decorum required



   98.045   Regulation and removal of persons




Cemetery Grounds and Grave Sites




   98.060   Prohibitions around lots and graves



   98.061   Items allowed at grave site



   98.062   Care or safety of items



   98.063   Planting of items prohibited



   98.064   Removal of items



   98.065   Articles prohibited



   98.066   Wooden or cast iron articles prohibited



 



   98.999   Penalty



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 98.001  RULES AND REGULATIONS OF OAKWOOD CEMETERY.



   All lots shall be held and used in accordance with the ordinances of
the city and the rules and regulations of Oakwood Cemetery now in force and
hereafter adopted.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)



§ 98.002  USE OF LOTS.



   Lots and portions thereof shall be used as burial places for human
remains and personal possessions of the deceased.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)



§ 98.003  TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT OF LOTS.



   Lot holders shall not allow interments to be made upon their lots for a
compensation, nor shall any transfer or assignment of any lot or interest
therein be valid without first obtaining the consent of the city and all
bills against said lot owner are paid.  Approved transfers or assignments
must be duly entered of record with the City Clerk.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)  Penalty, see § 98.999



§ 98.004  PERPETUAL CARE BY CITY.



   The city will perpetually care for and maintain all roads, paths,
vegetation, lots, grounds, and shrubbery.  However, lot owners must care for
and maintain all markers, monuments, vaults, etc., erected on their lots. 
The city reserves the right to remove from any lot or portion thereof
anything that conflicts with the rules and regulations.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)



§ 98.005  ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.



   City police officers are given full authority to enforce every
provision of this chapter.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)



§ 98.006  SALE OF LOTS OR SPACES.



   All  lots or spaces sold after date of this chapter shall  have a
casket encased by an underground vault.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)  Penalty, see § 98.999



DEEDS AND RECORDS



§ 98.020  RECORDS AND DEED REQUIREMENTS.



   The city shall keep a record of any lot sold and the date any deed was
executed.  Each deed executed to any person purchasing a lot in the cemetery
shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.  The provisions of this
chapter shall be written or printed in each deed to lots in the cemetery or
may be made a part thereof by reference to this chapter.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)



§ 98.021  INFORMATION REQUIRED BY CITY.



   The city requires information from the arranging funeral home to
include the deceased individual's name, lot identification, date of birth and
death, date/time of burial and type of container.  The city also requires
that a licensed mortician certify or attest to the remains being placed in
interment.  This record will be recorded by the city and will constitute a
permanent record.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)



§ 98.022  NOTIFICATION OF TRANSFER.



   The city must be notified of every transfer of ownership of any lot or
space in the Oakwood Cemetery.  Any lot holder has the right to give
permission by written order for the burial of the remains of others than his
or her immediate family, but not for monetary consideration, sale or hire of
space.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)



MARKERS AND MONUMENTS



§ 98.030  REQUIREMENTS FOR MONUMENTS, MARKERS AND GRAVESTONES.



   Flat monuments, markers and gravestones are required to be flush with
the ground in all sections with the exception of those spaces in the Southern
Red Oak section of the Oakwood Cemetery.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)  Penalty, see § 98.999



§ 98.031  APPROVAL BY CITY REQUIRED.



   The design and detail plans of all monuments, vaults, mausoleums, and
other structures and any writings, pictures, symbols or designs thereon must
be submitted in advance to the city for approval.  The city reserves the
right to reject any writings, pictures, symbols or designs that are vulgar or
obscene and any such structure that will interfere with the general effect or
maintenance of the cemetery or which does not conform with its rules and
regulations.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)  Penalty, see § 98.999



§ 98.032  OWNERS RIGHT TO ERECT MONUMENT AND MARKER.



   The owner of each lot shall have the right to erect one monument for
the entire family using such lot and one marker for each grave subject to the
provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)



§ 98.033  QUALITY OF MONUMENTS AND HEADSTONES.



   All monuments and headstones shall consist of good quality bronze,
granite or marble.  Prior to setting any monument the city must be notified
to verify and approve the placement of the monument or marker.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)  Penalty, see § 98.999



VISITORS



§ 98.040  HOURS.



   Hours of access to the cemetery shall be from 8:00 a.m. to sunset.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)



§ 98.041  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   All persons are prohibited from gathering flowers or breaking any tree,
shrub or plant, or writing upon or desecrating any monument, fence, or other
structure in or belonging to the cemetery.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)  Penalty, see § 98.999



§ 98.042  ASSEMBLIES PROHIBITED.



   No assemblies, other than funerals, are permitted, unless prior consent
of the city is obtained.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)  Penalty, see § 98.999



§ 98.043  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.



   The possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages, including beer,
wine, liquor, etc., is not permitted in any part of the cemetery grounds.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)  Penalty, see § 98.999



§ 98.044  PROPER DECORUM REQUIRED.



   Visitors are reminded that the grounds are sacredly devoted to the
interment of the dead, and that a strict observance of proper decorum will be
required by all.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)  Penalty, see § 98.999



§ 98.045  REGULATION AND REMOVAL OF PERSONS.



    The officers and agents of the city are authorized and directed to
regulate or forbid the entry of any person or persons who have no legal
reason to be therein.  Furthermore, the officers and agents of the city are
authorized and directed to remove all persons who commit any decorum
violation or who violate any of the rules or regulations set forth herein.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)



CEMETERY GROUNDS AND GRAVE SITES



§ 98.060  PROHIBITIONS AROUND LOTS AND GRAVES.



   Private fences, curbing, hedging, railing, borders, coping or stone
enclosures around lots and graves are prohibited.  No walkways or brick,
cinders, stone, marble, terra cotta, tiles, sand, cement, concrete, gravel or
wood will be allowed.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)  Penalty, see § 98.999



§ 98.061  ITEMS ALLOWED AT GRAVE SITE.



   Fresh cut flowers, artificial flowers, wreaths, potted plants, baskets,
or paper are permitted at the grave site for 48 hours following interment. 
Items not removed from grave site after the allowed time will be discarded by
cemetery crew.  This regulation does not apply to Southern Red Oak section.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)



§ 98.062  CARE OR SAFETY OF ITEMS.



   The city and the cemetery are not responsible for the care or safety of
any items placed at a grave site. Discarded, damaged, faded, torn or
unsightly items at a grave site shall be immediately removed and placed in
appropriate containers.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)



§ 98.063  PLANTING OF ITEMS PROHIBITED.



   No tree, shrub, bush, plant, flowers or similar items shall be planted
on or around a grave or lot locations.  No existing planted tree, shrub,
plant, flowers or bush shall be disturbed, damaged or removed.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)  Penalty, see § 98.999



§ 98.064  REMOVAL OF ITEMS.



   The city and the cemetery reserve the unconditional right to remove any
and all unsightly, damaged, faded or torn items from around or on grave or
lot locations.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)



§ 98.065  ARTICLES PROHIBITED.



   Except in the Southern Red Oak section it shall be unlawful for any lot
owner to allow on any lot or grave any toy, case, box, globe, shell, can,
jug, bottle or bric-a-brac of any description.  Any such article found on
the cemetery grounds shall be removed.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)  Penalty, see § 98.999



§ 98.066  WOODEN OR CAST IRON ARTICLES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any wooden or cast iron
bench, chair, settee or headboard or any article of like kind on the grounds
of the cemetery.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)  Penalty, see § 98.999



§ 98.999  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any part of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$500; each day that a violation occurs is a separate offense.



(Ord. 987, passed 11-18-09)



CHAPTER 99:  CARGO OR SHIPPING CONTAINERS



Section



   99.01   Definitions



   99.02   Temporary cargo container use



   99.03   Permanent cargo container use



   99.04   General terms of use for temporary permanent use



   99.05   Exemptions



   99.06   Existing nonconforming uses



 



   99.99   Violations and penalties



§ 99.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SHIPPING OR CARGO or STORAGE CONTAINER. An all steel container with
strength to withstand shipment, storage and handling.  Such containers
include reusable steel boxes, freight containers and bulk shipping
containers; originally a standardized reusable vessel that was designed for
and used in the parking, shipping, movement, transportation or storage of
freight, articles or goods or commodities; generally capable of being mounted
or moved on a rail car, truck trailer or loaded on a ship.



   ACTIVE BUILDING PERMIT. An unexpired and unrevoked building permit for
which the Building Inspector has not performed a final inspection.



   APPLICANT. An owner, occupant or authorized agent, or a contractor or
person with control of a property or lot.



   PERMANENT. A period of time that exceeds four months on site without
being used for transportation purposes.



   TEMPORARY. A period of time that does not exceed four months on site
while being used for storage purposes.



   CITY. City of Whitesboro, Texas.



(Ord. 1038, passed 3-13-12)



§ 99.02  TEMPORARY CARGO CONTAINER USE.



   (A)   No person shall store, maintain or otherwise keep a cargo or
shipping container temporarily on any lot or parcel of property within the
city without first having obtained and possessing an active building permit
issued by the city, and a permit for placement of a cargo/shipping container.



   (B)   Cargo/shipping containers must abide by building codes except
that:



      (1)   A foundation is not required for temporary uses;



      (2)   Ventilation is not required;



      (3)   Shall not be provided with refrigeration, heating,
electricity or plumbing;



      (4)   Tie-downs are not required for temporary uses; and



      (5)   Setbacks are to be at least 15 feet from any other
structure including other cargo/shipping containers.



   (C)   Cargo/shipping containers may be installed only in the
industrial zoning district and in residential districts with the following
restrictions:



      (1)   Cargo/shipping containers cannot be installed on any
residential site with less than 1.0 acre (or 43,560 sq.ft.)



      (2)   Only one cargo/shipping container per one acre of land.



      (3)   No cargo/shipping containers can be stacked on top of
one another or on top of any other object.



      (4)   Cargo/shipping containers must be behind or beside the
main or primary structure on the lot or parcel of land and are subject to the
same setback requirements as the main structure.



      (5)   Cargo/shipping containers must have opaque screening
such as fencing or vegetation screening of equal height to the Container to
screen the container from the street right of way or adjacent properties.



(Ord. 1038, passed 3-13-12)



§ 99.03  PERMANENT CARGO CONTAINER USE.



   (A)   No person shall store, maintain or otherwise keep a
cargo/shipping container without obtaining the required permit which shall be
issued by the city after the applicant establishes that:



      (1)   the lot or property on which the cargo/shipping
container is located is in agricultural use and is receiving an agricultural
exemption from ad valorem tax action;



      (2)   The applicant has paid the required permit fee for each
cargo container so placed;



      (3)   The applicant shall comply with reasonable conditions
which shall minimize the visual clutter when viewed from the adjacent
properties; or



      (4)   If the container is in a nonagricultural zoning area,
the applicant must obtain a permit annually for each container, provide a
specific use for the container, and provide a site map or location plan
showing the size and location of the container on the property and the
location of existing buildings.  The application for the permit and the site
plan must be approved by the building inspector to establish that the cargo
container will minimize the visual clutter and allow the continued use of
adjacent properties.



   (B)   No cargo container shall be used for human habitation or
commercial business purposes.



   (C)   No cargo container shall be used to store hazardous materials.



   (D)   No cargo container shall be used to store and keep refuse or
debris in, against, on or under the cargo container.



   (E)   Any cargo container shall be secure, structurally sound,
stable and in good repair.



(Ord. 1038, passed 3-13-12)



§ 99.04  GENERAL TERMS OF USE FOR TEMPORARY AND PERMANENT USE.



   (A)   Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked upon ten
days written notice to the owner, occupant or person in control of the
property if such person is storing, maintaining, or otherwise keeping a cargo
container in violation of this chapter.



   (B)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city to revoke a
permit may appeal to the City Council, whose decision shall be final.



(Ord. 1038, passed 3-13-12)



§ 99.05  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Contractors licensed by the Texas Department of Licensing and
Regulation may use cargo containers in any zoning district for the storage of
materials and equipment during the period of construction at the construction
site subject to the following:



      (1)   The construction must be properly permitted by the city .



      (2)   The container shall be removed from the property no
later than seven days after the final inspection and approval of the
construction by the city.



      (3)   If construction ceases for a period of 30 days or is
abandoned, the cargo container shall be removed not later than seven days
after notice to remove is issued by the city.



   (B)    Containers used for moving purposes may be placed on
residential zoned property for a maximum of 14 days.



(Ord. 1038, passed 3-13-12)



§ 99.06  EXISTING NONCONFORMING USES.



   A cargo container otherwise existing on property prior to the adoption
of this chapter that was lawfully placed and maintained shall be deemed a
legal non-conforming use. Such non-conforming use shall not be increased,
enlarged, extended or altered except the use may be voluntarily changed by
the owner to a conforming use which meets the requirements of the city code.



(Ord. 1038, passed 3-13-12)



§ 99.99  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter of the city or amendments thereto, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city shall be subject to a
fine not to exceed the sum of $500 for each offense, and each and every day
such offense shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.



(Ord. 1038, passed 3-13-12)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   AMUSEMENTS



      111.   AUTO SALVAGE, JUNK, AND SECONDHAND DEALERS



      112.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS



      113.   ALARM SYSTEMS



      114.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



      115.   TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING STUDIOS



      116.   BILLBOARD AND OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING



CHAPTER 110:  AMUSEMENTS



Section




Carnivals, Circuses, and Tent Shows




   110.01   Permit required; exemptions



   110.02   Application for permits



   110.03   Consideration of application



   110.04   Approval or denial of permit; appeal



   110.05   Compliance with permit conditions and applicable laws and
ordinances




Other Amusements




   110.20   Coin operated machines



CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES, AND TENT SHOWS



§ 110.01  PERMIT REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, group, or organization or
hold a circus, carnival, or tent show without first obtaining a permit from
the municipality.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to funeral processions, school
functions such as pep rallies, fund raisers, marching bands, and the like,
provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of
appropriate school authorities or a government agency.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.02  APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.



   (A)   Any person desiring to hold a circus, carnival, or tent show
within the municipality shall make an application in writing to the Municipal
Secretary at least ten days prior to the date such circus, carnival, or tent
show is to be conducted.



   (B)   The application for a permit shall be on forms furnished by
the municipality which shall set forth the following information:



      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person,
sponsor, group, or organization desiring such permit;



      (2)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person
who will be responsible for the conduct of the circus, carnival, or tent show;



      (3)   The names, addresses, and dates of birth of all
employees traveling with the show;



      (4)   The proposed dates the circus, carnival, or tent show is
to be held;



      (5)   The proposed location of the circus, carnival, or tent
show;



      (6)   A description of the proposed circus, carnival, or tent
show which is to be held; and



      (7)   Any additional information which the municipality may
deem pertinent as to whether a permit should or should not be issued.



   (C)   Each application for a permit shall be accompanied with a
permit fee as provided for in § 6.00 of the Fee Schedule, as set forth in
Appendix 1 of this code, before its consideration.  This fee shall be
nonrefundable regardless of whether the permit is granted or denied.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.03  CONSIDERATION OF APPLICATION.



   (A)   Upon the filing of an application for a permit for a circus,
carnival, or tent show, the Municipal Secretary shall cause or make an
investigation to determine whether or not the proposed event is in conflict
with any laws or ordinances and not detrimental to the public health, safety,
and welfare.  When reviewing the permit application the following concerns,
and any other information as may otherwise be obtained, shall be considered
before approving any permit:



      (1)   The proposed event will not substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian;



      (2)   The proposed event will not require the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the municipality to properly police the
event that customary protection to the municipality will not be available;



      (3)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles will
not unduly interfere with proper fire and ambulance service to all portions
of the municipality;



      (4)   The conduct of the event is not reasonably likely to
cause injury to persons or property or to provoke disorderly conduct or
create a disturbance;



      (5)   The event is for a meaningful purpose and is of
sufficient interest to the general public to justify any inconvenience it may
cause;



      (6)   The event has been planned to ensure that the general
safety, health, and welfare of all persons is provided as is reasonably
possible.



   (B)   The Municipal Secretary shall consult with the Chief of Police
and any other municipal officials and staff deemed to have an interest in or
information regarding the desirability of issuing a permit under the terms of
this chapter.



§ 110.04  APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF PERMIT; APPEAL.



   After completion of his or her investigation, the Municipal Secretary
shall make a recommendation to the Mayor regarding approval of the permit. 
The Mayor shall then approve or disapprove the permit.  If approved, the
Municipal Secretary shall then issue a permit to the applicant.  If
disapproved, the applicant may appeal such decision to the Council.  An
appeal fee of $20 shall be paid to the Municipal Secretary prior to the
Council hearing the appeal to partially defer the administrative cost of
handling the appeal.  If the Council approves the application for a permit,
the Municipal Secretary shall then issue a permit to the applicant.



§ 110.05  COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT  CONDITIONS AND APPLICABLE LAWS AND 
ORDINANCES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person participating in any parade for
which a permit hereunder has been issued to fail to comply with all
directions and conditions of such permit and all applicable laws and
ordinances.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Parades and processions, see § 70.090



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate shows and amusements, see Tex. Local Gov't Code
§ 215.032



OTHER AMUSEMENTS



§ 110.20  COIN OPERATED MACHINES.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply.



   COIN OPERATED MACHINES. Every coin operated machine of any kind or
character which dispenses or vends or which is used or operated for, by or
with coins or metal slugs, tokens, or checks, except as hereinafter exempt.



   (B)   The following coin operated machines are exempt from this
section: gas meters, pay telephones, food vending machines, confection
vending machines, beverage vending machines, merchandise vending machines,
cigarette vending machines which are now subject to a occupation or gross
receipts tax, stamp vending machines and service coin operated machines which
are devices which dispense service only and not merchandise, music, skill or
pleasure.



   (C)   An application for a license must be filed with the City
Secretary on a form provided for by the city.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, business,
partnership, corporation or other operation to establish any coin operated
machine without first attaching and affixing thereto in a visible place the
license receipt covering such machine for the current year in which the
machine is being operated.



   (E)   A license fee as provided for in § 6.01 of the Fee Schedule,
as set forth in Appendix 1 of this code, shall be collected from each
establishment or business using coin operated machines that are non-exempt
and such payment shall accompany the application filed with the city. 
Failure to file an application and/or pay such fee shall be a violation of
this section.



(Ord. 598, passed 2-5-81)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 111:  AUTO SALVAGE, JUNK, AND SECONDHAND DEALERS



Section




Auto Salvage Dealers




   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   License required



   111.03   Application for license



   111.04   Investigation



   111.05   Public hearing on application



   111.06   Issuance of license



   111.07   Transfer of license



   111.08   Content of license



   111.09   Fees



   111.10   General operating requirements



   111.11   Revocation or suspension of license



   111.12   Declaration of public nuisance




Junk and Secondhand Dealers




   111.20   Definitions



   111.21   Record of and receipt for property purchased



   111.22   Stock to be open for examination



   111.23   Purchases to be retained at least 72 hours



   111.24   Purchasing or receiving goods from minors



AUTO SALVAGE DEALERS



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANTIQUE AUTO.  Passenger cars, trucks, or motor vehicles manufactured
in 1945 or before or which become 35 or more years old.



   AUTO SALVAGE BUSINESS OR JUNKYARD. A place where one or more units of
inoperative motor vehicles are kept for the purpose of storage or sale of all
or the parts thereof of such inoperative motor vehicle.



   AUTO SALVAGE DEALER.  Any person, firm, or corporation which engages
in the business of disassembling any type of motor vehicle for the purpose of
sale of such vehicle or of any part therefrom.



   JUNKED VEHICLE.  A motor vehicle or self- propelled vehicle which is
inoperative and does not have lawfully affixed thereto an unexpired license
plate or plates and a valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate and
which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, or discarded and
incapable of movement under its power, or remains inoperative for a
continuous period of more than 90 days.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle or self- propelled vehicle subject
to registration pursuant to the Texas Certificate of Title Act, being Tex.
Transp. Code §§ 501.001 et seq., as amended.



§ 111.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
engage in the business of an auto salvage dealer within the municipality or
to continue in such business unless and until he or she shall have first
obtained a license under §§ 111.02 through 111.06 of this chapter.



   (B)   Any auto salvage business in the munici- pality that does not
conform with the regulations imposed in this chapter is declared to be a
public nuisance.



   (C)   No license shall be required of an individual collecting,
storing, dismantling, or refurbishing antique autos for his or her own use in
order to restore, preserve, and maintain an antique motor vehicle for
historic interest rather than for personal transportation.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.03  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Any person desiring to engage in the business of auto salvage
dealer shall make application for a license on forms furnished by the
Municipal Secretary.



   (B)   The application shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of applicant; if the applicant is a
partnership, the names and addresses of all partners; if the applicant is a
corporation, the names and addresses of all officers of such corporation.



      (2)   The location of the business proposed to be licensed
hereunder and a description of the property by metes and bounds.



      (3)   Such other information as may be required by the
Municipal Secretary.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.04  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Applications for a license to engage in the business of auto
salvage dealer shall be referred to the Council.



   (B)   The Council shall make the following findings:



      (1)   That applicant's business responsibility and moral
character are satisfactory and that all agents or officers of the applicant
who will take part in the operation of such business are capable of operating
the business in a manner consistent with the public health, safety, and
morals, and that neither the applicant nor any person associated therewith
have ever been convicted of any felony crime.



      (2)   That any proposed or existing buildings or equipment
with which such business is being operated or is to be operated conform to
the requirements of the this code, the Building Code, and other applicable
ordinances of the municipality.



      (3)   That the proposed or existing premises and equipment
upon which such business is being or is to be operated conform to the
requirements of all applicable health regulations of the municipality and
state.



      (4)   That the proposed or existing premises and equipment
upon which such business is being or is to be operated conform to the
requirements of all applicable fire prevention regulations of the
municipality and state.



§ 111.05  PUBLIC HEARING ON  APPLICATION.



   A public hearing will be held to gather public comment on the
application.  The hearing will be held after due notice is given by regular
mail to all persons owning property within 200 feet of such proposed location
and notice is published in a newspaper of general circulation more than ten
days prior to such hearing.



§ 111.06  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   If the findings required in §§ 111.04 and 111.05 are favorable to
applicant, the Municipal Secretary shall notify applicant that such license
will be issued upon payment of the prescribed fees.  If any of the findings
are unfavorable to applicant, the Municipal Secretary shall notify applicant
that such license is disapproved and that no license will be issued.  Upon
request from applicant, the Municipal Secretary will provide applicant with a
written statement of the grounds upon which the application was disapproved.



§ 111.07  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   The license issued under § 111.06 shall not betransferred or assigned
to any other person, firm, or corporation unless and until the proposed
assignee has met all the requirements of §§ 111.03 through 111.05 the same
as if such assignee were an original applicant.



§ 111.08  CONTENT OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Licenses issued hereunder shall not be used in any location
other than the one described in the application upon which it is issued and
shall state on its face the following:




“This license applies only to the premises indicated herein and authorizes
the licensee to operate an auto salvage business in a lawful place and manner
only; it is not a substitute for any certificate of occupancy, building
permit, or other certificate or permit that may be required by law of the
licensee, and it does not relieve the licensee of the responsibility of
having all such permits or certificates at all times and to comply with all
laws affecting the business licensed hereby.”




   (B)   The license shall further state on its face the date of its
issuance and the date of its expiration.



§ 111.09  FEES.



   To defray the expense of administration of these provisions, the fees
as prescribed in § 8.00 of the Fee Schedule, set forth in Appendix 1 of this
code, are established.



§ 111.10  GENERAL OPERATING  REQUIREMENTS.



   The following regulations shall apply to all auto salvage businesses in
the municipality and it shall be unlawful to operate such businesses in any
manner except in accordance with these regulations:



   (A)   The license issued pursuant to § 111.06 shall be plainly
displayed on the business premises.



   (B)   The premises upon which such auto salvage business is operated
shall be maintained in a sanitary condition.



   (C)   No space not covered by this license shall be used in the auto
salvage business.



   (D)   No water shall be allowed to stand on the premises in such a
manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes.



   (E)   Weeds and vegetation, other than trees and decorative
shrubbery, shall be kept at a height of not more than six inches.



   (F)   No garbage or other waste liable to give off a noxious odor or
attract vermin shall be kept on the premises nor shall any refuse of any kind
be kept on the premises, unless such refuse is salvageable parts in use in
the auto salvage business.



   (G)   No junk, parts, or salvage shall be allowed to rest upon or
protrude over any public street, walkway, or curb, or become scattered or
blown off the premises.



   (H)   Automobiles shall not be stacked upon one another and shall be
kept and maintained at all times in rows not exceeding two automobiles in
depth.  Such rows shall be a minimum of 20 feet apart, so as to provide
accessibility for firefighting and other safety purposes.



   (I)   No combustible materials of any kind not necessary to the
licensed business shall be kept on the premises nor shall the premises be
allowed to become a fire hazard.



   (J)   No burning of any material shall be allowed on the premises.



   (K)   The area on the premises where the auto salvage business is
conducted shall be enclosed, except for entrances and exits, with a
nontransparent vertical wall or fence of a minimum height of six feet
measured from ground level.  Entrances and exits shall not be wider nor more
numerous than reasonably necessary for the conduct of the business.  All
such entrances and exits shall be covered with paving of a type of material
approved by the municipality.



   (L)   The licensee shall permit inspections of the business premises
by any representative of the municipality at any reasonable time.



   (M)   No auto salvage dealer licensed hereunder or his or her agent
or employee shall purchase or receive any merchandise for use in the licensed
business without a written evidence of such transaction stating with
particularity the merchandise received, its serial number if available, and a
brief written description.  The person from whom such material is purchased
shall be described by name, address, and driver's license number or date of
birth.  Such written evidence of transaction shall be held available for
inspection by any representative of the municipality for a period of at least
six months after the transaction.



   (N)   No auto salvage business premises shall be allowed to become a
nuisance, public or private, nor shall any such premises be operated in such
a manner as to become injurious to the health, safety, or welfare of the
community or of any residents in close proximity thereto.



   (O)   No motor vehicle may be dismantled, wrecked, or parted out
unless the owner or operator of the auto salvage business has a certificate
of title, a certificate of authority to demolish, a police sales receipt, or
a transfer document issued by the state Department of Labor and Standards or
other authorized agency of the state.



   (P)   No person operating an auto salvage business shall store or
keep discarded motor vehicles or parts thereof, waste, junk, tires, or tire
carcasses in stacks or piles exceeding six feet in height or 625 square feet
in floor or lot area.  An aisle of at least ten feet shall be maintained at
all times between such piles or stacks of motor vehicles and parts thereof,
waste material, junk, tire or tire carcasses, or parts thereof.



   (Q)   Gasoline or other fuel shall be drained from fuel tanks of all
inoperative motor vehicles or other self propelled vehicles stored or kept on
the premises of an auto salvage business unless such vehicles are capable of
being removed from the premises under their own power.



   (R)   No automobile salvage business, wrecking yard, or junkyard
shall be operated in violation of the Texas Highway Beautification Act, as
amended, and such Act is incorporated herein by reference as if fully set
forth verbatim.



§ 111.11  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF  LICENSE.



   The Council may revoke or suspend the license of any auto salvage
dealer licensed hereunder at any time upon finding that:



   (A)   The auto salvage dealer or any officer or agent of such dealer
who takes part in the operation of the licensed business is not capable of
operating such business in a manner consistent with the public's health or
safety or has been convicted of any felony crime;



   (B)   That there has been a failure to comply with the provisions of
this chapter or of the provisions of any national, state, or local laws
applicable to the premises, equipment, or operation of such licensed business;



   (C)   the licensee has obtained such license through fraud or
misstatement;



   (D)   the licensed business is being conducted in a manner
detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public, or is a
nuisance, or is being carried on in an unlawful manner; or



   (E)   The licensed business is suspended or has been inactive for a
period of 12 consecutive months.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.12  DECLARATION OF PUBLIC  NUISANCE.



   Any inoperative motor vehicle or parts thereof which are visible from a
public place, public right-of- way, or property of another within the
municipality shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and it shall be unlawful
for any person to cause or to maintain such a public nuisance by wrecking,
dismantling, partially dismantling, rendering inoperable, abandoning, or
discarding a motor vehicle on the real property of another or suffer, permit,
or allow any inoperative motor vehicle or part thereof to be left, parked, or
maintained on his or her own real propertyfor the purposes of resale of the
parts thereof without compliance with the terms and conditions of this
chapter.  Failure to comply with the terms of this chapter shall be deemed
to constitute a public nuisance.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate auto salvage dealers, see Tex. Transp. Code §§
396.001 et seq.



JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS



§ 111.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   JUNK DEALER.  Any person who engages in the business of buying,
selling, trading, or otherwise dealing in new or used scrap materials,
including ferrous and nonferrous metal, brass, waste material, and the
like.  Such term shall also include any person who engages in the business
of processing iron, steel, or nonferrous scrap, and whose principal product
is scrap iron and steel or nonferrous scrap for sale for remelting purposes.



   SECONDHAND DEALER.  Any person who engages in the business of buying,
selling, trading, or otherwise dealing in used goods for the purpose of
resale.  This term shall not apply to dealers in used motor vehicles.



   USED.  Any goods, products, wares or articles of any sort which have
previously been owned by someone other than the manufacturer or dealer whose
business it is to sell such goods, products, wares or articles of any sort to
the public.



§ 111.21  RECORD OF AND RECEIPT FOR  PROPERTY PURCHASED.



   (A)   Every junk dealer and secondhand dealer shall keep at his or
her place of business a substantial, well bound book, in which he or she
shall enter daily a full description of all personal property purchased or
otherwise received in the course of his business operations, together with
the date of receipt.  Such description shall include any prominent or
descriptive marks visible on such property and, when applicable, the size,
weight, material, length, number of items, capacity, and any other
designations or descriptions customarily employed in the sale and purchase of
such property, whether new or used.



   (B)   The entry required by this section shall include the name and
address of the person from whom the property was received, his or her age,
complexion, and color and any prominent or descriptive marks visible on such
person.  It shall also include such person's age, business and residence
telephone numbers, and state driver's license number.  If the person does
not have a state driver's license, then proof of identity shall be made by
social security card and the serial number duly recorded.  Other means of
identification, when approved by the Chief of Police, may be used if accurate
identity can be established and if sufficient information is obtained to
enable the police to locate the person.



   (C)   The entry required by this chapter shall include the license
plate number and a description of the vehicle used to transport the property
purchased or otherwise received.



   (D)   All entries made in the book required by this section shall be
made in ink, and the book shall be kept clean and neat.  Every junk dealer
or secondhand dealer, upon request, shall submit and exhibit this book to any
police officer or authorized inspector of the municipality at any time during
ordinary business hours.



   (E)   Every junk dealer and secondhand dealer shall prepare and
furnish a receipt to the seller or transferor of the property.  Such receipt
shall be dated on the actual date of the transaction and shall be numbered
and issued in sequence.  An accurate copy or record of receipts issued shall
be retained for a period of not less than four years and shall be available
for inspection, upon request during business hours, by any police officer or
authorized inspector of the municipality.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.22  STOCK TO BE OPEN FOR  EXAMINATION.



   The entire stock or inventory of any junk dealer or secondhand dealer
shall at all times be available and accessible for examination by any police
officer or authorized inspector of the municipality.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.23  PURCHASES TO BE RETAINED AT  LEAST 72 HOURS.



   No junk dealer or secondhand dealer shall sell, dismantle, deface, or
in any manner alter or dispose of any article received by him or her in the
course of his or her business operations within 72 hours from the time of
purchasing or otherwise receiving such article.  During such 72 hour period,
all items of property shall be stored or displayed at the business location
where received, in the exact form received, and in a manner so as to be
identifiable from the description entered in the record book required by §
111.21.  Such property shall not be kept in secret storage or otherwise
handled so as to prevent or impede its examination by any police officer or
authorized inspector of the municipality.  Further, no article shall be
sold, dismantled, defaced or in any manner disposed of until the same shall
have been openly stored or displayed on the premises where from it is to be
sold, dismantled, defaced, or in any manner disposed of, for a period of at
least 72 hours.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.24  PURCHASING OR RECEIVING  GOODS FROM MINORS.



   No junk dealer or secondhand dealer shall purchase or otherwise receive
in the course of his or her business any goods, articles, or things of value
the ownership of which is in or which is claimed by any minor, or which may
be in the possession of or under the control of a minor, unless the minor's
parent or guardian shall state in writing that such transaction took place
with such parent's or guardian's full knowledge and consent.  It shall be
the duty of such junk dealer or secondhand dealer to preserve and keep on
file, and available for inspection, such written statements of consent.



Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 112:  PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS



Section



   112.01   Peddler or solicitor defined



   112.02   Permit required



   112.03   Application for permit



   112.04   Bond required



   112.05   Investigation of applicant



   112.06   Issuance and duration of permit



   112.07   Permit fees



   112.08   Permit must be carried



   112.09   Revocation of permit



   112.10   Permit not transferable



   112.11   Refusal to leave premises prohibited



   112.12   No peddling where posted



   112.13   Hours when peddling prohibited



   112.14   Consumers right to cancel order



   112.15   Exemptions



 



   112.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate peddlers, see Tex. Local Gov't Code § 215.031



§ 112.01  PEDDLER OR SOLICITOR DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this chapter, a PEDDLER, ITINERANT VENDOR, ITINERANT
MERCHANT or SOLICITOR shall mean any person, partnership, firm or corporation
going from place to place in the municipality soliciting, exhibiting,
selling, canvassing or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders
for any goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services, and subscriptions to
magazines or publications.  The same shall also include any person,
partnership, firm or corporation soliciting, exhibiting, selling, canvassing,
or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for any goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs, services, and subscriptions to magazines or
publications upon or from a truck or other vehicle whether on the streets or
from any property whatever in the municipality, whether public or private. 
Anyone who solicits orders and, as a separate transaction, makes deliveries
to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade these provisions shall
be deemed a PEDDLER, ITINERANT MERCHANT , or SOLICITOR .



§ 112.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, firm, or corporation
to peddle, sell, solicit, exhibit, or take orders or offer to take orders for
any goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services, and subscriptions to
magazines or publications without first having obtained a permit to do so
from the Municipal Secretary.



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.03  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Any person desiring to obtain a permit as required by this
chapter shall make written application to the Municipal Secretary.  The
application shall show at least the following:



      (1)   The name of the applicant and his or her address;



      (2)   The name and address of the person or firm the applicant
represents;



      (3)   A physical description and the social security number
and driver's license number of the applicant;



      (4)   A record indicating any prior conviction of a felony or
misdemeanor involving theft, fraud, bribery or perjury;



      (5)   The name of the immediate last preceding three
municipalities in which the applicant worked;



      (6)   The product or service offered or to be offered for sale;



      (7)   Whether the applicant will demand, accept or receive
payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery of any product or
service ordered;



      (8)   The date the permit was issued; and



      (9)   The period of time such applicant wishes to take orders
in the municipality.



   (B)   In addition, there shall also be attached to each application
for a permit the following:



      (1)   A recent photographic likeness of the applicant's face
as well as any persons working with the applicant; and



      (2)   Satisfactory proof that the applicant represents the
company or individual he or she purports to represent.



   (C)   In addition, the applicant may be required to submit to
fingerprinting.  Such fingerprinting shall be kept as a permanent record
with the application.



   (D)   No permit shall be issued until such written application has
been filed with the Municipal Secretary for a period of 24 hours.



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.04  BOND REQUIRED.



   (A)   If the application shows the applicant is to take orders for
future delivery, he or she shall give bond signed as surety by some surety
company authorized to do business in this state, conditioned for the final
delivery of goods or services in accordance with the terms of such order
obtained and also conditioned to indemnify any and all purchases or customers
for any and all defects in material or workmanship that may exist in the
articles sold by the principal in such bond, at the time of delivery, that
may be discovered by such purchaser or customer within 30 days after
delivery.  Such bond shall be in the sum of not less than $2,000 and shall
remain in full force and effect for the entire duration of the license permit.



   (B)   Any bona fide charitable, religious, educational, or
philanthropic organization or any person engaged in interstate commerce shall
not be required to give a surety bond even though orders may be taken for
future delivery.



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.05  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.



   It shall be the duty of the Municipal Secretary to investigate each
person that has made an application for a permit.



§ 112.06  ISSUANCE AND DURATION OF  PERMIT.



   Upon completion of the investigation, the Municipal Secretary shall
issue or refuse to issue a permit.  All permits issued shall be valid for a
period of one year, unless sooner revoked.



§ 112.07  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Each applicant for a permit under this chapter shall be
charged a permit fee as provided for in § 16.00 of the Fee Schedule set
forth in Appendix 1 of this code.  Such fees shall be paid by the person
desiring such permit and are payable at the time of application.  This fee
shall not be prorated nor refunded regardless of whether a permit is
issued.  No fee shall be charged to persons offering for sale agricultural
products, meats, poultry, or other articles of food grown or produced by such
persons.  A permit shall be issued to such persons by the Municipal
Secretary upon satisfactory proof that they have produced or grown the
products to be peddled and such license shall so state.



   (B)   No fee shall be charged to any bona fide charitable,
religious, educational, or philanthropic organization, or persons engaged in
interstate commerce.  The term INTERSTATE COMMERCE means soliciting,
selling, or taking orders, or offering to take orders, for any goods or
services which, at the time the order is taken, are in or will be produced in
any federal district or territory, any commonwealth, or any state other than
this state, and shipped or introduced into this municipality in the
fulfillment of such orders.



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.08  PERMIT MUST BE CARRIED.



   It shall be unlawful for any peddler, itinerant merchant, or solicitor
to engage in any activity for which a permit is required by this chapter,
unless he carries such permit on his or her person while so engaged.  Every
peddler, itinerant merchant, or solicitor shall display his or her permit
upon request of any person and failure to so display such permit shall be
grounds for revocation and shall constitute a violation of this chapter.



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.09  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   After such permit has been issued and the municipality finds that the
permit was obtained by false representation in the application or that the
permit holder has committed any act or practice that violates Tex. Business &
Commerce Code § 17.46 et seq., otherwise known as the Texas Deceptive Trade
Practice Act, or has committed any crime or misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude or any violation of this chapter or any other municipal ordinance
or state or federal law, the municipality may revoke such permit by giving
written notice to the holder and a hearing held.  Such notice shall be given
by depositing same in the United States mail, certified or registered mail
return receipt requested, addressed to the permittee at the address stated on
the license application.  Such hearing shall be held not less than ten days
after the service of such notice.



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.10  PERMIT NOT TRANSFERABLE.



   No permit issued under this chapter shall be transferable or assignable
nor give authority to more than one person to engage in business as a
peddler, itinerant merchant or solicitor, but any person having obtained such
permit may have the assistance of one or more persons in conducting such
business.



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.11  REFUSAL TO LEAVE PREMISES  PROHIBITED



   It shall be unlawful for any peddler, itinerant vendor, or solicitor
who enters upon premises owned, occupied, or leased by another person to
willfully refuse to leave such premises after having been notified by the
owner or possessor of such premises or his or her agent.



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.12  NO PEDDLING WHERE POSTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any peddler, itinerant vendor, or solicitor to
enter upon any private premises when the same is posted with a sign stating
“No Peddlers Allowed” or “No Solicitation Allowed” or other words to
such effect.



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.13  HOURS WHEN PEDDLING  PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any peddler, itinerant vendor, or solicitor to
engage in the business of peddling at any time between sunset and 30 minutes
after sunrise, except when the peddler, itinerant vendor, or solicitor has
specific invitation and appointment with the customer.



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.14  CONSUMERS RIGHT TO CANCEL  ORDER.



   (A)   All peddlers, itinerant vendors, or solicitors shall provide
to the consumer, in writing, the right to cancel a solicitation transaction
made in person or by telephone until midnight of the third business day after
the day on which the consumer signs an agreement or offer to purchase any
goods or services. For the purpose of telephone solicitations, the date of
transaction means the day the consumer receives the goods or services
purchased in a solicitation transaction.  If the consumer chooses to cancel
the solicitation transaction, notification by mail shall be considered given
at the time mailed, as evidenced by the postmark; notification by telegram
shall be considered given at the time filed for transmission; and
notification by any other writing shall be considered given at the time
delivered to the merchant's designated place of business.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any peddler, itinerant vendor,
solicitor, or company represented to refuse to allow the customer to cancel
the solicitation transaction.



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.15  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following persons, partnerships, firms, or corporations shall be
exempt from the permit provisions of this chapter:



   (A)   Ordinary commercial travelers who sell or exhibit for sale
goods or services to local firms or businesses and not to residences;



   (B)   Daily deliveries of milk and bakery and other food products,
liquor deliveries, or newspaper deliveries;



   (C)   Insurance salespersons, real estate salespersons, and other
professionals licensed by the state, except that insurance salespersons shall
personally solicit only at the specific request of the owner or occupant of
the business or residence at which the solicitation is being made.



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, or individual who shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
fined in any sum as provided for in § 10.99 of this code.  Each and every
day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.



CHAPTER 113:  ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   Permit required



   113.03   Application; false statements; issuance; transferability;
permit fees



   113.04   Maintenance of system



   113.05   Manual reset required



   113.06   Indirect alarm reporting



   113.07   Recorded message alarm notification prohibited



   113.08   Alarm dispatch records



   113.09   Determination of false alarm notification



   113.10   Fees for false alarm notifications



   113.11   Revocation of permit



   113.12   Appeal from denial of issuance or revocation of permit



   113.13   Liability; city to be held harmless



 



   113.99   Penalties



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM NOTIFICATION.  A notification intended to summon the Police or
Fire Department, which is designed either to be initiated purposely by a
person or by an alarm system that responds to a stimulus characteristic of
unauthorized intrusion or fire.



   ALARM SITE.  A single premises or location (one street address) served
by an alarm system or systems that are under the control of one owner.



   ALARM SYSTEMS.  Any mechanical or electrical device which is used to
protect buildings or premises from criminal acts or unauthorized entries by
warning persons of a crime or unauthorized entry, or fire, through the
emission of a sound or the transmission of a signal or message.  Alarm
systems do not include an alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is
permanently located at a site.



   AUTOMATIC ALARM NOTIFICATION.  An alarm notification sent over
telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice
message, synthesized voice message, or coded signal indicating the existence
of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.



   FALSE ALARM NOTIFICATION.  An alarm notification to the Police or Fire
Department, when the responding officer finds no evidence of unauthorized
intrusion, attempted unauthorized intrusion, robbery, attempted robbery, an
attempt to take a person hostage, or fire.



   LOCAL ALARM.  An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site
that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure.



   PERMIT HOLDER.  The person designated in the application who is
responsible for responding to alarms and giving access to the site and who is
also responsible for proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and
payment of fees.



(Ord. 806, passed 11-17-97)



§ 113.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   The owner or person in control of a premises commits an offense if he
or she installs an alarm system or possesses an activated alarm system
without first obtaining a permit from the Chief of Police.  A separate
permit is required for each alarm site.



(Ord. 806, passed 11-17-97)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.03  APPLICATION; FALSE STATE- MENTS; ISSUANCE; TRANSFERABILITY;
PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   The application for a permit shall contain the following
information:



      (1)   Name, business address, home address, business telephone
number, and home telephone number of the person in whose name the permit is
requested;



      (2)   Name, business telephone number, and home telephone
number of two persons who are authorized and have agreed to receive
notification at any time from responding police or fire personnel to come to
the alarm site within 30 minutes after receiving such notification;



      (3)   Classification of the alarm site as residential,
commercial or banking institution;



      (4)   Purpose of the alarm, i.e., burglary, robbery, fire, or
emergency medical assistance;



      (5)   Any other information required by the Chief of Police to
insure compliance with all provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The permit holder shall notify the Chief of Police of any
change in the information contained in the application within five days of
such change.



   (C)   A permit shall be valid for the period from January 1 through
December 31 of the same year issued.  However, if a permit is obtained after
December 1, the permit shall be valid through December 31 of the next
calendar year.  All permits expire on December 31st and will require a
renewal fee as provided for in § 13.00(A) of the Fee Schedule, as set forth
in Appendix 1 of this code; permit renewals for the next calendar year shall
start December 1 of the year of expiration.  Permits acquired after the date
of expiration shall require a new application and an additional late charge
as provided for in § 13.00(A) of the Fee Schedule, as set forth in Appendix
1 of this code.  Renewals may be made on weekdays during normal business
hours in person, by telephone or by mail.



   (D)   If the application complies with all requirements of this
ordinance, the Chief shall issue a permit upon receipt of a permit fee as
provided for in § 13.00(A) of the Fee Schedule, as set forth in Appendix 1
of this code.



   (E)   Any false statement of a material nature made by an applicant
for the purpose of obtaining a permit shall be grounds for denial of the
issuance of the permit, or cancellation of the permit if it has been issued.



   (F)   A permit is not assignable or transferable to another person.



(Ord. 806, passed 11-17-97)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.04  MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.



   The permit holder shall maintain the alarm system in such a manner as
to assure proper operation and to minimize false alarm notifications.



(Ord. 806, passed 11-17-97)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.05  MANUAL RESET REQUIRED.



   The permit holder for an alarm system which causes an alarm
notification to be sent directly to the city shall adjust the mechanism so
that upon activation the system will not transmit another alarm signal
without first being manually reset.



(Ord. 806, passed 11-17-97)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.06  INDIRECT ALARM REPORTING.



   A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications
to the city shall communicate alarm notifications to the city in a manner and
form determined by the Chief of Police and shall comply with the requirements
of this chapter and any rules and regulations promulgated by the Chief of
Police.



(Ord. 806, passed 11-17-97)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.07  RECORDED MESSAGE ALARM  NOTIFICATION PROHIBITED.



   Following the effective date of this chapter, no permit will be issued
for the use of systems using automatic telephone dialing to report an alarm
condition by means of a recorded message directly to the Police Department.



(Ord. 806, passed 11-17-97)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.08  ALARM DISPATCH RECORDS.



   The Chief of Police shall maintain a written record of all alarm
notifications, including but not limited to the following:



   (A)   Name of permit holder;



   (B)   Location of alarm site;



   (C)   Date and time of alarm notification;



   (D)   Weather conditions;



   (E)   Name of permit holder's representative on premises; and



   (F)   Whether the notification was a false alarm notification.



(Ord. 806, passed 11-17-97)



§ 113.09  DETERMINATION OF FALSE  ALARM NOTIFICATION.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall not consider an alarm notification
to be false if he or she determines that the alarm was caused by:



      (1)   A natural or man-made catastrophe;



      (2)   Severe weather that causes physical damage to the
premises;



      (3)   Vandalism;



      (4)   Telephone line outage;



      (5)   Attempted entry or attempted robbery; or



      (6)   Accidental activation by the occupant, provided the
alarm is immediately reported to the Police Department



   (B)   The determination of the Chief of Police in classifying an
alarm notification as false or actual is final.



(Ord. 806, passed 11-17-97)



§ 113.10  FEES FOR FALSE ALARM  NOTIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (B), (C) and (D) of this
section, the holder of an alarm permit or alarm site, responded to upon call,
shall pay a fee for each false alarm notification emitted from an alarm
system as follows:



      (1)   Beginning January 1 of each year, three false alarms
will be answered free of charge;



      (2)   Each false alarm thereafter will be billed at the rate
per response as provided for in § 13.00(B) of the Fee Schedule, as set forth
in Appendix 1 of this code.



   (B)   If a person notifies the Chief of Police and applies for an
alarm permit before a new alarm system is put into service, no service fee
will be assessed during the first 60 days after the system is put into
service, and alarm notification during that period will not be counted in
determining when a service fee shall be assessed.



   (C)   If the responding police or fire officer determines that an
alarm notification was caused by unauthorized intrusion, attempted
unauthorized intrusion, robbery, attempted robbery, an attempt to take a
person hostage, or fire (to include smoke), that notification will not be
counted in determining when a service fee will be assessed.



   (D)   An alarm notification will not be counted in determining when
a service fee will be assessed if the permittee can prove that the alarm
notification was the result of severe weather conditions, such as tornado,
hurricane, earthquake, or other weather condition that causes physical damage
to the alarm site, or the result of a malfunction in the operation of
telephone lines for the transmission of alarm signals, proof of the latter
being documented in the form of telephone company work orders or time stamped
records from the alarm company showing the periods of interrupted service.



(Ord. 806, passed 11-17-97)



§ 113.11  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   The Chief of Police shall revoke an alarm permit if he or she
determines that:



   (A)   There is a false statement of a material nature in the
application for a permit;



   (B)   The permit holder has violated any provision of this section;
or



   (C)   The permit holder is delinquent in payment of fees for false
alarm notifications.



(Ord. 806, passed 11-17-97)



§ 113.12  APPEAL FROM DENIAL OF  ISSUANCE OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   If the Chief of Police denies the issuance of a permit, or
suspends a permit, he or she shall send to the applicant or permit holder by
certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his or her action
setting forth the reason for such action and advising the applicant or permit
holder of the right to an appeal.  The applicant or permit holder may appeal
the decision of the Chief of Police to the Municipal Court of the city by
filing with the court a written request for a hearing, setting forth his or
her objections to the action of the Chief of Police, within ten days after
receipt of the notice from the Chief of Police.  The filing of a request for
an appeal hearing with the Municipal Court shall stay the action of the Chief
of Police in denying the issuance of or suspending a permit until a final
decision on the appeal is made by the Municipal Court.  If a request for an
appeal hearing is not made within the ten day limit, the action of the Chief
of Police is final.



   (B)   The Judge of the Municipal Court shall preside at any
administrative hearing conducted under the provisions of this section and
shall consider evidence offered by any interested person.  The formal rules
of evidence shall not apply at such hearing.  The Judge of the Municipal
Court shall make his or her decision on the basis of a preponderance of the
evidence presented and matters officially noticed at the hearing.  The Judge
of the Municipal Court shall render a written decision setting forth findings
of fact and conclusions of law within 30 days after the request for an appeal
hearing is filed.  Such decision shall affirm, reverse, or modify the action
of the Chief of Police and his or her decision is final.



(Ord. 806, passed 11-17-97)



§ 113.13  LIABILITY; CITY TO BE HELD  HARMLESS.



   The application to the city or its designated agent shall contain a
provision that the city shall not be liable for any failure of service or
damages, including damages resulting from breaking to gain entrance, that
might result from the installation or operation of any receiving station
alarm, automatic dialing device, or local alarm.  All applicants must agree
to indemnify the city for all claims, demands, judgments, or other liability
in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney.



(Ord. 806, passed 11-17-97)



§ 113.99  PENALTIES.



   A person commits an offense if he or she violates by commission or
omission any provision of this chapter that imposes upon him or her a duty or
responsibility.  Each day or portion of a day in which the violation exists
or is committed shall constitute a separate offense.  Each offense is
punishable as provided in § 10.99.



(Ord. 806, passed 11-17-97)



CHAPTER 114:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section




General




   114.01   Purpose and intent



   114.02   Definitions



   114.03   Classifications



   114.04   Licenses required




Licenses




   114.10   Issuance



   114.11   License fees



   114.12   Inspection



   114.13   Expiration



   114.14   Suspension



   114.15   Revocation



   114.16   Appeal



   114.17   Transfer




Locations; additional regulations




   114.25   Location



   114.26   Exemptions from locational restrictions



   114.27   Additional regulations for escort agencies



   114.28   Additional regulations for nude model studios



   114.29   Additional regulations for adult theaters and adult motion
picture theaters



   114.30   Additional regulations for adult motels



   114.31   Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit
films or videos



   114.32   Display of sexually explicit materials to minors



 



   114.99   Penalty



GENERAL



§ 114.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually
oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and
general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the
purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of
any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. 
Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or
deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market.



   (B)   It is the intent of the City Council of the City of Whitesboro
that the locational regulations of § 114.25 of this chapter are promulgated
pursuant to Tex. Local Gov’t Code Ch. 243.



(Ord. 884, passed 11- -02)



§ 114.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT ARCADE.  Any place to which the public is permitted wherein
coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”



   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE.  A commercial establishment that
as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental any form
of consideration any one or more of the following:



      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter,
or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that depict or
describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas;” or



      (2)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed
for use in connection with “specified sexual activities.”



   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment that regularly features:



      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity,
including topless dancers, nude dancers or strippers, male or female; or



      (2)   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure
of “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities;”
or



      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or
other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or
description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas.”



   ADULT MOTEL.  A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that:



      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas;” and
has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the
availability of this type of photographic reproductions; or



      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time
that is less than ten hours; or



      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to
subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A commercial establishment where, for
any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides,
or similar photographic reproductions are shown that are characterized by the
depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”



   ADULT THEATER.  A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment that regularly features persons who appear in a
state of nudity, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure
of “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities.”



   C HILD CARE FACILITY.  A building used as a day nursery, children's
boarding home, child placement agency, religious or charitable encampment for
children or any other place for the care or custody of children under 16
years of age.



   CHURCH.  A building in which persons regularly assemble for worship,
intended primarily for purposes connected with faith, or for propagating a
particular form of belief.



   CITY ADMINISTRATOR and/or CITY SECRETARY.  The City of Whitesboro's
City Administrator and/or City Secretary or his or her designated agent.



   ESCORT.  A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.



   ESCORT AGENCY.  A person who or business association that furnishes,
offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its business
purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration.



   ESTABLISHMENT.  Includes any of the following:



      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented
business as a new business;



      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a
sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;



      (3)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any
other existing sexually oriented business; or



      (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.



   LICENSEE.  A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an
applicant on the application for a license.



   NUDE MODEL STUDIO.  Any place where a person who appears in a state of
nudity or semi-nudity or displays “specified anatomical areas” is
provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed, or
similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration.



   NUDITY or a STATE OF NUDITY.



      (1)   The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male
genitals, female genitals, or female breast; or



      (2)   A state of dress that fails to opaquely cover a human
buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola if the female breast.



   OPERATES OR CAUSES TO BE OPERATED.  To cause to function or to put or
keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be
operating a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an
owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.



   OWNER.  An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.



   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.  A single-family, duplex, townhouse,
multiple-family or mobile home district or area so designated by such uses.



   RESIDENTIAL USE.  Property used for single- family, duplex,
multiple-family or mobile home park, mobile home subdivision, or campground
purposes.



   SCHOOL.  Any public or private learning center, elementary school,
secondary school, junior college, community college, college, university or
other center for post-secondary education.



   SEMI-NUDE.  A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the female breasts, as well as
portions of body covered by supporting straps or devices.



   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER.  A business or commercial enterprise that, as
one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:



      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between persons of the opposite sex; or



      (2)   Activities between male and female persons and/or
persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of
nudity or semi-nude.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.  An adult arcade, adult book store, adult
video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult
theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Human genitals in a state of sexual
arousal.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Any of the following:



      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;



      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;



      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or



      (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any
of the activities set forth in divisions (1) through (3), above.



   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT of a sexually oriented business.  The increase
in floor area occupied by the business by more than 20%, as the floor area
existed on the date of the enactment of this chapter.



   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL of a sexually oriented business.  Any
of the following:



      (1)   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;



      (2)   The transfer of securities that constitute a controlling
interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or



      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar
legal device that transfers the ownership or control of the business, except
for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.



(Ord. 884, passed 11- -02)



§ 114.03  CLASSIFICATIONS.



   Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:



   (A)   Adult arcades;



   (B)   Adult bookstores or adult video stores;



   (C)   Adult cabarets;



   (D)   Adult motels;



   (E)   Adult motion picture theaters;



   (F)   Adult theaters;



   (G)   Escort agencies;



   (H)   Nude model studios; and



   (I)   Sexual encounter centers.



(Ord. 884, passed 11- -02)



§ 114.04  LICENSES REQUIRED.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if he or she operates a sexually
oriented business without a valid license issued by the city for the
particular type of business.



   (B)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided
by the City Administrator and/or City Secretary.  The application form shall
be sworn to and shall:  (1) include the name and address of the applicant;
(2) state whether the applicant meets each of the requirements set forth in
§ 114.10 of this chapter; (3) include the name and address of each person
required to sign the application pursuant to § 114.04(D) of this chapter,
and the name, address and type of entity (if applicable) of each person or
entity owned or controlled by a person who owns or controls interest in the
business to be licensed; and (4) other matters, consistent with this chapter,
as may be specified in the application form.  The application must be
accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.  The
sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.  Applicants who must
comply with § 114.31 of this chapter shall submit a diagram meeting the
requirements of § 114.31.



   (C)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of
this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance
with the law by the City Administrator and/or City Secretary.



   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business
is an individual, he or she must sign the application for a license as
applicant.  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business
is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20% or greater
interest in the business must sign the application for a license as
applicant.  Each applicant must be qualified under § 114.10 of this chapter
and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.



(Ord. 884, passed 11- -02)



LICENSES



§ 114.10  ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The City Administrator and/or City Secretary shall approve the
issuance of a license to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an
application unless the City Administrator and/or City Secretary finds one or
more of the following to be true:



      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age.



      (2)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in
payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or
imposed, upon the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to sexually
oriented business.



      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information
reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form.



      (4)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted
of a violation provision of this chapter, other than the offense of operating
a sexually oriented business without a license, within two years immediately
preceding the application.  The fact that a conviction is being appealed
shall have no effect.



      (5)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been
paid.



      (6)   An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented
business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has
demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business
premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by
law enforcement officers.



      (7)   An applicant or the proposed establishment is in
violation of or is not in compliance with §§ 114.12, 114.17, 114.25, or
114.27 through 114.32 of this chapter.



      (8)   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented
business are not in compliance with all applicable city laws, regulations and
City Council orders.



      (9)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted
of a crime:



         (a)   Involving:



            1.   Any of the following offenses as described in
Tex. Penal Code Ch. 43:



               (i)   Prostitution;



               (ii)   Promotion of prostitution;



               (iii)   Aggravated promotion of prostitution;



               (iv)   Compelling prostitution;



               (v)   Obscenity;



               (vi)   Sale, distribution, display of
harmful material to a minor;



               (vii)   Sexual performance by a child; or



               (viii)   Possession of child pornography;



            2.   Any of the following offenses as described in
Tex. Penal Code Ch. 21:



               (i)   Public lewdness;



               (ii)   Indecent exposure; or



               (iii)   Indecency with a child;



            3.   Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault
as described in Tex. Penal Code Ch. 22;



            4.   Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring
a runaway child as described in Tex. Penal Code Ch. 25; or



            5.   Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation
to commit any of the foregoing offenses;



         (b)   For which:



            1.   Less than two years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of misdemeanor
offense;



            2.   Less than five years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony
offense; or



            3.   Less than five years have elapsed since the
date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two
or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any 24-month period.



   (B)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse.



   (C)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of
the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the
address of the sexually oriented business.  The license shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business
so that it may be easily read at any time.



(Ord. 884, passed 11- -02)



§ 114.11  LICENSE FEES.



   The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license shall be $500.



(Ord. 884, passed 11- -02)



§ 114.12  INSPECTION.



   (A)   An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the
Police Department of the City of Whitesboro and the City of Whitesboro
Building Inspector to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business
for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is
occupied or open for business.



   (B)   A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his
agent or employee commits an offense if he or she refuses to permit a lawful
inspection of the premises by a representative of the Police Department at
any time it is occupied or open for business.



   (C)   The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an
adult motel that are currently being rented by a customer for use as a
permanent or temporary habitation.



(Ord. 884, passed 11- -02)



§ 114.13  EXPIRATION.



   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in § 114.04.  Application
for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and
when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the
license will not be affected.



(Ord. 884, passed 11- -02)



§ 114.14  SUSPENSION.



   The City Administrator and/or City Secretary shall suspend a license
for a period not to exceed 30 days if he or she determines that a licensee or
an agent or employee of a licensee has:



   (A)   Violated or is not in compliance with §§ 114.12, 114.17,
114.25, or 114.27 through 114.32 of this chapter;



   (B)   Engaged in excessive use of alcohol beverages while on the
sexually oriented business premises;



   (C)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented
business premises as authorized by this Ordinance;



   (D)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually
oriented business premises; or



   (E)   Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually
oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating
action by law enforcement officers.



(Ord. 884, passed 11- -02)



§ 114.15  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The City Administrator and/or City Secretary shall revoke a
license if a cause of suspension in § 114.14 of this chapter occurs and the
license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.



   (B)   The City Administrator and/or City Secretary shall revoke a
license if he or she determines that:



      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted to the City Administrator and/or City Secretary during the
application process;



      (2)   A licensee, an agent or an employee has knowingly
allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;



      (3)   A licensee, an agent or an employee has knowingly
allowed prostitution on the premises;



      (4)   A licensee, an agent or an employee knowingly operated
the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's
license was suspended;



      (5)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in §
114.10(A)(9)(a) for which the time period required in § 114.10(A)(9)(b) has
not elapsed;



      (6)   On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a
person or persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the licensed
premises, of a crime listed in § 114.10(A)(9)(a), for which a conviction has
been obtained, and the person or persons were agents or employees of the
sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed;



      (7)   A licensee or agent or an employee has knowingly allowed
any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or
sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term SEXUAL
CONTACT shall have the same meaning as it is defined in Tex. Penal Code §
21.01; or



      (8)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for any
ad valorem taxes, sales or other taxes related to the sexually oriented
business.



   (C)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the revocation of the license.



   (D)   Division (B)(7) of this section does not apply to adult motels
as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee, agent or employee
knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public
view.



   (E)   When the City Administrator and/or City Secretary revokes a
license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall be
issued a sexually oriented business license for one  year from



the date revocation became effective.  If, subsequent to revocation, the
City Administrator and/or City Secretary finds that the basis for the
revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a
license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became
effective. If the license was revoked under division (B)(5) of this section,
an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number
of years required under § 114.10(A)(9)(b) has elapsed.



(Ord. 884, passed 11- -02)



§ 114.16  APPEAL.



   If the City Administrator and/or City Secretary denies the issuance of
a license, or suspends or revokes a license, the City Administrator and/or
City Secretary shall send to the applicant or licensee, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, written notice of the action and the right to an
appeal.  Upon receipt of written notice of the denial, suspension or
revocation, the licensee whose application for a license has been denied or
whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to appeal to
the state district court.  An appeal to the state district court must be
filed within 30 days after the receipt of notice of the decision of the City
Administrator and/or City Secretary.  The licensee shall bear the burden of
proof in court.



(Ord. 884, passed 11- -02)



§ 114.17  TRANSFER.



   A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a
license at any place other than the address designated in the application.



(Ord. 884, passed 11- -02)



LOCATIONS; ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS



§ 114.25  LOCATION.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes
to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of: 



      (1)   A church;



      (2)   A school;



      (3)   A child care facility;



      (4)   A boundary of a residential district;



      (5)   A public park;



      (6)   The property line of a lot devoted to residential use; or



      (7)   Any building or structure in which alcoholic beverages
are offered for sale.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if he or she causes or permits the
operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership
or control of a sexually oriented business located within 1,000 feet of
another sexually oriented business.



   (C)   A person commits an offense if he or she causes or permits the
operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented
business in the same building, structure or portion thereof, or the increase
of floor area of any sexually oriented business.



   (D)   For the purpose of division (A) of this section, measurement
shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part
of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted to the
nearest property line of the premises of a church, school, child care
facility or building or structure in which alcoholic beverages are offered
for sale, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential
district, or residential lot.



   (E)   For the purposes of division (B) of this section, the distance
between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest
exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.



   (F)   Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the
effective date of this chapter that is in violation of divisions (A), (B) or
(C) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use.  The nonconforming
use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed 12 months,
unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a
period of 30 days or more.  The nonconforming use shall not be increased,
enlarged, extended, or altered except that the use may be changed to a
conforming use.  If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within
1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the
sexually oriented business which was first established and continually
operating at a particular location is the conforming use, and the
later-established business(es) is nonconforming.



   (G)   A sexually oriented business lawfully operated as a conforming
use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the
grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church,
school, child care facility, public park, residential district or residential
lot, or any building or structure in which alcoholic beverages are offered
for sale, within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business.  This
provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply
when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or
has been revoked.



(Ord. 884, passed 11- -02)



§ 114.26  EXEMPTIONS FROM LOCATIONAL RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   If the City Administrator and/or City Secretary denies the
issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexually
oriented business establishment is in violation of any section of this
chapter, then the applicant may, not later than ten calendar days after
receiving notice of the denial, file with the Mayor of the city a request for
an exemption from the locational restrictions of this chapter.



   (B)   If the written request is filed with the Mayor within the
ten-day limit, the City Council shall consider the request.  The Mayor shall
set a date for a public hearing within 60 days from the date the written
request is received.



   (C)   A hearing by the City of Whitesboro City Council may proceed
if a quorum of the City Council is present.  The City Council shall hear and
consider evidence offered by any interest person. The formal rules of
evidence do not apply.



   (D)   The City Council may, in its discretion, grant an exemption
from the locational restrictions of this chapter if it makes the following
findings:



      (1)   That the location of the proposed sexually oriented
business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be
contrary to the public safety or welfare;



      (2)   That the granting of the exemption will not violate the
spirit and intent of this chapter;



      (3)   That the location of the proposed sexually oriented
business will not downgrade the property values or quality of life in the
adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban or rural blight;



      (4)   That the location of an additional sexually oriented
business in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood
conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or
restoration; and



      (5)   That all other applicable provisions of this chapter
will be observed.



   (E)   The City Council shall grant or deny the exemption by a
majority vote.  Failure to reach a majority vote shall result in denial of
the exemption.  Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a
preponderance of the evidence.  The decision of the City Council is final.



   (F)   If the City Council grants the exemption, the exemption is
valid for one year from the date of the City Council's action.  Upon the
expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of
the locational restrictions of this chapter until the applicant applies for
and receives another exemption.



   (G)   If the City Council denies the exemption, the applicant may
not reapply for an exemption until at least 12 months have elapsed since the
date of the City Council's action.



   (H)   The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from
any other provisions of this chapter other than the locational restrictions.



(Ord. 884, passed 11- -02)



§ 114.27  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ESCORT AGENCIES.



   (A)   An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of
18 years.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if he or she acts as an escort or
agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.



(Ord. 884, passed 11- -02)



§ 114.28  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR NUDE MODEL STUDIOS.



   (A)   A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age
of 18 years.



   (B)   A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he or
she appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity in or on the premises of a
nude model studio.  It is a defense to prosecution under this section if the
person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of
the opposite sex.



   (C)   A person commits an offense if he or she appears in a state of
nudity or semi-nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of
nudity or semi-nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be
viewed from the public right-of-way.



   (D)   A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or
mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a
reception room open to the public.



(Ord. 884, passed 11- -02)



§ 114.29  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT THEATERS AND ADULT MOTION
PICTURE THEATERS.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a
person under the age of 18 years to appear in a state of nudity or
semi-nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture
theater.



   (B)   A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he or
she knowingly appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity in or on the
premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater.



   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under divisions (A) and (B) of
this section if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to
public view or persons of the opposite sex.



(Ord. 884, passed 11- -02)



§ 114.30  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTELS.



   (A)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar
commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a
period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption
that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this
chapter.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a
sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that
does not have a sexually oriented business license, he or she rents or
subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the
room is rented, he or she rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.



   (C)   For purposes of division (B) of this section, the terms RENT
or SUBRENT mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of
consideration.



(Ord. 884, passed 11- -02)



§ 114.31  REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS
OR VIDEOS.



   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises
in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video
cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following
requirements:



      (1)   Upon application of a sexually oriented business
license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises
showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's
stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and switches, which
lights are controlled by which switches and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted.  Only agents or employees
shall have access to light switches.  A manager's station may not exceed 32
square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at
which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted.  A professionally
prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint
shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north
or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated
scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal
dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of
plus or minus six inches.  The City Secretary may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted and certifies the configuration for the premises has not
been altered since it was prepared.



      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by
the applicant.



      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location or
location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the
City Secretary.



      (4)   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the
premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each
manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.



      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such
a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose
excluding restrooms.  Restrooms may not contain video reproduction
equipment. The premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's
stations.  The view required in this section must be in direct line of sight
from the manager's station.



      (6)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it
also shall be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to
ensure that the view area specified in division (A)(5) of this section
remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials at all times that any patron is present on the premises and to
ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which
has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the
application filed pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section.



      (7)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons
are permitted access at an illumination of not less than 1.0 footcandle as
measured at the floor level.



      (8)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it
also shall be the duty of any agent and employee present on the premises to
ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that
any patron is present on the premises.



   (B)   A person having a duty under divisions (A)(1) through (A)(8),
above, commits an offense if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.



(Ord. 884, passed 11- -02)



§ 114.32  DISPLAY OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALS TO MINORS.



   (A)   A person commits an offense, if, in a business establishment
open to persons under the age of 17 years, he or she displays a book,
pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film, or video cystitis, the cover of which
depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for
commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain,
any of the following:



      (1)   Human sexual intercourse, masturbation, or sodomy;



      (2)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts;



      (3)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, buttocks, or that portion of the female breast below the top of the
areola; or



      (4)   Human male genitals in discernibly turgid state, whether
covered or uncovered.



   (B)   In this section DISPLAY means to locate an item in such a
manner that, without obtaining assistance from an agent or employee of the
business establishment:  (1) it is available to the general public for
handling and inspection; or (2) the cover, outside packing on the item or
contents of the items is visible to members of the general public.



(Ord. 884, passed 11- -02)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Enforcement. 



      (1)   Except as provided by division (A)(2) of this section,
any person violating § 114.25 of this chapter, upon conviction, is
punishable by a fine not to exceed $3,000 for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a
violation occurs.



      (2)   If the sexually oriented business involved is a nude
model studio or sexual encounter center, then violation of § 114.04(A) or §
114.25 of this chapter is punishable as a Class A misdemeanor.



      (3)   Except as provided by division (A)(2) of this section,
any person violating a provision of this chapter other than § 114.25, upon
conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $3,000 for each offense and
a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which
a violation occurs.



      (4)   (a)   It is a defense to prosecution under §§
114.04(A), 114.25 or 114.28(D) of this chapter that a person appearing in a
state of nudity or semi-nudity did so in a modeling class operated:



            1.   By a proprietary school licensed by the State
of Texas; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;



            2.   By a private college or university which
maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable
to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or



            3.   In a structure:



               (i)   Which has no sign visible from the
exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or
semi-nude person is available for viewing; and



               (ii)   Where in order to participate in a
class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and



               (iii)   Where no more than one nude or
semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time.



         (b)   It is a defense to prosecution under § 114.04(A)
or § 114.25 of this chapter that each item of descriptive, printed film, or
video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious
literary artistic, political, or scientific value.



   (B)   Injunctive relief.  A person who operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation
of § 114.25 of this chapter is subject to a suit for injunction as well as
prosecution for criminal violations.



(Ord. 884, passed 11- -02)



CHAPTER 115:  TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING STUDIOS



Section



   115.01   Definitions



   115.02   License required



   115.03   Exemptions from licensing requirements



   115.04   Permit required



   115.05   Application; fee; renewal



   115.06   Regulations



 



   115.99   Penalty



§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPROVED.  Acceptable to the health authority based on his
determination as to conformance with appropriate standards and good public
health practice.



   ASEPTIC TECHNIQUES.  This refers to the precautions taken to prevent
the spread of infections.  Such techniques include, but are not limited to,
cleaning the hands of the operator and the skin area of the client to be
tattooed with a germicidal soap, the wearing of clean apparel, using sterile
equipment and supplies at all times and keeping the environment of the
tattooing operation in a sanitary condition.



   BODY PIERCING.  The creation of an opening in an individual's body,
other than in an individual's earlobe, to insert jewelry or another
decoration.



   HEALTH AUTHORITY.  The Grayson County Health Officer or his
authorized  representative.



   INSPECTOR.  The Building Inspector or other designated employee of the
city.



   OPERATOR.  A person who performs tattooing.



   TATTOO STUDIO.  Any establishment or facility in which tattooing is
performed.



   TATTOOING.  The practice of producing an indelible mark or figure upon
the human body, whether it be by scarring or by inserting a pigment under the
skin through the use of needles, scalpels or other related equipment.



(Ord. 889, passed 3-11-03)



§ 115.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall conduct, operate or maintain a tattoo and/or body
piercing studio in the city who does not possess a valid, current permit from
the State of Texas Health Department for the operation of a tattoo and/or
body piercing studio.  The cost of any health license shall be as
established by the Health Department and must be paid directly to that agency.



(Ord. 889, passed 3-11-03)



§ 115.03  EXEMPTIONS FROM LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.



   This chapter shall not apply to medical facilities licensed under the
law; an office or clinic of a person licensed by the Texas State Board of
Medical Examiners; a person who performs only ear piercing; or a facility in
which only ear piercing is performed.



(Ord. 889, passed 3-11-03)



§ 115.04  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall conduct, operate or maintain a tattoo and/or body
piercing studio in the city who does not possess a valid, current permit from
the health authority as herein provided.  The permit shall at all times be
kept posted and displayed in a prominent place within the tattoo and/or body
piercing studio.



(Ord. 889, passed 3-11-03)



§ 115.05  APPLICATION; FEE; RENEWAL.



   (A)   Application.  An application for a license must be made on a
form provided by the city.  The application form shall: (1) include the name
and address of the applicant; (2) state whether the applicant meets all State
of Texas Health Department requirements; and (3) other matters, consistent
with this chapter, as may be specified in the application form.  The
application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the
configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space
occupied by the business.  The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises.



   (B)   Fee.  The fees and charges for the application and permit
process shall be $150, to be paid to the city at the time of application. 
Upon receipt of the application and processing fee, the City Inspector shall
schedule an inspection of the facility with the applicant.  He or she shall
also request confirmation from the City Administrator and/or City Secretary
as to the status of the facility's compliance with existing building and
zoning codes.  The Inspector, after determining that all city codes
including the regulations herein provided are complied with, shall issue a
permit to the applicant.



   (C)   Renewal.  A tattoo and/or body piercing studio license is
valid for one year from the date of issuance.  The license may be renewed
annually on payment of a $50 renewal fee.



(Ord. 889, passed 3-11-03)



§ 115.06  REGULATIONS.



   All tattoo and/or body piercing studios shall comply with the following
regulations:



   (A)   General.



      (1)   The tattoo and/or body piercing studio must be a
permanent, nondwelling building located in a B-2 commercial zone and shall
not be located within 1,000 feet of a church, school, or the property line of
a lot devoted to residential use.



      (2)   The hours of operation shall be posted on the front door
of the facility.



      (3)   All areas of the facility where tattooing or body
piercing is done shall be well lighted.



      (4)   The facility will at all times meet the requirements of
the city's electrical, plumbing and fire codes.



      (5)   The owner or operators will permit inspection of the
facility by the health authority during any period the facility is in
operation.



      (6)   The owner and any operator shall not perform tattooing
or body piercing if he or she is infected with a contagious disease. The
health authority may require the owner or operator to undergo a physical
examination, conducted by a physician, to prove the absence of disease.  The
expense of the examination will be borne by the owner or operator.



   (B)   Sanitary regulations.



      (1)   The facility shall provide for operators and clients a
restroom containing a properly installed and maintained water closet, a
lavatory with hot and cold running water, single service towels, and soap.



      (2)   Walls, floors and ceilings shall be kept clean and in
good repair.



      (3)   The building shall be kept free of insects and rodents.



      (4)   All operators when tattooing shall proceed with tools
and equipment that have been properly sterilized and kept in a sterile
condition. Tools and equipment used on one client must be sterilized before
use on the next client.



      (5)   Equipment and tools shall be sterilized by one of two
methods:



         (a)   Dry heating in an oven at a temperature of 320°
Fahrenheit for at least one hour; or by



         (b)   Steam pressure treatment in an autoclave.



      (6)   All needles and instruments, when not in use, must be
kept in a clean, dust-tight container.



   (C)   Operational regulations.



      (1)   No person under 21 years of age may be tattooed.  The
operator shall be held responsible for determining the correct age of the
person requesting a tattoo.



      (2)   No person under 18 years of age may have their body
pierced (ears excepted) without parental consent.  The operator shall be
held responsible for determining the correct age of the person requesting
body piercing.



      (3)   The operator shall maintain a permanent log of all
persons tattooed in the facility.  Included in the log shall be the person's
name, age, address and date.  The log shall be available for inspection upon
the request of the health authority or law enforcement officials.



      (4)   Tattoos or body piercing shall not be administered to
any person discernibly under the influence of drugs or alcohol.



      (5)   The following persons shall not be tattooed or have body
piercing; and determination of these conditions shall be the responsibility
of the operator:



         (a)   Those having a skin rash, pimples or other skin
irritations;



         (b)   Those infected with a communicable disease; and



         (c)   Those having had jaundice or hepatitis within the
past 12 months.



      (6)   The owner and operators shall practice aseptic
techniques.



      (7)   The owner shall report to the health authority, as soon
as it becomes known, any infection resulting from tattooing or body piercing.



(Ord. 889, passed 3-11-03)



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   (A)    Enforcement.  The health authority or City Inspector shall
enforce the provisions of this chapter.  All tattoo establishments shall be
inspected on a routine basis, but not less than twice annually, to determine
compliance.  Should a violation be observed, it shall be recorded and
reported in writing to the owner.  The owner will be required to make the
necessary correction within a specified time period.  Failure to comply with
the orders of the health authority will result in the suspension of the
permit or filing of a complaint with the municipal court or both.



   (B)   Penalty.  The penalty for violating any provision of this
chapter shall be a fine not to exceed $500 for each offense.  A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.



   (C)   Appeal.  Any person dissatisfied with an order or ruling of
the City Inspector in the enforcement of this chapter may appeal to the
Grayson County Health Department.  A person desiring to so appeal shall file
with the City Administrator within 15 days of the ruling or order appealed
from, a written appeal, which shall include a brief statement of the reasons
thereof and a detailed statement of the facts supporting the appeal.  Upon
the expiration of the 15-day period without a written appeal being filed with
the City Administrator, as herein provided, the order or ruling of the City
Inspector shall become final and nonappealable.



(Ord. 889, passed 3-11-03)



CHAPTER 116:  BILLBOARD AND OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING



Section



   116.01   Purpose and intent



   116.02   Definitions



   116.03   Application for approval and permit required



   116.04   Regulations



   116.05   Spacing



   116.06   Maintenance, safety and removal



   116.07   Enforcement



   116.08   Violations and penalties



   116.09   Appeals



§ 116.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate billboards and
off-premises advertising in order to promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the concentration of billboards within the city.



(Ord. 950, passed 12-13-05)



§ 116.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BILLBOARD.  A sign which constitutes a primary use of land (not an
accessory use) and which directs attention to a business, product, activity
or service which is not conducted, sold, offered, or located on the premises
where the sign is located, or a sign whose message space is available for
lease, rent or hire, separate and apart from any business product, activity
or service, which is not conducted, sold, offered, or located on the premises
where the sign is located.



   CHANGEABLE ELECTRONIC VARIABLE MESSAGE SIGN (CEVMS).  A sign which
permits light to be turned on or off intermittently or which is operated in a
way whereby light is turned on or off intermittently, including any
illuminated sign on which such illumination is not kept stationary or
constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use,
including an LED (light emitting diode) or digital sign, and which varies in
intensity or color.  A CEVMS sign does not include a sign located within the
right-of-way that functions as a traffic control device and that is described
and identified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD)
approved by the Federal Highway Administrator as the National Standard.



   SIGN CODE APPLICATION AREA.  The corporate limits of the city and the
area of its extraterritorial jurisdiction as defined by Tex. Local Government
Code § 42.021.



(Ord. 950, passed 12-13-05; Am. Ord. 978, passed 4-15-08)



§ 116.03  APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL AND PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   An application for rezoning land for purposes of constructing
a billboard, or any application for a building permit or other development
permit required for establishing or erecting a billboard is required.



   (B)   Applications for off-premises advertising or billboard permit
shall be accompanied by a copy of the lease agreement or a letter of
authorization from the owner of the property on which the sign is to be
located.



   (C)   Off-premises advertising or billboard applications must
include a copy of lease agreement or agreement between property owner and
sign owner that states "OFF-PREMISE SIGNS SHALL BE REMOVED UPON DEVELOPMENT
OF THE TRACT OR SITE UPON WHICH IT IS LOCATED."



   (D)   From and after the effective date, no new construction permit
shall be issued for the erection of an off-premise sign, including but not
limited to a new off-premise CEVMS or the conversion of an existing non-CEVMS
off premise sign to a CEVMS, within the sign code application area.



(Ord. 950, passed 12-13-05; Am. Ord. 978, passed 4-15-08)



§ 116.04  REGULATIONS.



   Billboards, off-premises signs and similar outdoor advertising shall be
allowed in business and industrial zoned districts located only on those
streets designated as major thoroughfares in the city provided the billboard
meets all city requirements. All billboard signs located within the city
limits shall adhere to the following requirements:



   (A)   Billboards shall not exceed a maximum overall height of 35
feet, measured from the highest point of the sign to the ground level.



   (B)   Billboard signs may not be located in such a manner as to
create a safety hazard, or to obscure or otherwise interfere with the
effectiveness of an official traffic sign, signal device, or obstruct the
driver’s view of approaching, merging, or intersecting traffic, or to be
likely to cause a driver to be unduly distracted in any way.



   (C)   Billboard signs which are illuminated, shall be lighted only
by lights which are properly installed, shaded or concealed, and are aimed in
such a manner so that the light will project onto the sign face and will not
interfere with the vision of motor vehicle operators. Illumination of such
signs shall not be flashing or intermittent.



   (D)   Off-site advertising signs shall be located only on platted
lot zoned business, commercial or industrial.



   (E)   Off-site advertising signs shall be deemed as a primary use of
the property on which they are located. Such signs shall not be located on a
lot where other buildings or uses exist.



(Ord. 950, passed 12-13-05)



§ 116.05  SPACING.



   All billboards or off-site advertising signs shall be subject to the
following stipulations:



   (A)   All billboards or off-site signs shall be located a minimum of
30 feet from a side or rear property line.



   (B)   All billboards or off-site signs shall have a minimum front
setback of 25 feet from all street rights-of-way or at the building setback
line specified by the Zoning Code, whichever is further.



   (C)   All billboards or off-site signs shall provide a minimum
distance of 1,000 feet between all detached advertising signs measured along
the street right-of-way.



   (D)   All billboards or off-site signs shall be located a minimum of
1,000 feet from major intersections, and 500 feet from any other intersection.



(Ord. 950, passed 12-13-05)



§ 116.06  MAINTENANCE, SAFETY AND REMOVAL.



   (A)   Sign facings may be removed, replaced, or painted; but, any
sign which does not display a message during a 180-day period will be
considered abandoned and shall be removed.



   (B)   No partial, incomplete, or defaced advertising shall be
permitted.



   (C)   Should any sign, in the opinion of the Building Inspector,
become insecure or in danger of failing, or otherwise unsafe, the Inspector
shall give written notice of the condition of the sign to the person owning,
leasing, or responsible for the sign. Said person so notified shall correct
the unsafe condition of the sign in a manner approved by the Inspector in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   All signs shall be kept in good repair and, unless of
galvanized or non-corroding metal or treated with appropriate wood
preservative, shall be thoroughly painted as often as necessary, consistent
with good maintenance. All braces, bolts, clips, supporting frames and
fastenings shall be free from deterioration, termite infestation, rot or
loosening. In case any sign is not maintained, the Inspector shall give
written notice to the owner or lessee thereof to so maintain the sign or
remove the sign.



(Ord. 950, passed 12-13-05)



§ 116.07  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The Building Inspector shall have the power and authority to
administer and enforce the conditions of this chapter and all other laws
relating to signs. The Inspector shall have, and is hereby granted, the power
and authority to revoke any and all license and permits authorized by this
chapter for violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The duties of the Inspector shall include not only the
issuance of permits as required by this chapter, but also the responsibility
of ensuring that all signs comply with this chapter and any other applicable
laws, and that all signs for which a permit is required do, in fact, have a
permit. The Inspector shall make such inspections as may be necessary and
initiate appropriate action to bring about compliance with this chapter and
other applicable law if such inspection discloses any instance of
noncompliance.



   (C)   Written notice to alter or to remove a sign shall be given by
the Building Inspector by certified mail or written notice served personally
upon the owner, lessee, or person responsible for the sign, or the owner’s
agent. If such order is not complied with within ten days, the owner, lessee
or person responsible therefor shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject
to fine.



(Ord. 950, passed 12-13-05)



§ 116.08  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a
fine not more than $500 for each violation. Each day in which any violation
shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The City Attorney is hereby
authorized to take all actions, both legal and equitable, necessary to assure
compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. 950, passed 12-13-05)



§ 116.09  APPEALS.



   Any person wishing to appeal a decision of the Building Inspector on
the grounds that the decision misconstrues or wrongly interprets this chapter
may, within 30 days of the decision, appeal the same to the City Council,
providing that the appealing party shall give notice of appeal in writing to
the City Secretary within ten days following the decision appealed from and,
provided further, that the appealing party shall comply with the
Inspector’s decision pending appeal unless the Inspector shall direct
otherwise.



(Ord. 950, passed 12-13-05)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES



CHAPTER 130:  MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES



Section



   130.01   Permit for signs on or over public property



   130.02   Posting advertising matter on utility poles



   130.03   Open wells



   130.04   Camping in the municipality



   130.05   Curfew for minors



   130.06   Loitering or trespassing on certain premises prohibited



   130.07   Discharge and unsafe carrying of dangerous weapons



   130.08   Tampering with utility meters



   130.09   Public consumption of alcohol



   130.10   Use, purchase, possession, and sale of synthetic
cannabinoids prohibited



Cross-reference:



   Reward for information regarding offenses committed against city
property, see § 31.110



Editor's note:



   Pursuant to Tex. Penal Code § 1.08, “No government subdivision or
agency may enact or enforce a law that makes any conduct covered by the
[Texas Penal Code] an offense subject to a criminal penalty . . . .” 
Therefore, offenses contained in the Texas Penal Code have preempted
duplicative municipal ordinances.  This chapter only contains offenses that
have not been addressed in the Texas Penal Code.



§ 130.01  PERMIT FOR SIGNS ON OR OVER  PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any sign which
will project or extend over any street, alley, sidewalk or other public
property, or which will be supported by a pole, pipe, or other support
located or set on any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public property,
without first obtaining a permit to do so from the Municipal Secretary.



   (B)   Application for such permit shall be filed with the Municipal
Secretary and shall set forth the proposed location of such sign, the
material out of which same is to be constructed, its dimensions, the exact
location of the pole, pipe, or other support, if located on city property,
and the height of such sign, measured from the bottom of the sign to the
ground. 



   (C)   No such permit shall be issued unless the application is
approved by the Mayor.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.02  POSTING ADVERTISING MATTER ON UTILITY POLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to tack, tie, or in any other
manner fasten upon any electric light pole, telephone, or street light in the
municipality any poster, placard, or other advertising matter.



(Ord. 1036, passed 3-13-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.03  OPEN WELLS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any well, cistern, or
other excavation to be or remain open or uncovered to the danger of others,
on any premises owned, controlled, or occupied by him or her.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.04  CAMPING IN THE MUNICIPALITY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp within the municipality.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.05  CURFEW FOR MINORS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   CURFEW HOURS.  Means:



      (1)   11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,  Wednesday,
or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and



      (2)   12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday.



   EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action.  The term includes but is
not limited to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss
of life.



   ESTABLISHMENT.  Any privately-owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place
of amusement or entertainment.



   GUARDIAN.  Means:



      (1)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the
person of a minor; or



      (2)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been
placed by a court.



   MINOR.  Any person under 17 years of age.



   OPERATOR.  Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or
corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment.  The term
includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the
officers of a corporation.



   PARENT.  A person who is:



      (1)   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of
another person; or



      (2)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or
guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.



   PUBLIC PLACE.   Any place to which the public or a substantial group
of the public has access and includes but is not limited to streets,
highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses,
office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.



   REMAIN.  Means to:



      (1)   Linger or stay; or



      (2)   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a 
police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the
premises.



   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY.  Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk
of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted
loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.



   (B)   Offenses.



      (1)   A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during
curfew hours.



      (2)   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he
or she knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to
remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the
city during curfew hours.



      (3)   The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment
commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours.



   (C)   Defenses.



      (1)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (B) of
this section that the minor was:



         (a)   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;



         (b)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's
parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;



         (c)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;



         (d)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or
returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;



         (e)   Involved in an emergency;



         (f)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or
abutting the residence of a next- door neighbor if the neighbor did not
complain to the Police Department about the minor's presence.



         (g)   Attending an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, the
Whitesboro Independent School District, a civic organization, or another
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or
returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored
by the city, the Whitesboro Independent School District, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor;



         (h)   Attending a function or event sponsored and
supervised by an establishment that prohibits ingress and egress to the
establishment during curfew hours and the management of the establishment has
registered the function or event with the city at least 48 hours in advance.



         (i)   Exercising first amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly; or



         (j)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of
minority removed in accordance with Tex. Family Code Chapter 31.



      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (B)(3)
that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified
the Police Department that a minor was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.



   (D)   Enforcement.  Before taking any enforcement action under this
section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason
for being in the public place.  The officer shall not issue a citation or
make an arrest under this section unless the  officer reasonably believes
that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other
circumstances, no defense in division (C) is present.



   (E)   Penalties.



      (1)   A person who violates a provision of this section is
guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the
violation is committed, continued, or permitted.  Each offense, upon
conviction, is punishable as provided in § 10.99.



      (2)   When required by Tex. Family Code § 51.08, as amended,
the Municipal Court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who
violates division (B)(1) of this section and shall refer the minor to
juvenile court.



   (F)   Review of section.  Within six months after the initial 
enforcement of this section, the City Manager or his or her designees shall
review this section and report and make recommendations to the City Council
concerning the effectiveness of and the continuing need for the section. 
The City Manager's report shall specifically include the following
information:



      (1)   The practicality of enforcing the section and any
problems with enforcement identified by the Police Department;



      (2)   The impact of the section on crime statistics;



      (3)   The number of persons successfully prosecuted for a
violation of the section; and



      (4)   The city's net cost of enforcing the section.



(Ord. 756, passed 9-13-94; Am. Ord. 1019, passed 9-14-10; Am. Ord. 1058,
passed 5-13-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.06  LOITERING OR TRESPASSING ON CERTAIN PREMISES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   COMMERCIAL OR BUSINESS PROPERTY.   Structures, buildings, offices,
parking lots and areas, yards, open grounds and fields within the boundaries
of the business property.



   ENTRY.  The intrusion of the entire body or being the occupant or
driver of a motor or other vehicle which has entered and remained on the
property of another.



   LOITERING.  To linger, wander about in idleness upon the property of
another.



   NOTICE.  Means:



      (1)   Oral communication that entry or remaining upon the
property is forbidden given by persons with apparent authority to act for the
owner of the property.



      (2)   Written communication by a sign or signs posted on the
property reasonably likely to come to the attention of the persons entering
the property.



      (3)   Fencing or other enclosures designed to exclude or limit
entry for unauthorized persons including door and doorways posted with signs
that limit access to “authorized persons only” or “employees only.”



   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.  Structures, buildings, garages, and the
surrounding yard and driveway located within the boundaries of the owner's
property.



   SCHOOL PROPERTY.  Structures, buildings, garages, classrooms, offices,
grounds, practice and playing fields of a public or private school within the
boundaries of the school's



property.



   (B)   Trespassing on residential property prohibited.



      (1)   A person commits an offense if he or she enters or
remains on the residential property of another without effective consent and
he or she:



         (a)   Had notice that the entry was forbidden;



         (b)   Received notice to depart but failed to do so; or



         (c)   Entered any fenced area or structure without the
consent of the owner.



      (2)   The provisions of this division shall not apply to those
persons employed and operating within the scope of their duties in the
installation, repair, maintenance, connection and disconnection or the
reading of meters on the property of another for any cable television
service, gas water sewer, and electric subject to regulation by the Public
Utility Commission of Texas or the Railroad Commission of Texas, or any
services authorized by law to enforce provisions, codes and statutes of the
state and its political subdivisions.



   (C)   Trespass on commercial or business property prohibited.  A
person commits an offense if he or she enters or remains on any commercial or
business of another without the effective consent of the owner and he or she:



      (1)   Had notice that entry was forbidden; or



      (2)   Received notice to depart but failed or refused to do so.



   (D)   Climbing elevated structures prohibited.  A person commits an
offense if he or she climbs upon any building, fence, pole, tower, or other
elevated structure or its related attachments and such person was not engaged
in the maintenance, repair, installation, connection or disconnection to the
structure or its related attachments.



   (E)   Loitering on commercial or business property prohibited.



      (1)   A person commits an offense if he or she loiters upon
any commercial or business property parking lot or area, yard, open field, or
ground within the city without the effective consent of the owner and:



         (a)   The property was posted with a “no loitering”
sign or signs that were reasonably likely to come to the attention of persons
on the property between any hours specified by such sign;



         (b)   The person had received previous notice from a
person with apparent authority to act for the property owner that the person
could not remain or loiter on the property; or,



         (c)   Having received a previous notice not to remain or
loiter on the property and having departed and later returned to the property
without the consent of the owner.



      (2)   For the purpose of this division, oral notice may be
given by the property owner or any official or employee of the business to
include those relatives of the property owner acting in the owner's
absence.  Notice may also be given by any police officer who is acting on
either oral or written request and authorization from the business owner or
an official of the business to cause the removal or arrest of persons found
loitering on business property.



   (F)   Loitering on school property prohibited.



      (1)   A person commits an offense if he or she loiters upon
school property and:



         (a)   Enters a school building that has a sign posted
“visitors please report to main office upon entering the building during
regular school hours” and fails to report his or her presence to school
officials; or



         (b)   Was warned to leave the school property by an
official or employee of the school to depart and failed to do so, or after
departing returned to the school property without the authorization or
consent of the school's officials or employee.



      (2)   This division shall not apply to persons with custodial
custody of a student currently enrolled within the school or persons involved
in any official function authorized by the school or persons and visitors
attending school functions, activities, and athletic events sponsored by the
school, or persons involved in the use of athletic equipment, track or
training fields when such use is authorized by school officials.



      (3)   A person commits an offense if he or she enters,
remains, or loiters within a school bus without the consent of the school bus
driver or other school official.  It is a defense to prosecution under this
division (F)(3) that the person was currently enrolled as a student when the
offense was committed.



   (G)   Authority to enforce.  Authority to enforce this section
shall be vested in the Chief of Police or his or her assigns.



(Ord. 715, passed 8-14-90)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.07  DISCHARGE AND UNSAFE CARRYING OF DANGEROUS WEAPONS.



   (A)   Discharge of dangerous weapons within city limits
prohibited.  It shall hereafter be unlawful to discharge within the limits
of the city any firearm of whatever description, airgun, B.B. gun, pellet
gun, or any other mechanism projecting a metal projectile including but not
limited to a bow and arrow, cross bow and bolt, sling shot or device designed
to propel a missile or projectile by use of rubber, elastic or spring energy,
that is capable of inflicting injury to a person or property.



   (B)   Unsafe carrying of loaded dangerous weapon within city limits
prohibited.



      (1)   In order to prevent the accidental discharge of any
dangerous weapon and the possibility of resulting injury to persons or
property, it shall be unlawful for a person, within the limits of the city,
other than on such person's property, property which the person has a right
to occupy or business place that is under the control of such person, to
carry on or about their person or vehicle, a dangerous weapon that is so
loaded as to be capable of accidental discharge, regardless if the weapon is
equipped with or utilizing a safety device.



      (2)   A firearm shall be considered to be capable of discharge
if loaded with live ammunition in the chamber, but is not considered capable
of discharge if loaded only in the magazine, clip, or cartridge receptacle in
any repeating weapon.



   (C)   Allowing minor child to violate unlawful.  No parent,
guardian, or custodian of a ward or child in their care shall permit a child
or ward to violate the provisions of this section within the limits of the
city.



   (D)   Exceptions.  The provisions of this sections shall not be
construed to prohibit the following:



      (1)   Any officer of the law or citizen acting at the
direction or instruction of an officer, in discharging a firearm in the
lawful performance of duty.



      (2)   Any citizen from discharging a dangerous weapon when
lawfully defending any person or property.



      (3)   The discharge of “blanks” during an official
celebration, athletic event or similar activity, if such event is sanctioned
by officials of a school, or events permitted by the city.



      (4)   The use by workers in the construction of buildings of
any mechanism designed to propel nails, bolts, screws, rivets, or fasteners,
as long as such mechanism is being used in the manner in which it was
intended.



      (5)   The enjoyment of target practice on property which the
participants have a right to occupy, with bow and arrow, pellet, B.B., or air
gun, when all the projectiles fired by any person are contained within a
proper backstop, trap, or target on such property so designed and positioned
as to prevent a hazard to any person or another's property.  This exception
shall not be available as a defense to prosecution under division (A) of this
section if any projectile is found to have not been contained within the
participants property due to missing the target or backstop, ricochet, or the
backstop, trap or target being inadequate to contain the projectile.



      (6)   The discharge of a firearm by a gunsmith in carrying out
the repair and maintenance of firearms, when the projectile is contained in a
bullet trap manufactured, designed and certified by the manufacturer to be
sufficient for the caliber and power of the firearm being tested and when the
noise of the weapon's discharge is sufficiently contained to the gunsmith's
premises in a manner that would prevent alarm or offense to the ordinary
sensibilities of other inhabitants of the city.



(Ord. 701, passed 4-11-89)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.08  TAMPERING WITH UTILITY  METERS.



   (A)   It is hereby declared a violation of law for any person to
tamper with a meter box, specifically including public utility meter boxes
for electricity and water.



   (B)   Tampering with a meter box shall be any attempt or actual
change in a reading of dials, figures, or any device that indicates the
amount of the utility used, and shall include breaking a seal on a meter box,
resetting any dials or digits within a meter box or by stopping a meter box
from registering use of a utility.



   (C)   A minimum charge may be made for any meter that has been
tampered with, using previous months up to two years for an experience
factor, and applying the existing rate structure.



(Ord. 590, passed 9-9-80)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.09  PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL.



   (A)   The drinking of any alcoholic beverages in any public park,
sidewalks, streets and alleys, on any public parking lot, on any private
parking lot of any shopping center, or any private parking lot of any retail
or commercial business or at any place where an athletic event or contest is
being conducted, or in, on or at any public school campus or facility, or in
any theater buildings, and/or any public building, within the corporate
limits of the city, whether afoot or as a passenger in or as an operator of
any vehicle is unlawful and is prohibited.



   (B)   The finding in one's possession of any opened container of the
type generally used to contain alcoholic beverages shall be prima facie
evidence that the person was then and there drinking alcoholic beverages in
violation of this section.



(Ord. 504, passed 5-2-74)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.10  USE, PURCHASE, POSSESSION, AND SALE OF SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Findings.  The city prohibits the use, purchase, possession,
sale and offering for sale the synthetic cannabinoid known or sold under such
names as "Spice", "Spice Diamond", "Spice Gold", "Pep Spice, "Yucatan Fire",
"Solar Flare", "Fire n' Ice", "Genie", "Dascents", "Zohai", "Sage", "Salvia
Divinorum", "K-2", "K-2 Summet", and "KO Knock Out -2".



   (B)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to prohibit the use,
possession, sale, ingestion or smoking of illegal smoking products and
ingestion devices hereinafter defined within the city limits.



   (C)   Definitions.



      (1)   ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCT.  Any substance, whether
described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice or any blend thereof, regardless
of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which
includes any one or more of the following chemicals:



         (a)   Salvia divinorum or Salvinorum A; all parts of the
plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing
or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every
compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such
plant, its seeds or extracts;



         (b)   2-[(1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-
5-(2-methylocatan) phenol (also known as CP47,497) and homologues;



         (c)   (6aS, 10aS)-9-(hydroxmethyl)-6,
6-dimethyl-3-(2methylocatan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10atetrahydrobenzo [3]
chorman-1-ol) (also known as HU-211 or Dexanbinol;



         (d)   1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphythoyl) indole (also known as
JWH-018); or



         (e)   Butyl-3-(naphthyoyl) indole (also known as
JWH-073).



      (2)   INGESTION DEVICE.  Equipment, a product or material
that is used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing an illegal smoking product into the human body, including:



         (a)   A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic,
or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or
punctured metal bowl;



         (b)   A water pipe;



         (c)   A carburetion tube or device;



         (d)   A smoking or carburetion mask;



         (e)   A chamber pipe;



         (f)   A carburetor pipe;



         (g)   An electric pipe;



         (h)   An air driven pipe;



         (i)   a chillum;



         (j)   A bong; or



         (k)   An ice pipe or chiller.



      (3)   PERSON.  An individual, corporation, partnership,
wholesaler, retailer or a licensed or unlicensed business.



   (D)   Sell, offer, gift, display or possession.  It shall be
unlawful for any person to use, possess, purchase, barter, give, publicly
display, sell or offer for sale any illegal smoking product.



   (E)   Use or possession of ingestion devices.  It shall be unlawful
for any person to use or possess with intent to use an ingestion device to
inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body an illegal
smoking product.



   (F)   Affirmative defense.  It shall be an affirmative defense to
prosecution of an offense under this section that any act described in this
section is under and pursuant to the direction or prescription of a license
physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe such act.



   (G)   Penalty.  Any person violating the provisions of this section
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.



(Ord. 1009, passed 8-10-10)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



      151.   FLOOD PREVENTION AND FLOOD MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS



      152.   (RESERVED)



      153.   SUBDIVISION CODE



      154.   ZONING CODE



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section




Building Code




   150.001   International Building Code, edition 2003 adopted



   150.002   Definitions



   150.003   Contractor’s annual registration and bond required



   150.004   Set-backs



   150.005   Drawings or survey required



   150.006   International Residential Code, edition 2003 adopted




Electrical Code




   150.010   National Electric Code adopted



   150.011   Scope of Code



   150.012   Definitions



   150.013   Compliance with electrical code required



   150.014   Office of Electrical Inspector created; compensation



   150.015   Powers and duties of electrical inspectors



   150.016   Electrical permits



   150.017   Applications for permits



   150.018   Electrical permit fees



   150.019   Expiration of permit



   150.020   Required inspections



   150.021   Defective work



   150.022   Meter loop equipment



   150.023   Work standards



   150.024   Signs



   150.025   Licensing of electricians



   150.026   Bond required for electrical contractors



   150.027   Failure to comply with orders of Electrical Inspector



   150.028   Interference with Electrical Inspector prohibited



   150.029   License to individuals doing own electrical work



   150.030   Penalty for violations




Plumbing Code




   150.040   International Plumbing Code adopted



   150.041   State plumbing license required



   150.042   Permit fees




Mechanical Code




   150.050   International Mechanical Code adopted



   150.051   Permit fees




Dangerous and Substandard Buildings, Property Maintenance Code




   150.060   Purpose



   150.061   Duties and powers of Inspector



   150.062   Definitions



   150.063   General requirements



   150.064   Violations



   150.065   Notices and orders



   150.066   Unsafe structures and equipment



   150.067   Emergency measures



   150.068   Means of appeal



   150.069   Failure to comply with orders



   150.070   Removal of orders or notices posted



   150.071   Interfering with enforcement of subchapter




Demolition, Moving, Relocation, Installation of Buildings




   150.080   Permit required



   150.081   Application for permit



   150.082   Investigation of application by building official



   150.083   Issuance of permit



   150.084   Insurance and bonding requirements



   150.085   Escort required



   150.086   House mover to make all arrangements



   150.087   Notice to utility companies



   150.088   Police escort



   150.089   Water and sewer connection mandatory



   150.090   Parking on public property



   150.091   Issuance of certificate of occupancy



   150.092   Liability of the municipality under this chapter



   150.093   Exceptions




Sidewalk Construction Required




   150.110   Sidewalks required



   150.111   Sidewalk specifications



   150.112   Construction required



   150.113   Unsafe sidewalk determination



   150.114   Appeal of order to repair



   150.115   Violation and penalty



Cross-reference:



   Building numbering, see § 97.02



BUILDING CODE



§ 150.001  INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE, EDITION 2003 ADOPTED.



   There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of establishing rules and
regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment,
use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of buildings and structures,
including permits and penalties, that certain building code known as the
International Building Code, edition 2003, being particularly the most
recently published edition thereof, save and except such portions as are
hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended, of which not less than one copy is
filed in the office of the Building Official of the municipality and the same
is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein,
and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions
thereof shall be controlling in the construction of all buildings and
structures therein contained within the corporate limits of the municipality.



(Ord. 915, passed 9-9-04; Am. Ord. 920, passed 9-9-04)



Cross-reference:



   Building Inspector, see §§ 39.080 – 39.083



§ 150.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   (A)   Wherever the term CORPORATION COUNSEL is used in the Building
Code, it shall be held to mean the Municipal Attorney for this municipality.



   (B)   Wherever the word  MUNICIPALITY is used in the Building Code,
it shall be held to mean this municipality.



§ 150.003  CONTRACTOR’S ANNUAL REGISTRATION AND BOND REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of contracting to
furnish labor and materials for the erection, construction or repair of
buildings, structures or signs for which a building permit is required,
without first registering with the city.



   (B)   Each contractor or builder who shall apply for such
registration shall pay an initial fee as provided for in § 10.00 of the Fee
Schedule set forth in Appendix 1 of this code.  Renewal may be effected at
any time prior to the date of expiration by a payment of a fee as provided
for in § 10.00 of the Fee Schedule set forth in Appendix 1 of this code.



   (C)   No person shall be registered as a contractor or builder until
he or she has made, executed, and



delivered a good and sufficient corporate surety bond in the amount of
$2,000, provides a current picture identification and current license if
applicable.



   (D)   All registrations issued under this code shall expire at
midnight on December 31 of the year of issuance.  Any registered contractor
failing to renew his or her surety bond shall be considered an applicant for
an original registration.  The fees required in division (B) of this section
shall not be prorated regardless of the date of issuance of an original
license.



   (E)   Any person desiring to erect, construct, or repair a structure
owned by that person and who personally performs such work shall not be
required to obtain the required registration or post the required bond but
shall be required to obtain the customary permit for the particular job under
this chapter.



(Ord. 920, passed 9-9-04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.004  SET-BACKS.



   (A)   From the date of passage of this section, no dwelling or
structure constructed in a residential area or district shall be constructed
closer to the street than the set-back line provided for on the plat of said
addition, or if the plat of said addition does not provide for same, then no
dwelling or structure shall be constructed no closer than 25 feet from the
front lot line.



   (B)   No dwelling or structure shall be constructed closer than five
feet from the side lines, except on a corner lot, then no building shall be
constructed closer than ten feet from said lot lines adjoining said street.



   (C)   No dwelling shall be constructed whereby there shall exist
less than a minimum of 25 feet from the rear foundation thereof to the back
lot line.



   (D)   For an exception to this section to be granted on application
for a building permit, a hearing shall be had with a minimum of ten days
notice to adjoining property owners to appear at such hearing before the City
Council to present their objections thereto.



   (E)   Penalty.  Those persons, individuals or corporate owners that
violate this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in a
sum not to exceed $200 and each day in violation thereof shall be deemed a
separate offense.



(Ord. 451, passed 3-4-68)



§ 150.005  DRAWINGS OR SURVEY REQUIRED.



   (A)   From the date of passage of this section when owner or
authorized agent or contractor desires to construct, enlarge, repair or
change a building or structure upon any lot or site within the city, he shall
obtain a permit therefor.



   (B)   Upon application for said permit, information together with
drawings and plats of the lot or property upon which said improvements are to
be built or constructed shall be submitted to the city for proper
determination of all boundary lines and it be determined that there shall not
be any encroachments and for proper placing of the said buildings or
structures on said lot or site in compliance with all building codes and
ordinances.



   (C)   Penalty.  Those individuals or persons or corporate owners
that violate this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
in a sum not to exceed $200, and each day in violation thereof shall be
deemed a separate offense.



(Ord. 452, passed 3-4-68)



§ 150.006  INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE, EDITION 2003 ADOPTED.



   There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of regulating and governing
the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair,
equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family
dwellings and multiple single family dwellings (townhouses) not more than
three stories in height with separate means of egress; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees thereof, that certain building
code known as the International Residential Code, edition 2003, being
particularly the most recently published edition thereof, save and except
such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which not
less than one copy is filed in the office of the Building Official of the
municipality and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set out at length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take
effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the construction of
all buildings and structures therein contained within the corporate limits of
the municipality.



(Ord. 917, passed 9-9-04; Am. Ord. 920, passed 9-9-04)



ELECTRICAL CODE



§ 150.010  NATIONAL ELECTRIC CODE ADOPTED.



   There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and
regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, and maintenance of
electric wiring and apparatus, including permits and penalties, that certain
electrical code known as the National Electric Code, being particularly the
most recently published edition thereof, save and except such portions as are
hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended, of which one copy is on file in
the office the Electrical Inspector of the municipality, and the same is
hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and
the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the construction, alteration,
maintenance, or removal of all electric wiring and apparatus within the
corporate limits of the municipality.



(Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 888, passed 3-11-03)



§ 150.011  SCOPE OF CODE.



   The provisions of this Electrical Code shall apply to all electrical
wiring and equipment installed, used, or maintained in the municipality,
except the electrical wiring or equipment used in the generation,
distribution, and rendition of service to the public, which is installed by
or for and owned or maintained by a public utility, telephone, or other such
company permitted to operate in the municipality.



(Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 888, passed 3-11-03)



§ 150.012  DEFINITIONS.



   Words used in the National Electric Code shall have the meanings
assigned to them herein.  Words relating to buildings and building use, when
not otherwise separately defined, shall have the meanings which conform to
the meanings set out in the building ordinances of the municipality. 
Otherwise, they shall have their usual meaning.  For the purpose of this



subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPROVED or APPROVAL.  Inspected and accepted by the Electrical
Inspector as having met the requirements of this code.



   BOARD.  The examining and supervisory board of electricians.



   COMMERCIAL BUILDING.  Any building, structure, or premises that
advertises as or conducts a business-like occupation dealing with merchandise
or services, including offices, stores, and the like, but not restricted to
such.



   DWELLING.  The abiding place of one or more persons in which the use
and management of sleeping quarters, all appliances for cooking, ventilating,
heating, or lighting are under one control.



   ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.  The chief Electrical Inspector and his or her
authorized assistants.



   ELECTRICAL WORK.  Any act in connection with the installing, altering,
repairing, or maintaining of electrical installations designed or capable of
carrying electrical energy, which act ordinarily requires the use of tools.



   JOURNEYMAN ELECTRICIAN.  Any person licensed as a journeyman
electrician in compliance with the requirements of this code, who works for
and under the general supervision and direction of a master electrician and
who does not hold himself or herself out to the public as being qualified to
contract for the doing of electrical work.



   MASTER ELECTRICIAN.  Any person licensed as a master electrician in
compliance with the requirements of this code, who holds himself or herself
out to the public as being qualified to do the kind of electrical work or to
contract for the doing of electrical work, by himself, herself or by the
employment of journeyman electricians which his or her license authorizes him
or her to do.



(Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 888, passed 3-11-03)



§ 150.013  COMPLIANCE WITH ELECTRICAL CODE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No electrical work shall be approved unless it is in strict
conformity with this Electrical Code, and unless such electrical work is in
conformity with the approved methods of construction for the safety of life
and property.



   (B)   When not specifically covered by this code, the Standard Fire
Code shall be prima facie evidence of such approved methods, except that the
provisions of this code shall prevail over the Standard Fire Code in case of
conflicting provisions.



   (C)   Any person who, as owner, agent, servant, lessee or otherwise,
violates, disobeys, or refuses to comply with, or who resists or opposes the
execution of, or violates any provisions of this code, or who occupies or
maintains any building or structure in which the wiring and appliances are in
violation of this code, shall be held in violation of this code.



   (D)   Any and all electrical installations erected or altered in
violation of this code shall be condemned and removed at the expense of the
person erecting or altering the same.



(Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 888, passed 3-11-03)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 150.014  OFFICE OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR CREATED; COMPENSATION.



   There is hereby created the office of Electrical Inspector, who shall
be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the confirmation of Council.  The
Electrical Inspector shall be versed in the approved methods of electrical
construction for the safety of life and property and the National Electric
Code.  He or she shall receive such compensation as the Council may decide.



(Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 888, passed 3-11-03)



§ 150.015  POWERS AND DUTIES OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.



   (A)   The Electrical Inspector shall have the following powers and
duties:



      (1)   Enforce the provisions of this code.



      (2)   Issue permits and collect fees.



      (3)   Enter any house or premises to examine any electric
wiring or installation of electrical wiring, fixtures or equipment therein,
during all reasonable hours.



      (4)   Order the electric service disconnected where improper
or defective wiring exists, or where electrical construction or equipment has
been installed without a permit as required herein.



      (5)   Order compliance with the provisions of this code where
a change of occupancy occurs in a building, which requires changes or
alterations to existing wiring.



      (6)   Disconnect electrical services in case of emergency.



      (7)   Attach to electrical equipment or meters any official
notice to prevent the use of electricity.



      (8)   Order all persons to cease and desist doing any work
being done without a permit or where such work is in violation of this code.



      (9)   Order special rulings to govern electrical work or
construction for a particular occupancy, building, or installation not
covered by this code nor the National Electric Code.



      (10)   Require, when deemed necessary, plans, specifications,
and a complete feeder layout of large or special installations of electrical
work.



   (B)   The Electrical Inspector shall make a thorough inspection of
all electrical work from time to time. Where such electrical work is in a
dangerous or unsafe condition or is deemed to be in interference with the
work of the Fire Department, the Electrical Inspector shall notify the person
owning, using, or operating such electrical work to place it in a safe,
secure, and non-interfering condition.  Any person failing, neglecting, or
refusing within a reasonable time to make the necessary repairs or changes
and have the necessary work completed, within a reasonable time after the
receipt of such notice, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this code,
and every day which shall elapse after the expiration of such reasonable time
until such wires and apparatus are repaired, removed, or changed as required
by the Electrical Inspector shall be considered a separate offense within the
intent and meaning of this code.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the
Electrical Inspector in the discharge of his or her duties, or to prevent, or
in any manner attempt to prevent, the Electrical Inspector from carrying out
his or her duties.



(Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 888, passed 3-11-03)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 150.016  ELECTRICAL PERMITS.



   (A)   No installation, alteration or removal shall be made of the
wiring of any building or structure for light, heat or power, or to increase
the load of energy carried by such wires or equipment, nor shall any building
or structure be wired for electric lights, appliances, motors, apparatus, or
heating devices, nor alterations made thereto, without a written permit being
first obtained by the master electrician.



   (B)   The only exception will be that a journeyman may obtain a
permit under the master’s license if the journeyman is on the master’s
current list on file with the city.  It will be the sole responsibility of
the master to keep a current list on file with the city.



   (C)   No permit for installation or alteration of any wiring,
heating devices, motors, appliances, and apparatus shall be issued until the
license and bond herein required have been obtained. 



(Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 888, passed 3-11-03)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 150.017  APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS.



   (A)   Applicants for permits shall be made in writing and shall
contain the following:



      (1)   Date;



      (2)   Property owner;



      (3)   Name of applicant;



      (4)   Address where the work is to be done;



      (5)   Description of the work to be done;



      (6)   Other information deemed necessary by the Electrical
Inspector;



      (7)   List of actual load - new and/or existing;



      (8)   Drawing to scale of work to be performed; drawing to
include proper electrical symbols and footnotes; and



      (9)   Contact phone number.



   (B)   Applications for permits must be presented in person during
regular municipal office hours.



(Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 888, passed 3-11-03)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 150.018  ELECTRICAL PERMIT FEES.



   The permit fees as provided for in § 10.00 of the Fee Schedule, as set
forth in Appendix 1 of this code, shall be paid prior to the work commencing
for all new work, repairs, renewal, or additions.  When fees are not set
therein, the Electrical Inspector shall set the fees.



(Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 888, passed 3-11-03)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 150.019  EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.



   Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by
such permit is commenced within one month after its issuance, or if the work
authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one month
after the work is commenced; each permit shall contain the date the job is
expected to be complete.  The Electrical Inspector may extend the expiration
date when deemed necessary; otherwise all permits shall expire 180 days after
issued.



(Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 888, passed 3-11-03)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 150.020  REQUIRED INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Rough-in required.  No work shall be concealed in any manner
until such work has been inspected and approved, and no work shall be
energized until such work is complete and all outlets supplied with approved
fixtures, devices, or covers.



   (B)   Final inspection required.  When any work is completed, the
permit electrician shall request a final inspection.  If the electrical work
meets all requirements, the Electrical Inspector shall contact the utility
company for power.  It shall be unlawful for any public service company to
furnish current to any new building, tent, structure, or outdoor wiring of
any kind without first obtaining clearance from the Electrical Inspector. 
Whenever any service is discontinued to any building or structure (except for
nonpayment of a bill), a clearance will be necessary before reconnection of
such building or structure.



(Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 888, passed 3-11-03)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 150.021  DEFECTIVE WORK.



   When a permit holder is given notice that defects exist in his or her
electrical work, he or she shall make the corrections promptly.  Failure to
make such corrections within ten days shall constitute a violation.



(Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 888, passed 3-11-03)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 150.022  METER LOOP EQUIPMENT.



   All buildings shall have meter loops and disconnects grouped at an
outside location accessible to meter readers and testers at all times.



(Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 888, passed 3-11-03)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 150.023  WORK STANDARDS.



   (A)   Commercial wiring.  Branch circuits of 20 amp shall have no
more than six outlets installed on any one circuit.



   (B)   Residential wiring.  Not more than eight outlets shall be
installed on any one circuit, with a maximum demand of 1,600 watts on No. 12
wire.  No wire smaller than No. 12 shall be permitted.



   (C)   Grounding.  All ground conductors must be protected against
any physical damage.



   (D)   New knob and tube wiring systems prohibited.  In all new work
or revisions of old work, new knob and tube wiring systems shall not be used
for interior wiring in the city.



   (E)   Aluminum wire.  Aluminum wire smaller than No. 6 gauge shall
be prohibited.  Aluminum wire No. 6 and larger may be used only with
approved connectors and terminals.



   (F)   The meter base.  The meter base must be not less than 5 feet,
6 inches, nor more than 6 feet above ground.  The drop pigtail shall be a
minimum of 18 inches long.  All meter bases shall have a minimum 2-inch
tubular mast, extending a minimum of 30 inches and not more than 36 inches
above the roof of single-story structures, complete with weatherhead and
anchor clamp with insulator to tie off service drop.



   (G)   Service entrance conductors.  Service entrance conductors
shall meet the requirements of the National Electric Code for each instance.



   (H)   Three-wire service conductors limited.  There shall not be
more than two sets of three-wire service conductors leading out of a meter
base.



   (I)   Main-disconnecting means required.  Each set of service
conductors leading from a meter base shall have a main-disconnecting means.



   (J)   Junction box.  All branch circuits shall originate in a
junction box.



   (K)   Master or journeyman required.  At no time will work be
allowed without a master or journeyman electrician on the job site.



(Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 888, passed 3-11-03)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 150.024  SIGNS.



   No signs or neon tubing shall be installed until a permit has been
issued.  A building permit is required for the sign, and an electrical
permit is required for the wiring.  A licensed electrician must connect the
sign to the power supply.



(Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 888, passed 3-11-03)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 150.025  LICENSING OF ELECTRICIANS.



   Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to engage in the business of
electrical construction or the installation of wiring and apparatus for
electric lights, appliances, heating, or power in the municipality shall hold
a valid electrical license from the State of Texas and a current city
registration.  The registration fee  shall be as provided for in § 10.00
of the Fee Schedule set forth in Appendix 1 of this code.



(Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 888, passed 3-11-03; Am. Ord. 923,
passed 3-29-05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.026  BOND REQUIRED FOR ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS.



   Every person, firm or corporation doing electrical business within the
municipality shall execute and deliver to the municipality a bond with a
surety bonding company in the sum of $2,000 to indemnify the municipality or
any citizen for any damage caused by the failure of such person, firm or
corporation doing the electrical work to comply strictly with the provisions
of this chapter.



(Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 888, passed 3-11-03)



§ 150.027  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDERS OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.



   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall fail to correct any defect
or defects in his or her work or to meet the required standards, after having
been given notice of the unfit condition by the Electrical Inspector, within
a reasonable time, shall be refused any other permit until such defect or
defects have been corrected and shall be subject to the revocation of his or
her license, either for continual defective work or upon conviction for
violation of any provision of this chapter.



(Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 888, passed 3-11-03)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 150.028  INTERFERENCE WITH ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the Electrical
Inspector, or his or her agent, in the discharge of his or her duties, or to
prevent, or to attempt to prevent, the Electrical Inspector from discharging
his or her duties.



(Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 888, passed 3-11-03)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 150.029  LICENSE TO INDIVIDUALS DOING  OWN ELECTRICAL WORK.



   Any individual desiring to perform his or her own electrical work
personally shall not be required to make the required bond or to obtain the
required license, but shall be required to obtain the customary permit for
that particular job.  Such work done by an individual must be done by him or
her personally on his or her own property on which he or she permanently
resides, and not be a way of performing a service to the public generally.



(Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 888, passed 3-11-03)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 150.030  PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS.



   Any person, firm, or corporation found guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than the
maximum fine as provided for in § 10.99 of this code, together with the
costs of such prosecution.  Each day during which a violation continues
shall be a separate offense.



(Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 888, passed 3-11-03)



PLUMBING CODE



§ 150.040  INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.



   For the protection and preservation of the public health, safety,
property and the general welfare of the people, the City Council hereby
adopts the International Plumbing Code  in its entirety as its own and all
plumbing work and plumbing inspections in the city must be done in accordance
with the International Plumbing Code.



(Ord. 826, passed 9-8-98; Am. Ord. 916, passed 9-9-04; Am. Ord. 920, passed
9-9-04)



§ 150.041  STATE PLUMBING LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Except as provided in §§ 150.043 and 150.044, any person, firm or
corporation desiring to engage in the business of installing, changing,
repairing, servicing or renovating plumbing in the municipality shall hold a
current state plumbing license.



(Ord. 826, passed 9-8-98; Am. Ord. 907, passed 5-11-04)  Penalty, see §
10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate plumbing, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code §§
214.012 et seq.



   Texas Plumbing License Law, see Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 6243-101



§ 150.042  PERMIT FEES



   Fees for required plumbing permits shall be provided for in § 10.00 of
the Fee Schedule set forth in Appendix 1 of this code.



§ 150.043  PLUMBING BY PROPERTY OWNER IN HOMESTEAD.



   A property owner is not required to be licensed to perform plumbing in
the property owner’s homestead.  The property owner is required to obtain
the customary permit for that particular job and is required to have their
work inspected.



(Ord. 907, passed 5-11-04)



§ 150.044  WORK INCIDENTAL TO OTHER PROFESSIONS.



   A person is not required to be licensed to perform plumbing incidental
to and in connection with the business in which the person is employed or
engaged if the person is regularly employed as or acting as a maintenance
person or maintenance engineer and does not engage in plumbing for the public.



(Ord. 907, passed 5-11-04)



MECHANICAL CODE



§ 150.050  INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED.



   The 2003 edition of the International Mechanical Code published by the
International Code Council is hereby adopted to govern installation of
mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment,
appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances thereto, including
ventilation, heating, cooling, air-conditioning and refrigeration systems,
incinerators, and other energy-related systems in the municipality.  The
International Mechanical Code is adopted hereby by reference as though it
were copied herein fully.



(Ord. 918, passed 9-9-04; Am. Ord. 920, passed 9-9-04)



§ 150.051  PERMIT FEES.



   Fees for required permits shall be as provided for in § 10.00 of the
Fee Schedule set forth in Appendix 1 of this code.



DANGEROUS AND SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS, PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



§ 150.060  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures,
equipment and exterior property.  The owner of the premises shall maintain
the structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements,
except as otherwise provided for in this code.  A person shall not occupy as
owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a
sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of
this chapter.  Occupants of a dwelling unit or rooming unit are responsible
for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling
unit or rooming unit or premises which they occupy and control.



   (B)   All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land
shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as
provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect
the public health or safety.



(Ord. 979, passed 5-13-08)



§ 150.061  DUTIES AND POWERS OF INSPECTOR.



   (A)   Inspections.  The Building Inspector shall make all of the
required inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved
agencies or individuals.  All reports of such inspections shall be in
writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or
by the responsible individual.  The Building Inspector is authorized to
engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual
technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing
authority.



   (B)   Right of entry.  The Building Inspector is authorized to
enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect subject to
constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures.  If entry
is refused or not obtained, the Building Inspector is authorized to pursue
recourse as provided by law.



   (C)   Notices and orders.  The Building Inspector or his assign
shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this
code.



   (D)   Modifications.  Whenever there are practical difficulties
involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the Building Inspector
shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases,
provided the Building Inspector shall first find that special individual
reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical and the modification
is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such
modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements.  The
details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the
department files.



(Ord. 979, passed 5-13-08)



§ 150.062  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPROVED.  Approved by the Building Inspector.



   BASEMENT.  That portion of a building which is partly or completely
below grade.



   BATHROOM.  A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or
shower.



   BEDROOM.  Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping
purposes.



   BUILDING INSPECTOR.  The official who is charged with the
administration and enforcement of this code or any duly authorized
representative.



   CONDEMN.  To adjudge unfit for occupancy.



   DWELLING UNIT.  A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.



   EASEMENT.  That portion of land or property reserved for present or
future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the
property.  The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above
a said lot or lots.



   EXTERIOR PROPERTY.  The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.



   EXTERMINATION.  The control and elimination of insects, rats or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying,
fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest elimination methods.



   GARBAGE.  The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



   GUARD.  A building component or a system of building components
located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes
the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.



   HABITABLE SPACE.  Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking.  Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility
spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.



   IMMINENT DANGER.  A condition which could cause serious or
life-threatening injury or death at any time.



   INFESTATION.  The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or
premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.



   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE.  A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the
public streets for reason including but not limited to being unlicensed,
wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved
under its own power.



   LET FOR OCCUPANCY OR LET.  To permit, provide or offer possession or
occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or
structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant
to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.



   OCCUPANCY.  The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is
utilized or occupied.



   OCCUPANT.  Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having
possession of a space within a building which is available for unobstructed
ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.



   OPERATOR.  Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure
or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.



   OWNER.  Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a
legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official
records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the
property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian
of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the
estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a
court.



   PERSON.  An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group
acting as a unit.



   PREMISES.  A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way,
including any structures thereon.



   PUBLIC WAY.  Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.



   ROOMING HOUSE.  A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or
without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family
dwelling.



   ROOMING UNIT.  Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for
cooking purposes.



   RUBBISH.  Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.



   STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE.  An offense in which the prosecution in a
legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its
case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was
prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required
to do.



   STRUCTURE.  That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.



   TENANT.  A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not
the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.



   YARD.  An open space on the same lot with a structure.



(Ord. 979, passed 5-13-08)



§ 150.063  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Exterior property areas.



      (1)   Sanitation.  All exterior property and premises shall
be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition.  The occupant shall
keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or
controls in a clean and sanitary condition.



      (2)   Grading and drainage.  All premises shall be graded and
maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon.



      (3)   Sidewalks and driveways.  All sidewalks, walkways,
stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper
state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions.



      (4)   Weeds.  All premises and exterior property shall be
maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 12 inches.  All
noxious weeds shall be prohibited.  Weeds shall be defined as all grasses,
annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however,
this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.



      (5)   Rodent harborage.  All structures and exterior property
shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation.  Where rodents are
found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will
not be injurious to human health.  After extermination, proper precautions
shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent re- infestation.



      (6)   Exhaust vents.  Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or
blowers shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke,
odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or
adjacent public or private property or that of another tenant.



      (7)   Accessory structures.  All accessory structures,
including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained
structurally sound and in good repair.



      (8)   Motor vehicles.  Except as provided for in other
regulations, no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept
or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of
major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or
dismantled.  Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an
approved spray booth.  Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to
undergo major overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is
performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved
for such purposes.



      (9)   Defacement of property.  No person shall willfully or
wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or
building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking,
carving or graffiti.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore
said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair.



   (B)   Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs.



      (1)   Swimming pools.  Swimming pools shall be maintained in
a clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair.



      (2)   Enclosures.  Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas,
containing water more than 24 inches in depth shall be completely surrounded
by a fence or barrier at least 48 inches in height above the finished ground
level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool.  Gates and
doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching.  Where the
self-latching device is less than 54 inches above the bottom of the gate, the
release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate. 
Self-closing and self latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate
will positively close and latch when released from an open position of six
inches from the gatepost.  No existing pool enclosure shall be removed,
replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety
barrier.



   (C)   Exterior structure.



      (1)   The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the
public health, safety or welfare.



      (2)   All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to,
doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and
fences shall be maintained in good condition.  Exterior wood surfaces, other
than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by
painting or other protective covering or treatment.  Peeling, flaking and
chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted.  All siding and
masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the
perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather
resistant and water tight.  All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion
shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust
or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and
corrosion.  Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces.
Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this
requirement.



      (3)   Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in
a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting
the property as specified in § 97.02, Street Numbering.



      (4)   All structural members shall be maintained free from
deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and
live loads.



      (5)   All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free
from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to
prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.



      (6)   All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and
loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface
coated where required to prevent deterioration.



      (7)   The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have
defects that admit rain.  Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent
dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the
structure.  Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good
repair and free from obstructions.  Roof water shall not be discharged in a
manner that creates a public nuisance.



      (8)   All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim,
wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good
repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.



      (9)   All overhang extensions including, but not limited to
canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and
exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so
as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of
metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust
by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or
similar surface treatment.



      (10)   Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and
all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound,
in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed
loads.



      (11)   Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and
capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good
condition.



      (12)   Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in
sound condition, good repair and weather tight.



      (13)   Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be
easily opened and capable of being held in position by window hardware.



      (14)   All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall
be maintained in good condition.  Locks at all entrances to dwelling units,
rooming units and guestrooms shall tightly secure the door.



      (15)   Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit
or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a
deadbolt lock meeting specifications set forth herein.  Such deadbolt locks
shall be operated only by the turning of a knob or a key and shall have a
lock throw of not less than one-inch.  For the purpose of this section, a
sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock.  Such
deadbolt locks shall be installed according to manufacturer's specifications
and maintained in good working order.  All deadbolt locks required by this
section shall be designed and installed in such a manner so as to be operable
inside of the dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit without the
use of a key, tool, combination thereof or any other special knowledge or
effort.



      (16)   Operable windows located in whole or in part within six
feet above ground level or a walking surface below that provide access to a
dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or
let shall be equipped with a window sash locking devices.



   (D)   Interior structure.



      (1)   The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall
be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition.
Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy or control
in a clean and sanitary condition.  Every owner of a structure containing a
rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling
units or two or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean
and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and
exterior property.



      (2)   All structural members shall be maintained structurally
sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads.



      (3)   All interior surfaces, including windows and doors,
shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition.  Peeling,
chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. 
Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions
shall be corrected.



      (4)   Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or
other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair.



      (5)   Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and
capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good
condition.



      (6)   Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its
frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and
securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer
of the attachment hardware.



   (E)   Rubbish and garbage.



      (1)   All exterior property and premises, and the interior of
every structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.



      (2)   Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all
rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved
containers.



      (3)   The owner of every occupied premises shall supply
approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premises shall
be responsible for the removal of rubbish.



      (4)   Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation
shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without first
removing the doors.



      (5)   Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage
in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage
disposal facility or approved garbage containers.



      (6)   The owner of every dwelling shall supply one of the
following: an approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit;
an approved incinerator unit in the structure available to the occupants in
each dwelling unit; or an approved leak proof, covered, outside garbage
container.



      (7)   The operator of every establishment producing garbage
shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leak proof
containers provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such
materials until removed from the premises for disposal.



   (F)   Extermination.



      (1)   All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent
infestation.  All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be
promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to
human health.  After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to
prevent reinfestation.



      (2)   The owner of any structure shall be responsible for
extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.



      (3)   The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a
single-tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination
on the premises.



      (4)   The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for
the continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure.  Exception:
Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner
shall be responsible for extermination.



(Ord. 979, passed 5-13-08)



§ 154.064  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Unlawful acts.  It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or
corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions
of this code.



   (B)   Notice of violation.  The Building Inspector  shall serve a
notice of violation or order in accordance with § 150.065.



   (C)   Prosecution of violation.  Any person failing to comply with
a notice of violation or order served in accordance with § 150.065 shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and the violation shall be deemed a strict
liability offense.  If the notice of violation is not complied with, the
code official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity
to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or
termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the
provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall
be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and
shall be a lien upon such real estate.



   (D)   Violation penalties.  Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the
requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state
or local laws.  Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense.



   (E)   Abatement of violation.  The imposition of the penalties
herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction
from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a
violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the
building, structure or premises.



(Ord. 979, passed 5-13-08)



§ 150.065  NOTICES AND ORDERS.



   (A)   Notice to person responsible.  Whenever the Building
Inspector determines that there has been a violation of this code or has
grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in
the manner prescribed in division (B) and (C) of this section to the person
responsible for the violation as specified in this code.  Notices for
condemnation procedures shall also comply with § 150.066.



   (B)   Form.  Such notice prescribed in division (A) of this section
shall be in accordance with all of the following:



      (1)   Be in writing.



      (2)   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification.



      (3)   Include a statement of the violation or violations and
why the notice is being issued.



      (4)   Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to
make the repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or
structure into compliance with the provisions of this code.



      (5)   Inform the property owner of the right to appeal.



      (6)   Include a statement of the right to file a lien in
accordance with § 150.064(C).



   (C)   Method of service.  Such notice shall be deemed to be
properly served if a copy thereof is:



      (1)   Delivered personally;



      (2)   Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the
last  known address; or



      (3)   If the notice is returned showing that the letter was
not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or
about the structure affected by such notice.



   (D)   Penalties.  Penalties for noncompliance with orders and
notices shall be as set forth in § 150.064(D).



   (E)   Transfer of ownership.  It shall be unlawful for the owner of
any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon
whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease
or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the
provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied
with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of
violation issued by the Building Inspector and shall furnish to the Building
Inspector a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or
notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition
for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or
notice of violation.



(Ord. 979, passed 5-13-08)



§ 150.066  UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   General.  When a structure or equipment is found by the
Building Inspector to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human
occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant
to the provisions of this code.



   (B)   Unsafe structures.  An unsafe structure is one that is found
to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the
occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or
warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains
unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe
or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or
complete collapse is possible.



   (C)   Unsafe equipment.  Unsafe equipment includes any boiler,
heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device,
flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the
structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a
hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the
premises or structure.



   (D)   Structure unfit for human occupancy.  A structure is unfit
for human occupancy whenever the Building Inspector finds that such structure
is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in
disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested,
contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination,
sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this
code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the
occupants of the structure or to the public.



   (E)   Closing of vacant structures.  If the structure is vacant and
unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural
collapse, the Building Inspector is authorized to post a placard of
condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to
be an attractive nuisance.  Upon failure of the owner to close up the
premises within the time specified in the order, the Building Inspector shall
cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available public
agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof
shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located
and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other
legal resource.



   (F)   Notice.  Whenever the Building Inspector has condemned a
structure or equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such
notice and served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the
structure or equipment in accordance with § 150.065(C).  If the notice
pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed on the condemned equipment. 
The notice shall be in the form prescribed in § 150.065(B).



   (G)   Placard.  Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to
comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the Building
Inspector shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard
bearing the word "Condemned" and a statement of the penalties provided for
occupying the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.



   (H)   Placard removal.  The Building Inspector shall remove the
condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the
condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated.  Any
person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of
the Building Inspector  shall be subject to the penalties provided by this
code.



   (I)   Prohibited occupancy.  Any occupied structure condemned and
placarded by the Building Inspector shall be vacated as ordered by the
Building Inspector.  Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or
shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible
for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises or operate
placarded equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided by this code.



(Ord. 979, passed 5-13-08)



§ 150.067  EMERGENCY MEASURES.



   (A)   Imminent danger.  When, in the opinion of the Building
Inspector, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or
structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure
has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when
there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the
proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors
or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective
or dangerous equipment, the Building Inspector is hereby authorized and
empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises
forthwith.  The Building Inspector shall cause to be posted at each entrance
to such structure a notice reading as follows: "This Structure Is Unsafe and
Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the Building Inspector."  It shall be
unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of
securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous
condition or of demolishing the same.



   (B)   Temporary safeguards.  Notwithstanding other provisions of
this code, whenever, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, there is
imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the Building Inspector  shall
order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings,
to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure
herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be
taken as the Building Inspector deems necessary to meet such emergency.



   (C)   Closing streets.  When necessary for public safety, the
Building Inspector shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the
authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and
places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being
utilized.



   (D)   Emergency repairs.  For the purposes of this section, the
Building Inspector shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform
the required work as expeditiously as possible.



   (E)   Costs of emergency repairs.  Costs incurred in the
performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction.  The legal
counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the
owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the
recovery of such costs.



   (F)   Hearing.  Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall
comply with such order forthwith.  Any affected person shall thereafter,
upon petition directed to the Council, be afforded a hearing as described in
this code.



(Ord. 979, passed 5-13-08)



§ 150.068  MEANS OF APPEAL.



   (A)   General procedures.  Any person directly affected by a
decision of the Building Inspector or a notice or order issued under this
code shall have the right to appeal to the City Council, provided that a
written application for appeal is filed within 20 days after the day the
decision, notice or order was served.  An application for appeal shall be
based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally
adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this
code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately
satisfied by other means.  Building Inspector shall set the matter for
hearing before the Council.  Notice of the date, hour and place of the
hearing shall be posted and published in the newspaper at least ten days
prior to the meeting and shall order all interested parties who desire to be
heard to appear and show cause, if any they have, why the building or
structure, or portion thereof, involved in the proceedings should not be
repaired, vacated and repaired, or demolished.



   (B)   Open hearing.  Hearings shall be open to the public.  The
appellant, the appellant's representative, the Building Inspector and any
person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.



   (C)   Council decision.  The Council shall modify or reverse the
decision of the Building Inspector only by a concurring vote of a majority of
the Council.  If, from a full and fair consideration of the evidence and
testimony received at the hearing, the City Council shall determine that the
building or structure, or any portion thereof, is unsafe and a public
nuisance, then it shall deny the appeal and issue an order, certified by the
City Clerk:



      (1)   That the building or structure must be repaired, vacated
and repaired, or demolished;



      (2)   Particulars which render the building or structure
unsafe and a public nuisance and the things required to be done;



      (3)   Specify the time within which the work required must be
commenced, which shall not be less than ten days after the issuance of the
order;



      (4)   Specify a reasonable time within which the work shall be
completed.



   (D)   Records and copies.  The decision of the Council shall be
recorded.  Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the Building
Inspector.  The Building Inspector shall cause copies of the order rendered
to be posted on the building or structure involved and served in the manner
upon the persons specified in § 150.065.



   (E)   Stays of enforcement.  Appeals of notice and orders (other
than imminent danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and
order until the appeal is heard by the Council.



(Ord. 979, passed 5-13-08)



§ 150.069  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDERS.



   (A)   The owner or other person having charge and control over any
building or structure determined by the Building Inspector or, upon appeal,
by the City Council to be unsafe and a public nuisance who shall fail to
comply with any order to repair, vacate and repair, or demolish such building
or structure, or any portion thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99.



   (B)   The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with
any order to vacate any building or structure, or any portion thereof, in
accordance with any order given as provided for in this subchapter, shall be
punished as provided in § 10.99.



   (C)   Action by city.



      (1)   Authority to vacate or demolish.  Whenever an order to
repair, vacate and repair, or demolish any building or structure, or any
portion thereof, has not been complied with within the time set by the City
Council, the city shall have the power, in addition to any other remedy
herein provided, to:



         (a)   Cause the building or structure ordered to be
repaired to be vacated until such time as the necessary repairs have been
made.  No person shall thereafter occupy or permit to be occupied any such
building until and unless the necessary repairs have been made and the
Building Inspector has approved same and issued a certificate of occupancy
for such building or structure.



         (b)   Request the Building Inspector to cause the
building or structure to be demolished, and the land restored to a reasonable
clear and level condition, including the filling of any excavation to the
finished grade of the surrounding area.  The demolition of any building or
structure, and the sale of the materials thereof, shall be by a contract
conforming to all applicable state and federal bidding laws.  The Building
Inspector may sell any such building or structure singly or otherwise.  Any
proceeds from the sale of any building or structure, or group of buildings or
structures, over and above the cost of demolition, and cleaning the site,
shall be retained to be distributed to the parties or persons lawfully
entitled thereto.



      (2)   Report of demolition.  Upon completion of the
demolition of any building or structure, or any portion thereof, under this
section, the Building Inspector shall cause to be prepared and filed with the
City Council a report specifying:



         (a)   The work done;



         (b)   The cost of the work and incidental expenses;



         (c)   A description of the real property upon which the
building or structure was located;



         (d)   The names and addresses of the persons entitled to
notice pursuant to § 150.065; and



         (e)   The assessment against each lot or parcel or land
proposed to be levied to pay the cost thereof.



         (f)   Any such report may include demolition work on any
number of buildings or structures on any number of parcels of property,
whether contiguous to each other or not.  The term INCIDENTAL EXPENSES shall
include, but not be limited to, the expenses and costs of the city in
preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, inspection of the work,
and the costs of printing and making required hereunder.



      (3)   Hearing on report and assessment of costs.



         (a)   Upon filing of the report of the Building
Inspector, the City Council shall, by resolution, fix the day, hour and place
when it will hear and pass upon the report, together with any objections or
protests which may be raised by demolition, and any other interested
persons.  At least ten days before the date set for the hearing, the
Building Inspector shall cause copies of his or her report and notice of the
filing of his or her reports and of the day, hour and place when the City
Council will hear and pass upon the report, and any objections or protests
thereto, to be posted and served in the manner and upon the persons specified
in § 150.065.  A copy of the notice shall be published once at least ten
days prior to the date set for the hearing in the official newspaper of the
city.



         (b)   Any person interested in and affected by the
proposed assessment may file written protests or objections with the City
Clerk at any time prior to the hour set for the hearing on the report of the
City Superintendent.  Each such protest or objection must contain a
description of the property in which the signer thereof is interested and
grounds of such protest or objection.  Upon the day and hour fixed for the
hearing, the City Council shall hear and pass upon the report of the Building
Inspector, together with any objections or protests which may be raised by
any of the property owners liable to be assessed for the cost of the
demolition and other interested persons.  The Council may make such
revisions, corrections or modifications in the report as it may deem just,
and the report as submitted or as revised, corrected and modified, together
with the assessment, the report and the assessment and all protests or
objections shall be final and conclusive.  The City Council may adjourn the
hearings from time to time.



      (4)   Contest of assessment.  The validity of any assessment
levied under the provisions of this section shall not be contested in any
action or proceeding unless the same is commenced within 30 days after the
assessment is confirmed.



      (5)   Assessment as lien on property.



         (a)   The amount of the cost of abating such nuisance
upon lots or parcels of land, including incidental expenses, as confirmed by
the City Council, shall constitute special assessments against the respective
lots or parcels of land, and as thus made and confirmed shall constitute a
lien on such property for the amount of such assessments, respectively, until
paid.  Such lien shall, for all purposes, take priority, until paid.  Such
lien shall, for all purposes, take priority over all other liens except tax
liens or paving assessment liens.



         (b)   Within a reasonable length of time after the
special assessment liens are created by action of the City Council under this
section, the City Clerk shall cause a certified copy of such special
assessment lien to be filed with the County Clerk in the deed records of
Grayson County.  Such special assessment liens shall bear interest at the
rate of 8% per annum from the date of filling of the same with the County
Clerk and such lien shall be collected in the same manner as other assessment
liens are collected under the laws of the state.



(Ord. 979, passed 5-13-08)



§ 150.070  REMOVAL OF ORDERS OR NOTICES POSTED.



   Any person who removes any notice or order posted as required in this
subchapter shall be punished as provided in § 10.99.



(Ord. 979, passed 5-13-08)



§ 150.071  INTERFERING WITH ENFORCEMENT OF SUBCHAPTER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere
with any officer, agent or employee of the city or with any person who owns
or holds any estate or interest in any building or structure, or any portion
thereof, which has been ordered to be repaired, vacated and repaired, or
demolished, or with any person to whom such building or structure has been
lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter, whenever any
such officer, agent, employee, purchaser or person having an interest or
estate in such building or structure is engaged in repairing, vacating and
repairing, or demolishing any such building or structure pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter, or in performing any necessary act preliminary
to or incidental to such work, or authorized or directed pursuant thereto.



(Ord. 979, passed 5-13-08)



DEMOLITION, MOVING, RELOCATION, INSTALLATION OF BUILDINGS



§ 150.080  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to demolish, move or relocate a
building, structure or portion thereof, except portable storage buildings not
greater than 12 feet in width, 24 feet in length, and 12 feet in height,
within the corporate limits of the municipality without first obtaining a
building relocation/ installation/demolition permit from the city.



(Am. Ord. 953, passed 12-13-05)



§ 150.081  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Any person desiring to demolish, move or relocate any house,
building or structure within the corporate limits shall file any application
with the City Inspector requesting that he or she be permitted to do so. 
Written application for such permit shall be filed at least seven days prior
to the actual moving of the structure.  Upon filing an application for a
permit, the applicant shall pay such fees as provided for in § 10.00 of the
Fee Schedule, as set forth in Appendix 1 of this code.



   (B)   The application shall contain the following information:



      (1)   Name, address, and telephone number of applicant;



      (2)   Description and size of the house, building, or
structure to be moved along with its present location, together with a
picture thereof;



      (3)   Legal description of the lot and the local address upon
which the house, building, or structure is to be moved or relocated if a
permit is granted;



      (4)   A drawing or plot plan showing the dimensions of the lot
or tract of land upon which the house, building, or structure is to be moved
or relocated, the location of existing buildings or structures upon the lot,
if any, and the location of existing buildings or structures upon adjoining
lots;



      (5)   The proposed route, including the time and date when the
applicant proposes to move or relocate the house, building, or structure;



      (6)   Intended use of the house, building, or structure.



(Am. Ord. 953, passed 12-13-05)



§ 150.082  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION  BY BUILDING OFFICIAL.



   (A)   Upon filing of the application, the Building Official shall
investigate the application by inspecting the house, building, or structure
to be moved or relocated upon the lot or tract of land, and the lot or tract
of land upon which the house, building, or structure is to be located.  He
or she shall then advise the applicant whether the house, building, or
structure, if allowed to be moved onto the designated lot or tract of land,
would meet all of the requirements of the Building Code and other applicable
regulations of the municipality.



   (B)   A deposit as provided for in § 10.00 of the Fee Schedule, as
set forth in Appendix 1 of this code, is required for each building or
structure to be moved from a lot or tract within the corporate limits of the
municipality.  This deposit is to be refunded when the following
requirements have been met:



      (1)   Water lines capped and meters removed;



      (2)   Sewer lines capped;



      (3)   All debris shall be removed from the lot and it shall be
left in a sanitary state.



(Am. Ord. 953, passed 12-13-05)



§ 150.083  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   A permit shall not be issued if:



   (A)   The house, building or structure to be moved does not or
cannot meet all the requirements of all applicable ordinances of the
municipality;



   (B)   The lot or tract of land with the house, building, or
structure thereon would not meet all of the requirements of the applicable
ordinances of the municipality;



   (C)   The moving of such house, building, or structure upon or from
the lot or tract of land would cause injury to persons or property or damage
to the streets or other public improvements;



   (D)   The applicant cannot ensure that he or she has the financial
resources to bring the building and grounds up to municipal standards within
90 days after completion of the move;



   (E)   The applicant cannot ensure that the grounds from which a
building is demolished or removed will be completely cleared, leveled, and
cleaned within 90 days after the permit is issued.



(Am. Ord. 953, passed 12-13-05)



§ 150.084  INSURANCE AND BONDING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No permit shall be issued unless the applicant shall file with
the Municipal Secretary a surety bond by a surety acceptable to the
municipality in the sum of not less than $5,000.  In the event the
conditions of § 150.083 are not completed within the 90 days, the city may
file on the applicant’s bond in order to complete the conditions thereof.



   (B)   The applicant shall procure and keep in full force and effect
a policy of public liability and property damage insurance issued by a
casualty insurance company authorized to do business in this state and in the
standard form approved by the state Board of Insurance Commissioners.  Such
policy shall contain a provision that the municipality shall be fully
indemnified.  Such insurance policy shall insure the public from any loss or
damage that may arise to any person or property by the reason of the moving
of a building or structure by the applicant and providing that the following
recovery limits be not less than the following:



      (1)   For damages arising from bodily injury to or death of
one person in any one accident, $100,000;



      (2)   For damages arising from bodily injury to or death of
two or more persons in any one accident, $300,000;



      (3)   For injury to or destruction of property in any one
accident, $50,000.



   (C)   The Council may waive any insurance or bonding requirements
provided for herein or may require a lesser amount of coverage if in its
opinion the public will be adequately protected.



(Am. Ord. 953, passed 12-13-05)



§ 150.085  ESCORT REQUIRED.



   No person shall move any building or structure across or along any
public way within the municipal limits without an escort.  All escort
vehicles shall be adequately marked and lighted as the Police Chief may
require.  If the mover does not have an approved escort, he or she may
request that a police escort be made available.  The fee for such escort by
the police department shall be as provided for by the City Council and is
payable at the time when the permit is issued.



§ 150.086  HOUSE MOVER TO MAKE ALL ARRANGEMENTS.



   Upon the issuance of a permit, the house mover shall make all
arrangements with the public utilities, railroads, and other persons, firms,
or corporations whose facilities are involved in such movement, for the
removal, relocation, and replacement of wires, poles, or other improvements,
to enable the building or structure to be moved without causing damage.



§ 150.087  NOTICE TO UTILITY COMPANIES.



   (A)   Before the moving of a building is commenced, it shall be the
duty of the permit holder to give notice of the move to all companies
maintaining overhead wires across or along any street or alley included in
the designated route and to secure written clearance from such companies.



   (B)   If it is necessary to temporarily move any such wires to
accommodate the moving of the building, the same shall be at the expense of
the building mover, if the wires are 18 feet above the right-of-way.  If the
wires are less than 18 feet above the right-of-way, they shall be moved at
the expense of the utility company.  The shortest measurement between the
overhead wire and the center point of the right-of-way shall be used for the
purposes of this chapter.



§ 150.088  POLICE ESCORT.



   No person shall move a building or structure across or along any
street, public way, or public place within the municipality unless
accompanied by police escort, if required by the Police Department.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.089  WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION MANDATORY.



   Any building or structure in the municipality shall be connected to the
water and sewer system of the municipality or to a septic tank approved by
the municipality before a certificate of occupancy can be issued for the
building or structure if the building or structure is to be used for any
purpose other than storage. It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant,
manager or person in control of real property used as a residence, to occupy
or cause or permit the occupancy of the residence without having running
water and sanitary sewer services.



(Ord. 1067, passed 6-9-15)



§ 150.090  PARKING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   No building or structure for which a permit has been granted shall be
allowed to remain, park, or stand upon the public streets or other public
property within the municipality for more than 24 hours, except in cases of
emergency in which event the building or structure must be removed from the
public streets or public property within 48 hours after the emergency has
arisen.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.091  ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   No person shall occupy such house, building, or structure permitted to
be moved until the building official issues the permittee a certificate of
occupancy.  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the house,
building, or structure complies with all conditions of the permit and all
requirements of all applicable ordinances of the municipality.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.092  LIABILITY OF THE MUNICIPALITY UNDER THIS CHAPTER.



   Neither the municipality nor any authorized agent acting under the
terms of this chapter shall be liable or have any liability by reason of
orders issued or work done in compliance with the terms of this chapter.



§ 150.093  EXCEPTIONS.



   This chapter shall not apply to the movement of oversized equipment or
buildings or structures of a temporary nature, when such equipment, buildings
or structures are within the legal road limit as required by state law.



SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION REQUIRED



§ 150.110  SIDEWALKS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Each owner with a lot that abuts or is adjacent to a street
right-of-way will provide a safe sidewalk within the street right-of-way or
adjacent to the street right-of-way, for the distance that the lot abuts or
is adjacent to that right-of-way.



   (B)   As of August 16, 2005, for those lots abutting or adjacent to
a street right-of-way without a sidewalk for the required distance or having
only part of a sidewalk, no owner will be required to provide a sidewalk
except under the following conditions:



      (1)   When required by the City Council;



      (2)   When constructing a new primary structure; or



      (3)   When structurally altering an existing primary structure
with the proposed structure alteration increasing square footage of the
existing primary structure by 40% or more.



   (C)   For those lots abutting or adjacent to a street right-of-way
with an existing sidewalk or part of one that is substandard, an owner will
be required to provide a sidewalk under the following conditions:



      (1)   When required by the City Administrator or designate;



      (2)   When constructing a new primary structure; or



      (3)   When structurally altering an existing primary structure
with the proposed structural alteration increasing the square footage of the
existing primary structure by 40% or more.



   (D)   Neither the Zoning Official nor the Building Official will
issue any permanent occupancy permits until the permit holder complies with
this subchapter.



(Ord. 935, passed 8-15-05; Am. Ord. 1033, passed 12-13-11)



§ 150.111  SIDEWALK SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Sidewalks will be constructed and when necessary repaired
according to the specifications approved by the City Council and kept on file
in the offices of the City Secretary and Building Official.



   (B)   The existing width of sidewalks within the central business
district shall be maintained unless and until determined otherwise by the
City Council.  The central business district is the area of the city
identified as such in the Zoning Code.  All other sidewalks will conform to
the widths contained in the specifications on file in the office of the City
Secretary and Building Official.



   (C)   No person will construct or repair any sidewalk except
according to the line, grade, slope and specifications established for that
sidewalk.  The city will furnish the specifications as may be necessary for
the proper control of the work.



   (D)   Sidewalks shall be placed parallel to the street and to the
back of the curb and gutter, or in line with any existing sidewalks or as
otherwise approved by the Building Official.



   (E)   The city may issue a stop work order to any property owner for
failing to comply with the provisions of this subchapter.  The city will
lift a stop work order once the property owner complies.



(Ord. 935, passed 8-15-05; Am. Ord. 1033, passed 12-13-11)



§ 150.112  CONSTRUCTION REQUIRED.



   The City Council may require the owner of a lot without a sidewalk
within the street right-of-way or within 15 feet of the street right-of-way
to build a sidewalk according to the specifications of this subchapter. 
When the Council takes such action, the City Secretary shall give notice to
the owner of the affected lot to construct the sidewalk within the time
established by the Council.



(Ord. 935, passed 8-15-05; Am. Ord. 1033, passed 12-13-11)



§ 150.113  UNSAFE SIDEWALK DETERMINATION.



   Whenever the City Administrator or designate determines that a sidewalk
or part of one is unsafe, the City Secretary will give notice to the owner of
the affected lot to repair the sidewalk or the portion that is unsafe within
30 days of receipt of the notice.



(Ord. 935, passed 8-15-05; Am. Ord. 1033, passed 12-13-11)



§ 150.114  APPEAL OF ORDER TO REPAIR.



   A property owner may request an exception from an order by the city to
repair a sidewalk from the City Council.  In granting the exception, the
City Council may attach any conditions it deems to be reasonable in the
furthering of the purpose of requiring the repair of sidewalks.  In granting
or denying the exception, the City Council will state its reasons for the
record.



(Ord. 935, passed 8-15-05; Am. Ord. 1033, passed 12-13-11)



§ 150.115  VIOLATION AND PENALTY.



   Any violation of this subchapter is hereby designated to be a class C
misdemeanor and shall be subject to a civil fine of up to $500.



(Ord. 935, passed 8-15-05; Am. Ord. 1033, passed 12-13-11)



CHAPTER 151:  FLOOD PREVENTION AND FLOOD MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   151.01   Findings of fact



   151.02   Statement of purpose



   151.03   Methods of reducing flood losses



   151.04   Definitions




General Flood Regulations




   151.10   Lands to which this chapter applies



   151.11   Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard



   151.12   Establishment of development permit



   151.13   Compliance



   151.14   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   151.15   Interpretation



   151.16   Warning and disclaimer of liability




Administration




   151.20   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator



   151.21   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator



   151.22   Permit procedures



   151.23   Variance procedures




Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction




   151.30   General standards



   151.31   Specific standards



   151.32   Standards for subdivision proposals



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.01  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the municipality are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of
which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage.



§ 151.02  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Protect human life and health;



   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and
bridges located in floodplains;



   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future
flood blight areas; and



   (G)   Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in
a flood area.



§ 151.03  METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.



   The following methods may be used to reduce flood losses:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health,
safety, or property in times of flood or cause excessive increases in flood
heights or velocities;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the
accommodation of flood waters;



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase flood damage;



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.



§ 151.04  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and
to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   APPEAL.  A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.  The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map
(FHBM).  After detailed rate- making has been completed in preparation for
publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO,
A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE, or V.



   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% chance of being equalled or
exceeded in any given year.



   CRITICAL FEATURE.  An integral and readily identifiable part of a
flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the
entire system would be compromised.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any human-made change in improved and unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.



   ELEVATED BUILDING.  A nonbasement building:



      (1)   Built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A,
A-99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in
the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the
lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the
ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls
parallel to the floor of the water; and



      (2)   Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base
flood.  In



the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A-99, AO, AH, B, C, X, D, ELEVATED BUILDING
also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement
of flood waters.  In the case of Zones V1-30, VE, or V, ELEVATED BUILDING
also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of ELEVATED
BUILDING, even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls
if the breakaway walls meet the standards of § 60.3(e)(5) of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations.



   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.  For the purposes of determining rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective
date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date.  EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as “existing
structures.”



   FLOOD or FLOODING.  A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters;



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM).  An official map of a community on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated the boundaries
of the flood; mudslide (mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards
have been designated as Zone A, M, and/or E.



   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA.  Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source.  See also the definition of
“flooding.”



   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM.  Those physical structural works for which
funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the areas within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent
of the depths of associated flooding.  Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees, or dikes.  These
specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with
sound engineering standards.



   LEVEE.  A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment,
designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to
contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection
from temporary flooding.



   LEVEE SYSTEM.  A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices,
which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement.  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation designed requirement of § 60.3 of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.  For
floodplain management purposes, the term MANUFACTURED HOME also includes park
trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for
greater than 180 consecutive days.  For insurance purposes, the term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other
similar vehicles.



   MEAN SEA LEVEL MEANS.  For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum
to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate
Map are referenced.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  For floodplain management purposes, structures for
which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, Pub. L. 97-348,
includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.  The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation.  Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of
streets or walkways, nor does it include excavation for basement, footings,
piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.



   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement
of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or if
the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage
occurred.  For the purpose of this definition, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.  The term does
not, however, include either any project for improvement of a structure to
comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions,
or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or a state inventory of historic places.



   VARIANCE.  A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this
chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.  A
variance permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited
by this chapter.  For full requirements, see § 60.6 of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations.



   VIOLATION.  The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.  A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in § 60.3(b)(5),
(c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time
as that documentation is provided.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION.  The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of
flood of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.



GENERAL FLOOD REGULATIONS



§ 151.10  LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.



   The chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the municipality.



§ 151.11  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.



   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency on its Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) for the community,
and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be
a part of this chapter.



§ 151.12  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A Development Permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.13  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its
use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.14  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this
chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.



§ 151.15  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of
the governing body, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers
granted under state law.



§ 151.16  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations.  On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and
flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes.  This
chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards
or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.  This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.



ADMINISTRATION



§ 151.20  DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Mayor is hereby appointed as the Floodplain Administrator to
administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate
section of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations pertaining to
floodplain management.



§ 151.21  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:



   (A)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records
pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Review permit applications to determine whether proposed
building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.



   (C)   Review, approve, or deny all applications for development
permits required by adoption of this chapter.



   (D)   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal,  state, or local
governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is
required.



   (E)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation.



   (F)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the
State Coordinating Agency, which is the Texas Water Commission, prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   (G)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.



   (H)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in
accordance with § 151.11, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review,
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data
available from a Federal, State, or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of §§ 151.30 through 151.33.



§ 151.22  PERMIT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Application for a development permit shall be presented to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her and may include,
but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations,
existing and proposed structures, and the location of the foregoing in
relation to areas of special flood hazard.  Additionally, the following
information is required:



      (1)   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;



      (2)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;



      (3)   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or
architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the
floodproofing criteria of § 151.31(B);



      (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or
natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development;



      (5)   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance
with § 151.21(A).



   (B)   Approval or denial of a development permit by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:



      (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;



      (3)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others;



      (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (6)   The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and
bridges and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems;



      (7)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise,
and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;



      (8)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location,
where applicable;



      (9)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject
to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;



      (10)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan for that area.



§ 151.23  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Appeal Board as established by the Council shall hear and
render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.



   (B)   The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal
only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.



   (C)   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal
Board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.



   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all
actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.



   (E)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction,
rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register
of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard
to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter.



   (F)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in § 151.22(B)
have been fully considered.  As the lot size increases beyond the one-half
acre size, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.



   (G)   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent
of this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting
of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of
this chapter as set forth in § 151.02).



   (H)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.



   (I)   Prerequisites for granting variances shall include the
following:



      (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum  necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon,



         (a)   Showing a good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



      (3)   Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be
given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with
the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost
of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting
from the reduced lowest floor elevation.



   (J)    Variances may be issued by a community for new construction
and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:



      (1)   The criteria outlined in § 151.22(A) through (I) are
met; and



      (2)   the structure or other development is protected by
methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety.



PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 151.30  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are
required for all new construction and substantial improvements:



   (A)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.



   (B)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.



   (C)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.



   (D)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.



   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.



   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharge from the systems into flood waters.



   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.



§ 151.31  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data
has been provided as set forth in §§ 151.11, 151.21(H), or § 151.32(D),
the following provisions are required:



   (A)   Residential construction.  New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor
(including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation.  A
registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this
subsection as proposed in § 151.22(A)(1) is satisfied.



   (B)   Nonresidential construction.  New construction and
substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest flood (including
basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base
flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable
to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability
of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.  A
registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review
structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall
certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice as outlined in this division.  A record of
such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by
the Floodplain Administrator.



   (C)   Manufactured homes.



      (1)   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within
Zone A shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood
damage.  For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be
elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. 
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top
or frame ties to ground anchors.  This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.



      (2)   All manufactured homes shall be in compliance with §
151.31(A).



§ 151.32  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.



   (A)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks
and subdivisions, shall be consistent with § 151.01 through 151.03 of this
chapter.



   (B)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet development permit
requirements of §§ 151.12 and 151.22 and the provisions of §§ 151.30 and
151.31.



   (C)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development, including manufactured home parks
and subdivisions, which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is
less, if not otherwise provided pursuant to §§ 151.11 or 151.21.



   (D)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks
and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.



   (E)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks
and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.



CHAPTER 152:  (RESERVED)



CHAPTER 153:  SUBDIVISION CODE



Section



General Provisions



   153.001   Short title



   153.002   Purpose



   153.003   Authority



   153.004   Jurisdiction



   153.005   Approval required



   153.006   Improvements required



   153.007   Annexation



   153.008   Variances and appeals



   153.009   Definitions



Procedure



   153.020   Pre-design conference



   153.021   Preliminary plat



   153.022   Contents of preliminary plat



   153.023   Filing preliminary plat



   153.024   Final plat



   153.025   Filing final plat



   153.026   Re-platting



   153.027   Minor plats



Extraterritorial Jurisdiction



   153.040   Authority



   153.041   City and county agreement



Design Standards



   153.055   Conformance



   153.056   Streets and alleys



   153.057   Sewage collection and treatment system



   153.058   Water



   153.059   Electric



   153.060   Drainage



   153.061   Other improvements



   153.062   Easements and dedications



   153.063   Lots



   153.064   Floodplain



Special Provisions



   153.075   Developer’s contract



   153.076   Financial security



   153.077   Pro rata payments



   153.078   City participation



Enforcement



   153.090   Observation of construction



   153.091   Performance and payment bonds



   153.092   Filing, plat and other fees



 



   153.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.001  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter may be known as and referred to as the Subdivision
Regulations of the City of Whitesboro, Texas.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)



§ 153.002  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the safe, efficient,
and orderly development of the city, and the provision of adequate streets,
utilities, services, and facilities, in the city.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)



§ 153.003  AUTHORITY.



   These subdivision regulations are adopted under the authority of Texas
Local Government Code.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)



§ 153.004  JURISDICTION.



   (A)   These regulations shall govern any and every person, firm,
corporation, or organization owning any tract of land within the corporate
limits of the city who may hereafter divide the same into two or more parts
for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of any tract of land of less
than five acres within the city limits or less than ten acres in the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, or any addition to said city, or
for laying out suburban lots or building lots, or any lots, and streets,
alleys, or parks or other portions intended for public use, or the use of
purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto.



   (B)   These regulations shall be extended to and shall apply to all
of the area outside of the corporate limits of the city but within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)



§ 153.005  APPROVAL REQUIRED.



   Unless and until any plat, plan or re-plat shall have been first
approved in the manner provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person,
firm, corporation or organization to construct or cause to be constructed any
streets, utilities, building or other improvements to any tract of land; and
it shall be unlawful for any official of the city to issue any permit for
such improvements or to serve or connect said land, or any part thereof, or
for the use of owners or purchasers of said land with any public utilities
such as water, sewers, lights, gas and the like, which may be owned,
controlled, distributed, franchised or supplied by city. No building permits
will be issued for the construction of any building on unplatted land within
the city where this chapter requires platting.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.006  IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.



   (A)   All of the improvements required under these regulations which
are necessary for the adequate provision of streets, utilities, and drainage
to the subdivision shall be constructed at the sole expense of the developer,
unless other provisions are approved by the City Council.



   (B)   Any rebates or other payments to the developer by the city for
oversized or off-site improvements required as a part of the subdivision
shall be paid from monies received by the city from the subdividing or
development of surrounding areas, and such rebates or payments shall not be
made until such monies are received by the city, unless other provisions are
approved by the City Council.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)



§ 153.007  ANNEXATION.



   If the property is not within the city limits of Whitesboro and the
subdivision abuts the city limits, the owner shall request the city to annex
the property. Annexation must be completed within 90 days after date the
governing body institutes the annexation proceedings. Any period during which
the city is restrained or enjoined by a court of competent jurisdiction from
annexing the area is not included in computing the 90 days.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.008  VARIANCES AND APPEALS.



   These rules and regulations are the standard requirements of the city.
Suspension of any of these rules and regulations may be granted by the City
Council upon a showing by the owner that there are circumstances or
conditions affecting the property in question, or that enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter will deprive the applicant of a right and that
such suspension, if granted, will not be detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to other property or property rights in the vicinity. Each and
every application for variance shall be decided on its own merits and the
disposition of any prior or pending application for variance shall not be
allowed to enter into or affect any decision on the application in question.
Cost, standing alone, shall not be justification for the granting of a
variance.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)



§ 153.009  DEFINITIONS.



   Words and terms used in this chapter, unless otherwise specified, shall
have their normal meaning in commonly accepted usage. The word “shall”
shall be deemed as mandatory; the word “may” shall be deemed as
permissive. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY. The municipal corporation of the City of Whitesboro, Texas,
together with its governing and operating bodies.



   CITY COUNCIL. The duly-elected governing body of the city.



   CITY OFFICIAL or ADMINISTRATOR. Any person elective or appointive, or
any employee, or any board or commission authorized or constituted by city
ordinance or state law to act in behalf of the municipality (ex: City
Attorney, City Clerk, City Inspector, and the like).



   COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission, as appointed by the
City Council to administer these regulations.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The general plan for the growth and development of
the city and its environs; and including any elements of such plan, such as a
land use plan, thoroughfare plan, utilities plan, schools and parks plan, and
others.



   EASEMENT. An interest in land granted to the city, to the public
generally, or to another person or entity, for installing or maintaining an
access way or utilities across, over, or under private land, together with
the right to enter thereon with machinery and vehicles necessary for the
construction, maintenance, and replacement of said utilities and access way.



   ENGINEER. An engineer authorized under the provisions of the Texas
Engineering Practice Act to practice engineering in the State of Texas.



   EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION (ETJ). All land outside of, but adjacent
and contiguous to, the city limits that is recognized by state statute as the
area within which the city can enforce its subdivision rules and regulations.



   FINAL PLAT. A map, drawing or chart prepared according to the
provisions of this chapter and containing all engineering and legal data,
dedications and certificates necessary to the recording of the same in the
map and plat records of the county.



   LOT. A distinct and separate undivided tract or parcel of land having
frontage on a public street, which is, or in the future may be, offered for
sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement as a building site.



   MINOR PLATS or SHORT FORM.  A minor plat is allowed when the
subdivision of land abuts an existing approved road and no additional roads
or other public improvements are required to comply with the subdivision
regulations.



   PRELIMINARY PLAT. Any plat of any lots, tract or parcel of land that is
not to be recorded, but is only a proposed division of and is presented only
for review and study by the city.



   RE-PLATTING. The re-subdivision of any part of a previously platted
subdivision, addition, lot or tract.



   RESIDENTIAL ESTATE SUBDIVISION. A subdivision of lots of not less than
one acre, intended for single-family use.



   STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY. A public or private way set aside as a permanent
right-of-way for a roadway or street for automotive traffic.



   STREET WIDTH. The back of curb to back of curb distance of a street or,
in the absence of curbs, the edge of pavement to edge of pavement distance.



   SUBDIVIDER or DEVELOPER. A person who divides or proposes to divide
land so as to constitute a subdivision as that term is defined herein. The
terms SUBDIVIDER and DEVELOPER shall be restricted to include only the owner
or authorized agent of such owner of land to be subdivided.



   SUBDIVISION. The division of any lot, tract or parcel of land situated
within the corporate or extraterritorial limits of the city, into two or more
lots or sites for the immediate or future purpose of sale or development, or
for laying out residential, commercial, or industrial lots, or any lots, and
streets, alleys, or other portions intended for public use or the use of
purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto. It also
includes re-subdivision or re- platting of land, lots, or tracts. Division of
land for agricultural purposes, in parcels of five acres or more, shall not
be included within this definition unless such division of five acres or more
includes the planning or development of a new street, alley or access
easement, or the installation or extension of city water, sewer, or drainage
systems.



   SURVEYOR. A licensed state land surveyor or a registered professional
land surveyor as authorized by the state statutes to practice the profession
of surveying in the State of Texas.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05; Am. Ord. 949, passed 12-13-05)



PROCEDURE



§ 153.020  PRE-DESIGN CONFERENCE.



   Prior to filing a preliminary plat, the developer may consult with city
officials concerning the proposed development, the arrangement of streets,
alleys and lots, the layout of utility lines, availability of utility
service, and other regulations and policies of the city regarding development.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)



§ 153.021  PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   The developer shall prepare a preliminary plat of the proposed
subdivision. The preliminary plat shall show the land use and zoning proposed
for the subdivision. It shall show the general layout of lots and parcels,
streets and alleys, water and sewage utilities, and drainage features of the
proposed subdivision. It shall show how the proposed subdivision conforms to
plans of the city for land use, traffic, utilities, and drainage. It shall
identify any conflicts between the subdivision proposal and this chapter, or
any ordinance of the city, and explain how resolution of the conflict
according to the proposal of the subdivision is advantageous to the city.



   (B)   When a subdivision is a portion of a larger tract to be
subdivided later, the preliminary plat shall encompass the entire tract. The
preliminary plat shall show the schematic layout of the entire tract and its
relationship to adjacent property. When appropriate, more than one tract or
subdivision may be included in the preliminary plat.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.022  CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   Scale and drawing size. The preliminary plat shall be drawn at
a convenient scale of one inch to 100 feet, 200 feet, or 400 feet such that
the information presented is clearly legible on drawings 11 by 17 inches, 22
by 34 inches, or 24 by 36 inches in size.



   (B)   Existing features inside subdivision.



      (1)   Topography with mean sea level elevations at contour
intervals of five feet; or less if requested by the City Engineer.



      (2)   The locations, widths and names of all existing or
platted streets, alleys, easements, existing permanent buildings, railroad
rights-of-way and other important features such as creeks, abstract lines,
political subdivisions of city limits and school district boundaries.



      (3)   Existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other
underground structures with pipe sizes and locations indicated.



   (C)   Existing features outside subdivision. Similar features to
divisions (B)(1), (B)(2) and (B)(3) shall be identified for a distance of 200
feet outside the proposed subdivision. Property lines and the names of
adjacent subdivisions and/or the names of owners of adjoining parcels of
unsubdivided land shall be indicated.



   (D)   New features inside subdivision.



      (1)   The boundary line, accurate in scale, of the tract to be
subdivided with record distances and bearings indicated.



      (2)   The layout, designations, names and widths of any and
all proposed streets, alleys and easements.



      (3)   The layout, lot numbers, setback lines and approximate
dimensions of proposed lots and blocks.



      (4)   All parcels of land intended to be dedicated or reserved
for public use in the proposed subdivision or reservations for other uses
together with the purpose or conditions and limitations of such reservation.



      (5)   A schematic plan of the proposed water and sanitary
sewer lines and related facilities including location and size. Fire hydrant
and valve locations shall be indicated.



      (6)   Delineation of drainage areas, points of concentration,
and the location of major and off-site drainage structures.



      (7)   Defined flood hazard zones.



   (E)   Variances. The preliminary plat shall show requirements of
this chapter from which it varies and the alternatives to the chapter
requirements proposed by the developer.



   (F)   Location map. A location map of the proposed subdivision at a
scale of one inch to 2,000 feet showing existing and proposed major features
covering an area of at least one mile in all directions from the proposed
subdivision.



   (G)   Title information.



      (1)   The proposed name of the subdivision.



      (2)   North point, scale, date and acreage of the proposed
subdivision.



      (3)   The names and addresses of the owner, developer,
engineer and surveyor as appropriate.



      (4)   The tract designation, abstract and other description
according to the real estate records of the city or county.



      (5)   Total number of lots and designation and amounts of land
of the proposed uses within the subdivision.



   (H)   Acceptance block. The following notice shall be placed on the
face of each preliminary plat and utility plan by the subdivider:



   “PRELIMINARY PLAT



   FOR REVIEW PURPOSES ONLY”



The following certificate shall be placed on the preliminary plat by the
subdivider:



   “RECOMMENDATION FOR APPROVAL”



_____________________________            __________________________
____



Chairman                           Secretary



Planning and Zoning Commission



_________________                     _________________



Date                              Date



   “ACCEPTED FOR PREPARATION OF FINAL PLAT”



_____________________________            __________________________
____



Mayor                              City
Secretary



_________________                     _________________



Date                              Date



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.023  FILING PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   Submission to City Administrator. A preliminary plat shall be
submitted by a developer to the City Administrator who shall cause a review
of the preliminary plat by the city’s staff to determine conformance of the
preliminary plat to this chapter. Upon a finding by the City Administrator
that the preliminary plat conforms to this chapter and upon payment of filing
fees by the developer, the preliminary plat may be filed for consideration by
the Commission within 30 days.



   (B)   Recommendation for approval. Upon a finding that the
preliminary plat conforms to this chapter, the Commission may forward the
preliminary plat with its recommendation for approval to the City Council.
Upon a finding by the Commission that a preliminary plat does not conform to
this chapter, the Commission will cite the basis of its finding and will not
recommend that the preliminary plat be approved by the Council.



   (C)   Acceptance for preparation of final plat. A written record of
the Commission’s action shall be forwarded to the Council for consideration
of the preliminary plat within 30 days following the Commission’s action.
Upon finding that a preliminary plat conforms to this chapter, the Council
may accept the preliminary plat for preparation of a final plat. Upon finding
that a preliminary plat fails to conform to this chapter, the Council will
cite the basis of its finding and will not accept the preliminary plat for
preparation of a final plat.



   (D)   Acceptance and expiration.  When a preliminary plat is found
to conform to these regulations, it shall be so certified and a copy shall be
placed on file with the City Secretary for a public record.



      (1)   When a preliminary plat has been accepted, the final
plat for all or a part of the area shall be submitted within six months
thereafter; otherwise the acceptance shall terminate and shall be void,
unless prior to the expiration of acceptance, the time for filing the final
plat is extended at the written request of the developer. The first filing
extension, not to exceed 90 days, may be granted by the City Administrator.
Any further extensions shall be approved by the Commission.



      (2)   When the Commission or the Council finds that the
preliminary plat does not conform to these regulations, the city shall return
the preliminary plat with a report of such findings to the developer. The
developer may revise and resubmit a preliminary plat following the same
procedure as required for the original application. If the revised
preliminary plat for the same area or a lesser part thereof is filed within
90 days following Commission or Council action, no new filing fee shall be
required. No re-submittal and no new fee shall be required when city action
is delayed with the concurrence of the developer for consideration of related
matters.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.024  FINAL PLAT.



   When a preliminary plat has been accepted, the developer may prepare
his or her final plat for the area designated by the preliminary plat.



   (A)   Scale and drawing size. The final plat shall be drawn on
sheets measuring 18 inches by 24 inches and shall be at a scale of 100 feet
to the inch. In the event that more than one sheet is required, an index
sheet at a reduced scale shall be provided. In addition, the developer shall
furnish a signed mylar drawing and copies of the final plat in such number
and of a size acceptable to the county for recording.



   (B)   Features to be shown. All necessary data to locate and
reproduce the final plat on the ground must be shown on the final plat.



      (1)   The boundary lines with accurate distances and bearings,
a written boundary description of the tract, acreage, the exact location and
width of all existing or platted streets intersecting the boundary of the
tract.



      (2)   Bearings and distances to the nearest established street
lines, official monuments or subdivision corner, shall be found and
accurately described on the final plat. Abstract lines and municipal
boundaries shall be shown.



      (3)   An accurate location of the subdivision in reference to
the deed records of the county which shall include the volume and page of the
deed of the property to be subdivided.



      (4)   The layout, width and names of all streets and/or alleys
with the bearings and curve data for the lines thereof.



      (5)   Boundary line arcs shall be simple curves of constant
radii. Arcs shall begin and end at points of tangency. Arc lengths and arc
radii shall be shown for each curve. Curve deflection angles may be noted. If
degree of curvature is specified, it shall be noted whether the chord
definition or the arc definition is used.



      (6)   The location, width and description of all easements
provided for public services, utilities, drainage, and fire lanes and any
limitations on use of the easements.



      (7)   All lot lines with accurate dimensions in feet and with
bearings and angles in degrees.



      (8)   Floodways and flood plains as designated on maps
provided by the Federal Insurance Administration. Base flood elevations shall
be shown.



      (9)   A continuous and sequential lettering and/or numbering
of blocks and lots within the subdivision.



         (10)   Required building setback lines.



         (11)   A boundary of all parcels of land which are
reserved for public use or reserved for other uses, together with the purpose
and conditions or limitations of such reservations and/or dedications, if any.



         (12)   The accurate location, material and approximate
size of all monuments and benchmarks.



         (13)   Determination of bearings and distances and the
placement of monuments shall conform to the Standards of the Texas Board of
Professional Land Surveying for precision and accuracy.



   (C)   Title information.



      (1)   The proposed name of the subdivision with section or
sequencing designation, as appropriate.



      (2)   North point, scale and date.



      (3)   The names and addresses of the owner, developer,
engineer and surveyor responsible for actual design of the subdivision.



   (D)   Certificates required.



      (1)   A certificate, signed by the city tax assessor, stating
that all taxes and assessments then due and payable on the land contained
within the subdivision have been paid.



      (2)   A certificate of ownership and dedication of a form
approved by the city, of all streets, alleys, parks, open spaces and public
ways to public use forever, signed and acknowledged before a notary public by
the owner and any and all lien holders of the land, and a complete and
accurate description of the land subdivided and dedications made.



      (3)   Certification by a registered professional land
surveyor, registered in the State of Texas:



KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:



I, ________________________________, Registered Professional Land Surveyor,
certify that the plat shown hereon was prepared from a survey made on the
ground under my direction and supervision and bearings, distances, areas, and
monuments are as shown.



                        Signature:_____________________
____________



                        Date:__________________________
___________



The surveyor shall affix his or her seal on the plat adjacent to the
certification.



      (4)   Certificate of acceptance by the City Planning and
Zoning Commission:



Accepted this _____ day of ____________, 20___, by the City Planning and
Zoning Commission of the City of Whitesboro, Texas.



   ________________________            ________________________



   Chairman                        Secretary



      (5)   Certificate of acceptance by the City Council:



Accepted by the City Council of the City of Whitesboro, Texas:



                                 _____________
___________



                                 Mayor, City
of Whitesboro



                                 Date_________
___________



The undersigned, the City Secretary of the City of Whitesboro, hereby
certifies that the foregoing final plat of __________________ subdivision or
addition to the City of Whitesboro was submitted to the City Council on the
_____ day of ____________, 20___, and the City Council by formal action then
and there accepted the dedication of streets, alleys, easements and public
places as shown and set forth in and upon said map or plat and said City
Council further authorized the Mayor to note the acceptance thereof by
signing his name as hereinabove subscribed.



Witness my hand this _____ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.



                                 _____________
___________



                                 City
Secretary, City of Whitesboro



   (E)   Construction plans. Construction plans for all public
improvements shall be submitted with the final plat. The approval of the
final plat shall be contingent upon acceptance of construction plans and
specifications by the City Engineer. Construction plans shall be drawn on
sheets measuring 24 by 36 inches, 22 by 34 inches, or 11 by 17 inches. Each
sheet shall include north point, scales, date and bench mark description to
sea level datum. Each sheet shall show the seal and signature of the
professional engineer who prepared the plans and shall include the following:



      (1)   A plan and profile of each street with proof grades
shown. Scales shall be in one inch equals 50 feet horizontally and one inch
equals five feet vertically, or such other scale approved by the City
Engineer.



      (2)   The cross-section of proposed streets, alleys and
sidewalks showing the width and type of pavement, base and subgrade and
location within the right-of-way.



      (3)   A plan and profile of proposed sanitary sewers with
grades and pipe size indicated, showing locations of manholes, cleanouts and
other appurtenances, and details for bedding and backfill.



      (4)   A plan of the proposed water distribution system showing
pipe sizes, valves, fire hydrants, fittings and other appurtenances, and
details for bedding and backfill.



      (5)   A plan and profile of proposed storm sewers, showing
hydraulic grade, pipe grades and sizes, manholes, inlets, pipe connections,
culverts, outlet structures, bridges and other structures.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05; Am. Ord. 949, passed 12-13-05)  Penalty, see §
153.999



§ 153.025  FILING FINAL PLAT.



   (A)   Submission to City Administrator. A final plat shall be
submitted by a developer to the City Administrator who shall cause a review
of the final plat by the city’s staff to determine conformance of the final
plat to this chapter. Upon a finding by the City Administrator that the final
plat conforms to this chapter and upon payment of filing fees by the
developer, the final plat may be filed for consideration by the Commission
within 30 days.



   (B)   Recommendation for approval. Upon a finding that the final
plat conforms to this chapter, the Commission may forward the final plat with
its recommendation for approval to the City Council. Upon a finding by the
Commission that a final plat does not conform to this chapter, the Commission
will cite the basis of its finding and will not recommend that the final plat
be approved by the Council.



   (C)   Acceptance of final plat. A written record of the
Commission’s action shall be forwarded to the Council for consideration of
the final plat within 30 days following the Commission’s action. Upon
finding that a final plat conforms to this chapter, the Council may accept
the final plat. Upon finding that a final plat fails to conform to this
chapter, the Council will cite the basis of its finding and will not accept
the final plat.



   (D)   Recording final plat. Following acceptance of the final plat
by the City Council, the City Secretary may cause the final plat to be filed
for record in the county real property records when:



      (1)   All public improvements required by this chapter have
been constructed and accepted by the city; or



      (2)   Financial security according to § 153.076 is made
effective and can be used at the sole discretion of the city to construct the
public improvements.



   (E)   Acceptance of final plat by sections.



      (1)   A developer, at his or her option, may obtain approval
of a portion or a section of a subdivision provided he or she meets all the
requirements of this chapter with reference to such portion or section in the
same manner as is required for a complete subdivision. In the event that
subdivision and the final plat thereof are accepted in sections by the
Commission and City Council, each final plat of each section shall carry the
name of the entire subdivision, but shall bear a distinguishing letter,
number or subtitle. Block numbers shall run consecutively throughout the
entire subdivision, even though such subdivision may be finally accepted in
sections.



      (2)   When the proposed subdivision constitutes a unit of a
larger tract owned by the developer which is intended to be subsequently
subdivided as additional units of the same subdivision, the preliminary and
final plats shall be accompanied by a layout of the entire area, showing the
tentative proposed layout of streets, blocks, drainage, water, sewer and
other improvements for such areas. The overall layout, if accepted by the
Commission, shall be attached to and filed with a copy of the accepted
subdivision plat in the permanent files of the city. Thereafter, plats of
subsequent units of such subdivision shall conform to such accepted overall
layout, unless changed by the Commission. However, except where the developer
agrees to such change, the Commission may change the layout only when the
Commission finds:



         (a)   That adherence to the previously accepted overall
layout will hinder the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter; or



         (b)   That adherence to the previously accepted overall
layout will be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or will be
injurious to other property in the area.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.026  RE-PLATTING.



   A re-plat shall meet all requirements for a new subdivision.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.027  MINOR PLATS.



   (A)   A minor plat (short form) procedure may be followed for the
approval of a subdivision final plat when the land proposed for subdivision
meets the following requirements:



      (1)   Such land abuts an existing approved roadway and is so
located that no additional streets or roads or other public easements are
required to comply with these regulations.



      (2)   The topography of the land being subdivided and adjacent
land is such that a drainage plan is deemed unnecessary or where drainage
facilities are required arrangements have been made for the construction of
such facilities.  A topography contour plan drawn per the requirements of a
preliminary plat shall be submitted to the Building Inspector for review.



      (3)   The perimeter of the tract being subdivided has been
surveyed and marked on the ground by a registered professional land surveyor
licensed in the state and a plat thereof prepared and filed with the city.



   (B)   The short plat submittal process will be the same as that for
a final plat; however, if no zoning change is required, the short plat may be
approved by the Council.  Minor plat (short form) plat submittals shall
include the following:



      (1)   A completed plat application form and plat review fee.



      (2)   Four copies of the final plat together with one mylar
sheet are required.  Final plats will be drawn on 18-inch by 24-inch sheets
at a scale not to exceed one inch to 200 feet.



(Ord. 949, passed 12-13-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION



§ 153.040  AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The city is a general city of Grayson County, Texas, which has
extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) under the provisions of Chapter 42 of the
Texas Local Government Code. The effect of this chapter is hereby extended in
its application to include all of the area within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city, such area being one-half mile beyond the corporate
limits of the city. The provision of such ordinance shall have the same force
and effect within said area of extraterritorial jurisdiction as within the
corporate limits of the city except as provided in divisions (B) and (C)
below.



   (B)   No violation of any provision of this chapter outside the
corporate limits of the city, but within such city’s area of
extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall constitute a violation, nor shall any
fine provided for in this chapter be applicable to a violation within such
area of extraterritorial jurisdiction.



   (C)   In the event any provision of this chapter is violated within
the area of extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city and outside its
corporate limits, the city may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings in the district court to enjoin the violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)



§ 153.041  CITY AND COUNTY AGREEMENT.



   (A)   One office for plat applications, fee payments, and responses.
Pursuant to this agreement, the Mayor or his or her designee is authorized to
accept plat applications for tracts of land located in the ETJ of the city,
to collect plat application fees established by law, and provide applicants
one response indicating approval or denial of the plat application by the
city. The city will make any and all contacts necessary for plat approval
with the County Planner. The county will refer any and all parties that to
their knowledge have an interest in development in the ETJ, to the office of
the city.



   (B)   City regulations. That the city’s subdivision regulations
are hereby established as the set of regulations related to plats and
subdivisions of land as authorized by Chapters 212 and 232 of the Texas Local
Government Code, and will be enforced in the ETJ of the city, except in
regards to the placement of utilities, the number of acres that give rise to
the need to plat a subdivision, and the construction of private roads.



      (1)   Utilities may be placed in the street right-of-way,
between the curb and the property line, if the street is constructed with
curbs and gutters, or may be placed in a ten-foot utility easement adjacent
to the street if the street is constructed without curbs and gutters.



      (2)   For land that is within the city’s ETJ in whole or in
part, the sale of a tract of land that is less than ten acres in area
requires that a plat be approved by the city. This is in lieu of the city’s
requirement that the sale of a tract of land that is less than five acres and
is within the city limits of the city must be platted.



      (3)   Private roads built within the city’s ETJ must be
constructed to the same standards as required by the county, and the city
shall inspect the construction of such roads to assure that this standard is
met.



   (C)   Areas outside ETJ. In an unincorporated area wholly outside
the ETJ of the city, the city may not regulate subdivisions or approve the
filing of plats, and the county retains jurisdiction to do so. Should the
city expand or reduce its ETJ, city shall promptly notify county of such
expansion or reduction. City and county agree that such an expansion or
reduction shall not require amendment to this agreement, and the city shall
continue to regulate subdivision plats in its ETJ, and the county shall
continue to have jurisdiction of areas outside the city’s ETJ.   



   (D)   Areas partially inside ETJ. In an unincorporated area
partially inside and partially outside the city’s ETJ, the city will
regulate the entire subdivision as if the entire subdivision was inside the
city’s ETJ unless the area lies within another municipality’s
jurisdiction.



   (E)   Costs.  Each party shall bear any and all costs they incur in
investigating or regulating any matter concerning development in the city’s
ETJ.



   (F)   Fee collection and disbursement. Each party can develop fees
for their services rendered in regulating development in the city’s ETJ.
The city will collect all fees and remit to the county its portion, once a
month, when applicable.



   (G)   Periodic review. This agreement may be reviewed periodically
and revised to address changed circumstances. This agreement may only be
modified or amended by a subsequent agreement in writing between the same
parties and approved by the governing bodies.



   (H)   When development occurs in the city’s ETJ within 300 feet of
a sanitary sewer main owned by the city, the development will be required to
extend the sanitary sewer main rather than utilizing on-site sewage
facilities.



   (I)   When development occurs in the city’s ETJ, the city’s
regulations will be the required standards. The city will specifically
require that utilities be placed in the street right-of-way, between the curb
and the property line, if the street is constructed with curbs and gutters,
or be placed in a ten-foot utility easement adjacent to the street if the
street is constructed without curbs and gutters.



   (J)   When development occurs in the city’s ETJ, city personnel
shall make any and all inspections with



regards to construction of streets, water, sewer and drainage improvements.
Copies of all inspection documents shall be provided to the Grayson County
Planning Director.



   (K)   This agreement shall not constitute an agreement for the
provision of government functions or services by either party for the other,
except for the specific subject matter hereof. The county shall maintain
their control and enforcement of permits required in the ETJ concerning
septic tank approvals, E9-1-1 addressing, and flood zone certifications.



   (L)   All notices required to be given by virtue of this agreement
shall be addressed as follows and delivered by certified mail, postage
prepaid, or by hand delivery.



 

City of Whitesboro
Attn: Mayor
111 W. Main Street
P.O. Box 340
Whitesboro, Texas 76273
 
County of Grayson
Attn: County Judge
100 W. Houston St.
Sherman, Texas 75090



 



   (M)   In the event any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence,
phrase, or word of this agreement shall be held invalid, illegal, or
unconstitutional, the balance of the agreement shall be severable, and shall
be enforced as if the parties intended to delete the invalid portion.



   (N)   This agreement shall be construed under the laws of the State
of Texas. Venue for any action under this agreement shall be the State
District of Grayson County, Texas. This agreement is performable in Grayson
County, Texas.



   (P)   This agreement may be executed in identical counterparts, each
of which shall be deemed an original and constitute one and the same
instrument.



   (Q)   This agreement embodies the complete agreement of the parties
hereto, superceding all prior or contemporaneous, oral or written agreements
between the parties relating to the subject matter hereof.



   (R)   All recitals contained in this agreement are incorporated
herein by reference for all purposes and specifically found to be true and
correct by the parties hereto.



   (S)   The undersigned officers of the parties hereto have been duly
authorized by appropriate legislative action of their respective governing
bodies to execute this agreement and bind the represented party to the terms
hereof.



   (T)   This agreement is not intended to and does not extend the
liability of the parties beyond that provided by law and does not constitute
a joint enterprise for liability purposes. Neither the city nor the county
waives any immunity or defense that would otherwise be available to it
against claims by third parties.



   (U)   All rights, orders, approval, permits, and legal or
administrative proceedings, with regard to a subdivision plat of property in
the ETJ of the city in existence at the effective date of this agreement
shall continue until consummation.



   (V)   A representative of Grayson County shall be invited to
participate in the following meetings between the city and a developer: any
pre- development reviews, any pre-submission reviews, any pre-construction
meetings and any procedures to accept public infrastructure from the
developer. Nothing in this provision is to interfere with a developer’s
right to have a single review process within an ETJ.



   (W)   All private drives or access easements in the extraterritorial
jurisdiction must be constructed to county road standards.



   (X)   Final plat approval does not include acceptance of streets and
roads by the county for maintenance purposes. Street/road acceptance is by
separate action of the court.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



DESIGN STANDARDS



§ 153.055  CONFORMANCE.



   The specifications for materials and workmanship shall conform to the
latest standard specifications for public works construction of the city. All
engineering plans and construction within the jurisdiction of the city shall
comply with the latest standard construction details of the city. The
developer shall place these improvements in all new subdivisions that are
subject to this chapter. The satisfactory installation of these improvements
shall be a precedent to the final approval and acceptance of the subdivision
by the city:



   (A)   Streets, sidewalks and alleys.



   (B)   Sewage collection and treatment system.



   (C)   Water supply and distribution system.



   (D)   Storm drainage systems.



   (E)   Electrical distribution system.



   (F)   Other improvements.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.056  STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   (A)   Conformity to thoroughfare plan. The width and location of
streets shall conform to such thoroughfare plan of the city, both as to
horizontal and vertical alignment and right-of-way widths.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ALLEY. A public or private way designed primarily for vehicular
travel to provide access to the rear or side property otherwise abutting on a
street.



      ARTERIAL STREET or MAJOR THOROUGHFARE. Any street designated as
being a principal route more or less continuous across the city or areas
adjacent thereto, or any route carrying or designated to carry fast-moving or
large volumes of traffic.



      COLLECTOR STREET.  A street which is continuous through several
residential districts and is intended as a connecting street between
residential districts and thoroughfares or business districts.



      CUL-DE-SAC. A local street having but one outlet to another
street and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turnaround.



      DEAD END STREET. A street other than a cul-de-sac having only one
outlet.



      FRONTAGE STREET. A local street lying parallel to and adjoining a
major street right-of-way that provides access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.



      LOCAL STREET. A street exclusively or primarily providing access
to abutting properties. A local street may be located within a residential,
commercial, or industrial area.



      LOOP STREET. A local street having only two outlets onto one
other street.



   (C)   Relation to adjoining street system. The proposed street
system shall extend all existing major streets and such collectors and local
access streets as may be desirable for convenience. Where possible, the width
and the horizontal and vertical alignment of extended streets shall be
preserved. Streets and rights- of-way shall be compatible with the city’s
thoroughfare plan.



   (D)   Street jogs. Offsets in street alignment shall not be less
than 125 feet between center lines.



   (E)   Topography.  The street system shall bear a logical
relationship to the natural topography of the ground.



   (F)   Pavement and right-of-way.



 


Type Street

 

R-O-W

 

Pavement Width (Back of Curb)



Thoroughfare
 

80'

 
49' (with curb and gutter)


Collector
 

60'

 
38' (with curb and gutter)


Local
 

50'

 
31' (with curb and gutter)


Residential Estates
 

60'

 
22' (no curb and gutter)



 



Curb and gutter shall be installed in subdivisions with lots smaller than one
acre.



   (G)   Structural design of street. Streets shall be designed for the
expected volume and weight of vehicles in the traffic. The thickness of the
stabilized subgrade, base, and pavement shall be derived for the traffic load
from the California Bearing Ratios of the materials used in the design of
flexible pavements. The design of concrete streets shall relate pavement
thickness to coefficient of subgrade reaction, traffic load, and concrete
strength. Minimum requirements for subgrade stabilization, base, and pavement
are listed in Items 8 and 9.



   (H)   Subgrade stabilization. All streets shall be constructed on
stabilized subgrade. Design and construction of subgrade on fine grain soil
shall conform to the following schedule:



 


Soil PI

 

Stabilization Method

 

Minimum Depth



0 - 4
 
3% Cement
 

6"



4 - 14
 
Mechanical Compaction
 

6"



15 +
 
6% Lime
 

6"




 



   (I)   Pavement and base. The minimum thickness of base and pavement
for the type street noted shall conform to the following schedule.



 

 
Asphalt



Type Street

 

Reinforced Concrete

 

Pavement

 

Flex. Base



Thoroughfare
 

8"

 
3" HMAC
 

10"



Collector
 

7"

 
3" HMAC
 

8"



Local
 

6"

 
2" HMAC
 

6"



Residential Estates
 

5"

 
1-1/2" HMAC
 

6"




 



The 28-day compressive strength of the concrete shall not be less than 3,600
psi.



   (J)   Reinforcement and joint spacing for concrete streets.
Expansion joints one inch wide shall be spaced 600 feet or less apart based
on the relationship:



 

S = a Δt L,
 
S = feet of expansion


 
a = 6.2 * 10-6ft./°F


 
Δt = 100°F — air temp. at time of pour


 
L = feet between expansion joints



 



Reinforcement shall be based on contraction joint spacing and the
relationship:



 

A S = (W * f * L)/(2 fs),
 
AS = square inches of steel per foot of width


 
W = weight of concrete slab per square foot


 
f = 1.5


 
L = feet between contraction joints


 
fs = 36,000 psi



 



Bar spacing shall not exceed three times pavement thickness or 24 inches. Bar
diameter shall not be less than .375 inches.



   (K)   Vertical alignment. Grades of streets shall be connected by
vertical curves of a minimum length in feet equal to the multiple of the
algebraic difference between the grades and the values shown for the
specified design speed.



 

 
Design speed


 

30

 

40

 

50

 

60



Crest vertical curve
 

28

 

50

 

80

 

150



Sag vertical curve
 

35

 

50

 

70

 

100




 



Vertical curves will not be required in local and residential estates streets
when the change in grade is 2% or less.



   (L)   Horizontal alignment. The center line curve of streets shall
have a minimum radius as follows:



 


Classifications

 

Minimum center line radius (feet)



Thoroughfare
 

500



Collector
 

300



Local (commercial or industrial)
 

300



Residential
 

150



Loop streets and alleys
 

75




 



The maximum deflection of alignment permitted in a local, residential, or
looped street without use of curve shall be three degrees. Deflections in
thoroughfare and collector streets shall be by horizontal curve.



   (M)   Reverse curves. Reverse curves on thoroughfares and collector
streets shall be separated by a minimum tangent of 100 feet.



   (N)   Culs-de-sac; dead end streets.



      (1)   The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be 400 feet for
local streets and 800 feet for residential estates streets.



      (2)   Culs-de-sac shall have a minimum right- of-way radius of
50 feet and a minimum back-of-curb radius of 40 feet for single-family and
two-family uses and a minimum right-of-way radius of 60 feet and a minimum
back of curb radius of 48 feet for all other uses.



   (O)   Street intersections. Street intersections shall be
perpendicular.



   (P)   Partial or half streets. Partial or half streets shall not be
authorized.



   (Q)   Street names. Names of new streets shall not duplicate names
of existing streets.



   (R)   Boundary streets.



      (1)   New streets on the boundary of a proposed subdivision
shall conform to the right-of-way width and construction requirements of this
chapter.



      (2)   Half streets shall be built to complete existing half
streets.



      (3)   When the proposed subdivision abuts an existing
right-of-way that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, the
developer shall dedicate right-of-way sufficient to make the right-of- way
conform to this chapter.



      (4)   When the proposed subdivision abuts an existing street
that does not conform to this chapter, the developer may:



         (a)   Construct the street according to the standards of
this chapter;



         (b)   Place cash or other suitable security in deposit
with the city to pay one-half the cost of constructing the street according
to the standards of this chapter;



         (c)   Construct the street according to the standards of
this chapter for a distance equal to one-half the length of the existing
abutting street; or



         (d)   Construct the street and extensions thereof to
suitable points of access to a standard acceptable to the city and at
developer cost not less than the amount derived according to divisions (R)(2)
and (R)(3) of this section.



   (S)   Curb and gutter. Except in Residential Estates Subdivisions,
curb and gutter shall be installed by the developer on both sides of all
interior streets. Provisions for curb and gutter shall be made on boundary
streets in accordance with division (R) of this section.



   (T)   Street signs. The city shall install street signs, at the
developer’s expense, at all intersections within the subdivision. A fee for
this service shall be paid prior to acceptance of the streets and utilities.



   (U)   Laboratory testing. The city shall retain the services of a
reputable commercial testing laboratory



or will perform the necessary tests on subgrade soils, flexible base
material, concrete, and other construction materials, to verify that
specifications are being met. These laboratory tests will be made at the
developer’s expense and may include the following:



      (1)   Moisture-density relationships;



      (2)   Gradation;



      (3)   Atterberg limits;



      (4)   In-place moisture density;



      (5)   Concrete strength;



      (6)   Other as required.



   (V)   Alleys.



      (1)   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial
districts where other provisions are not made for service access, off-street
loading, parking, and fire fighting.



      (2)   Alleys may be provided in residential areas.



      (3)   Alleys shall be constructed according to the standards
for local streets in residential subdivisions.  In commercial and industrial
areas alleys shall be constructed according to the standards for their
service function.



      (4)   Alleys shall be perpendicular to streets at
intersections. Minimum radius of pavement of street-alley intersections shall
be eight feet.



      (5)   Dead-end alleys shall be provided with culs-de-sac with
a minimum paved surface radius of 30 feet.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.057  SEWAGE COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM.



   (A)   All subdivisions shall be provided with an approved sewage
collection and treatment system at the developer’s expense. In the city and
in all areas of the ETJ, subdivisions shall be served by the city’s sewage
collection and disposal system unless otherwise authorized by the Council.
When the city considers it unreasonable to extend city’s primary sewage
collection and disposal system to a proposed subdivision located in the
city’s area of jurisdiction, then a developer may construct a sewage
collection and treatment system to create a satellite sewerage system to
serve the subdivision. The satellite system shall be constructed at the
developer’s expense unless provided otherwise by the developer’s
contract. Upon completion, the satellite system shall become the property of
the city and the city will operate, maintain, and utilize the system to the
benefit of all its sewage collection and disposal users. Satellite systems
will be incorporated into the city’s overall sewage collection and disposal
system as service areas expand.



   (B)   On-site sewage disposal systems licensed by Grayson County may
be installed in Residential Estates Subdivisions unless specified otherwise
by the city.



   (C)   Where sewer lines are to be installed on private property, the
developer shall pay the cost to secure the necessary easements in the name of
the city.



   (D)   All sewer pipe shall be PVC or other material approved by the
City Engineer.



   (E)   All pipe joints shall be rubber ring gasket type conforming to
the applicable ASTM standards.



   (F)   Sewers in residential areas shall be a minimum of six inches
diameter. Sewers in commercial and industrial areas shall be a minimum of
eight inches diameter.



   (G)   If a sanitary sewage treatment system is to be installed, the
plans for such system shall be approved according to the regulations of the
state and a permit secured from the state prior to approval of the final plat
by the City Council.



   (H)   The sewage collection system shall be designed to handle the
anticipated flow of sewage from the subdivision, including development of
future sections of the same subdivision.



   (I)   All sewer lines shall be on such a grade as to provide a
minimum velocity of two feet per second using an “n” value of .013 in the
Manning Formula.



   (J)   The minimum size line, excluding house service lines, shall be
six inches in diameter.



   (K)   Manholes shall be spaced according to the standards of the
state regulatory agencies.



   (L)   The city may require larger sewer lines than are necessary to
serve the subdivision and future development, and adjacent areas. In the
event that larger lines are required, then the developer may be entitled to
participating aid from the city on oversized lines when city funds become
available.



   (M)   Should a lift station, either temporary or permanent, be
necessary to provide sanitary sewer service to the subdivision, the developer
shall construct the station and all appurtenances at his own expense. If and
when the lift station is no longer needed, the installation will, unless
other provisions are made, remain the property of the city for reuse or
disposal.



   (N)   Sewer service lines for each lot shall have a minimum internal
diameter of four inches and shall be installed on a minimum grade of 1%.
Minimum cover at the property line shall be two feet. Tracer tape shall be
installed to indicate the location of the sewer stub out.



   (O)   Unless provided otherwise in the developer’s contract,
off-site sewerage utilities shall be constructed by developers at no expense
to the city.



   (P)   Prior to acceptance, the sanitary sewers shall be subjected to
an air leakage test and mandrel test.



   (Q)   The City Engineer may require, at the developer’s expense, a
TV examination of the sewer prior to acceptance.



   (R)   The design of sewers shall conform to the criteria set forth
by the state regulatory agency.



   (S)   Sewer shall have four-inch crushed stone bedding and six
inches of crushed stone above the pipe.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.058  WATER.



   (A)   All subdivisions shall be provided with an approved water
system. In the city and in all areas of the ETJ, subdivisions shall be served
by the city’s water system unless otherwise authorized by the Council. When
the city considers it unreasonable to extend water distribution pipelines
from the city’s primary water system to a proposed subdivision located in
the city’s area of jurisdiction, then a developer may construct a
groundwater or surface water supply, water storage facilities, and pressure
pumping system to create a satellite water system to serve the subdivision.
The satellite system shall be constructed at the developer’s expense unless
provided otherwise by facilities agreement. Upon completion, the satellite
system shall become the property of the city and the city will operate,
maintain, and utilize the system to the benefit of all its water users.
Satellite systems will be incorporated into the city’s overall water system
as service areas expand.



   (B)   Where water lines are to be installed on private property, the
developer shall pay the cost to secure the necessary easements in the name of
the city.



   (C)   Water mains in residential areas shall be a minimum of six
inches nominal internal diameter and shall be UL and NSF certified. Water
mains in commercial and industrial areas shall be a minimum of eight inches
nominal internal diameter and shall be UL and NSF certified.



   (D)   Water services for each lot shall be a minimum of
three-quarters of an inch. Each service shall be provided with a brass meter
valve contained inside a meter box. Service to each lot shall have a maximum
cover of 18 inches.



   (E)   Valves shall be located at maximum intervals of 600 feet on
12-inch and smaller lines. Valves shall be furnished with extensions such
that the working nut is a maximum of 48 inches below grade.



   (F)   In residential areas, fire hydrants shall be placed along the
water lines at intervals not exceeding 600 feet and such that every building
site is within 500 feet of a hydrant. In commercial and industrial areas,
fire hydrants shall be placed along the water lines at intervals not
exceeding 300 feet. Fire hydrants shall be placed at intersections, in the
middle of blocks that exceed 600 feet in residential areas and 300 feet in
commercial and industrial areas, and on the end of dead-end water lines 300
feet long and longer. Fire hydrants shall be placed on the right-of-way line
if there is no street curb; if there is a street curb, the hydrant shall be
placed one and one-half feet from the curb.



   (G)   Water lines shall be installed with 36 inches minimum cover
over the top of the pipe.



   (H)   Water lines shall be disinfected and pressure tested in
accordance with standards of the state regulatory agency.



   (I)   PVC pipe shall have four-inch sand bedding, and 12 inches of
sand over top of pipe.



   (J)   The design shall conform to the latest criteria set forth by
the standards of the state regulatory agency.



   (K)   The water distribution system shall conform to the American
Water Works Association standards for fire protection, which standards shall
supercede the minimum otherwise specified herein.



   (L)   Except as provided otherwise by the developer’s contract,
the developer shall pay for all costs of the water system.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.059  ELECTRIC.



   (A)   All electric primary lines shall conform to the specifications
published by REA Standard D-804.



   (B)   Conformation to the city electric line extension policy shall
be required.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.060  DRAINAGE.



   (A)   Computations for storm drainage from watersheds less than 200
acres may be based on the rational method using NWS TP-40 and NWS HYDRO 35
frequency curves for Grayson County. For larger watersheds, SCS or USACOE HEC
methods shall be used.



   (B)   Underground drainage structures for residential areas,
shopping centers and industrial developments shall be designed for a ten-year
frequency rainfall, and central business districts for a 25-year frequency
rainfall.



   (C)   An adequate storm sewer system consisting of inlets, pipes and
other underground drainage structures with approved outlets shall be
constructed where runoff of storm water and the prevention of erosion cannot
be accomplished satisfactorily by surface drainage facilities. Storm sewers
shall be reinforced concrete pipe.



   (D)   Open channel drainage structures shall be designed for the
100-year rainfall and shall provide for one foot of freeboard with
sub-critical flow conditions.



   (E)   The drainage system shall be designed and constructed to
handle rainfall runoff that originates in and crosses the subdivision.



   (F)   The drainage system shall be designed so that water shall not
be greater than curb-deep and shall not flow farther than 1,000 feet before
reaching an inlet in thoroughfare, collector, and local streets under design
rainfall conditions. Curb inlets shall be installed at the upstream end of
all valley gutters crossing thoroughfare and collector streets.



   (G)   Street crowns shall not be flattened or warped from one side
of the street to the other side.



   (H)   Drainage systems, streets, terrain, building sites, building,
public and private improvements shall be constructed to enable the runoff
from a 100-year frequency rainfall to pass through the subdivision without
inundating the ground floor of any home or business.



   (I)   Except when provided otherwise in the developer’s contract,
the developer shall pay for all costs of the drainage system.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.061  OTHER IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Monuments and markers. Lot corners and lot line transition
points shall be marked with three- quarter inch diameter steel bars 18 inches
long driven flush with the ground.



   (B)   Utilities. All services for utilities shall be made available
to each lot in such a manner so as to eliminate the necessity for disturbing
the street and alley pavement, curb, gutter, sidewalks and drainage
structures when connections are made.



   (C)   Sidewalks shall be constructed:



      (1)   On the subdivision side of all thoroughfare streets
adjacent to the subdivision;



      (2)   On both sides of all internal residential streets;



      (3)   As deemed necessary by the city in commercial,
industrial, public and multi-family areas;



      (4)   Such additional sidewalks as the subdivider may desire;
and



      (5)   Shall be constructed of 2,000 psi concrete having a
width of not less than four feet and a minimum thickness of four inches.



   (D)   Street lighting and signs. Street lights shall be installed by
the subdivider at all street intersections of the subdivision.



      (1)   Street lighting shall conform to the latest edition of
the Illuminating Engineering Society Handbook.



      (2)   Lighting levels shall be recommended for:



         (a)   Very light traffic in residential areas.



         (b)   Medium traffic on collector streets.



         (c)   Heavy traffic on thoroughfares.



      (3)   Street lights shall conform to standards specified by
the city.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.062  EASEMENTS AND DEDICATIONS.



   (A)   Utility easements.  Ten feet wide utility easements shall be
provided on the rear lot line of each lot. Easements shall be provided at all
other locations necessary for the construction and maintenance of utilities.



   (B)   Drainage easements. Drainage easements shall be provided for
the construction and maintenance of drainage systems of such size and
location necessary as determined by the drainage plans.



   (C)   Fire lanes. Where adequate access for fire fighting is not
otherwise provided, easements for fire lanes shall be required. Fire lane
easements shall be paved to a minimum of 20 feet in width and shall be marked
as such on the ground.



   (D)   Parks and open space. There shall be no dedication of parks,
open space, or other public access areas except as authorized by the city.



   (E)   Schools. There shall be no dedication or reservation of land
for school purposes except as authorized by the City in consultation with the
Whitesboro ISD.



   (F)   Public facilities. There shall be no dedication or reservation
of land for public buildings or facilities except as authorized by the city.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.063  LOTS.



   (A)   The lot size, width, shape, depth, and orientation, and the
minimum building setback lines shall be in accordance with the Zoning Code.



   (B)   Each lot shall front upon a public street.



   (C)   Double frontage lots should be avoided except where essential
to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to
overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting
screen reservation of at least ten feet, and across which there shall be no
right of access shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a
traffic artery or other similar use.



   (D)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or
radial to street centerlines.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.064  FLOODPLAIN.



   (A)   General. Subdividing of property that includes areas
designated as flood hazard areas by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
shall conform to applicable federal, state, county, and city floodplain
management requirements.



   (B)   Liability. The city will not be financially liable for any
damages due to flooding.



   (C)   Notification.  Subdivision plats, site plans, and building
permits shall designate lots and portions thereof that are in flood hazard
zones.



   (D)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      BASE FLOOD ELEVATION LINES. Elevation lines showing projected
water surface elevation that can be expected from a flood with a probability
of occurrence of 1%.



      FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial and complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers or
other inland water.



      FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP. An official map or plat, approved by
the Federal Insurance Administration, on which the boundaries of the area
having special flood hazards have been drawn for the purpose of the federal
flood insurance program.



      FLOODING.  Same as “flood.”



      FLOODPLAIN. An area susceptible to flooding.



      FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures, primarily for
the reduction or elimination of flood damage to lands, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and contents of building.



      FLOODWAY. The channel of a water course and the adjacent land
that must be reserved to discharge the base flood without increasing the
water surface elevation more than one foot.



      F LOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES. The lines marking the limits of
floodways on the official flood hazard boundary map.



      ONE HUNDRED YEAR STORM. A storm or rainfall event, having a one
percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.



      RIVERINE. Of or relating to a river, stream or water course.



      WATER SURFACE ELEVATION DATA. The elevation in relation to mean
sea level of an air- water interface.



   (E)   After floodways are identified and designated, no new
construction or major improvement will be authorized in the flood plain that
will raise the water surface elevation above the base flood elevation more
than one foot.



   (F)   All residential building permit applications for new
construction of substantial improvements shall be accompanied by a statement
of a duly registered Texas surveyor or engineer certifying that the lowest
building, including basement, elevation will be at least two feet above the
base flood elevation line.



   (G)   Building permit applications for buildings or portions thereof
that are or will be less than two feet above the base flood elevation shall
be reviewed by the Building Inspector to determine that the proposed
construction or repair uses construction materials and utility equipment that
are resistant to flood damage and construction methods that will minimize
flood damage.



   (H)   Building permit applications shall be reviewed by the Building
Inspector to assure that the proposed construction is protected against flood
damage and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or movement of structure.



   (I)   The City Engineer will review all subdivision proposals and
other proposed new development to assure that: all such proposals are
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; all public utilities and
facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer and water systems are constructed
to minimize or eliminate flood damage; adequate drainage is provided so as to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



SPECIAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.075  DEVELOPER’S CONTRACT.



   (A)   The subdivider shall be required to enter into a contract with
the city which shall govern his or her subdivision, pro rata payments, city
participation in cost, escrow deposits, other future considerations,
variances, non-standard development, improvements to be dedicated to the
city, improvements that will be completed prior to filing of the final plat
in the county records. This agreement shall be based on the requirements of
this chapter and shall provide the city with specific authority to complete
the improvements required by the agreement in the event of failure by the
developer to perform and to recover the full costs of such measures.



   (B)   The developer’s contract shall be a binding agreement
between the city and the developer specifying the individual and joint
responsibilities of the city and the developer. Unusual circumstances
relating to the subdivision shall be considered in the developer’s contract
such that the purpose of this chapter is served for each particular
subdivision. The developer shall indemnify the city against any claims
arising out of the developer’s subdivision.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.076  FINANCIAL SECURITY.



   (A)   The developer shall submit a letter of irrevocable credit,
bond, or cash escrow equal to the estimated cost of construction as approved
by city officials. Such letter of credit, bond, or cash escrow shall be in
force and effect until completion of the construction.



   (B)   If the developer fails to construct or complete the
construction of the subdivision improvements within one year following final
plat approval, the city may secure the construction of such improvements and
pay for the cost thereof with proceeds from the letter of credit, bond,
and/or escrow account. In the alternative, the owner(s) of the affected land
may abandon the plat in such manner that all the affected land shall revert
to a single, undivided parcel. Abandonment of a plat shall not be cause for
disannexation of a parcel.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.077  PRO RATA PAYMENTS.



   (A)   The developer shall be responsible for the construction of
oversize or off-site access, utilities, drainage and other improvements
necessary for his or her subdivision unless other provisions are approved by
the City Council. Provisions for reimbursement of costs in excess of those
necessary to serve the subdivision and any other provisions, shall be made a
part of the developer’s contract. For a period of five years following the
filing of the final plat, subsequent subdivisions utilizing such facilities
shall pay any cost due prior developers as the use by the new subdivision
bears to the amount due. Such prorated amounts will be made a part of any
subsequent developer’s contract, collected by the City and repaid to the
original developer making such improvements, not to exceed his actual share
of the cost incurred.



   (B)   All such reimbursements or prorations shall be based on the
actual cost of the improvements at the time of their construction. The
original developer shall therefore provide the city with acceptable
documentation of actual construction costs from which calculation of
reimbursable amounts will be made for inclusion in the developer’s contract.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.078  CITY PARTICIPATION.



   The city may, but shall have no obligation to, participate with the
developer on items of construction which benefit other areas of the city. The
amount of financial responsibility of each party and the terms of discharging
such responsibility may be provided for in the developer’s contract.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 153.090  OBSERVATION OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   The City Inspector and/or his or her designated inspector
shall periodically observe the construction of improvements for subdivision.
Inspection of improvements is not intended to and does not relieve the
subdivider or his contractor, from ensuring that the improvements are
constructed in accordance with the accepted plans and specifications. The
subdivider or his or her contractor shall maintain contact with the City
Inspector or his or her representative during construction of improvements.



   (B)   No sanitary sewer, water or storm sewer pipe shall be covered
without approval of the City Inspector or his or her representative. No
flexible base material, subgrade material or stabilization shall be applied
to the street subgrade without approval of the City Inspector. No concrete
shall be poured nor asphaltic surface applied to the base without approval of
the City Inspector.



   (C)   The City Inspector or his or her representative may, at any
time, cause any construction, installation, maintenance or location of
improvements to cease when, in his or her judgment, the requirements of this
chapter or the standards and specifications as hereinbefore provided have
been violated. Any violation may require such reconstruction or other work as
may be necessary to correct any such violation at the expense of the
developer. The cost of materials testing shall be borne by the developer.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.091  PERFORMANCE AND PAYMENT BONDS.



   (A)   The subdivider shall furnish performance and payment bonds in
the amount of 100% of the contract price of all public improvements from a
reputable and solvent corporate surety in favor of the city for a period of
one year from the date of final acceptance of the improvements. Construction
of improvements shall not begin until bonds are furnished to the city.



   (B)   If any of the public facilities fail to meet the requirements
of the chapter or if the developer fails to complete the improvements
according to the approved plat and construction plans, the deficiencies and
unfinished improvements shall be completed at the cost and expense of the
surety as provided.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.092  FILING, PLAT AND OTHER FEES.



   (A)   (1)   The fees and charges shall be paid to the city when
any preliminary plat or final plat is filed. Each of these fees and charges
shall be paid in advance and no action of the Commission or any other board
or agency of the city shall be valid until the fees have been paid to the
city.



      (2)   Except as hereinbefore provided, these fees and charges
shall be charged on all plats and filings, regardless of the action taken by
the Commission or any other board or agency of the city and whether the plat
is approved or denied by the City Council.



   (B)   The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a filing fee of
$250 per plat, plus $2 per lot. The fee shall be $300 plus $30 per acre for
multiple dwelling areas, commercial or industrial districts, and other areas
not subdivided into lots. No action by the city shall be valid until the
filing fee has been paid. This fee shall not be refunded should the developer
withdraw a preliminary plat or should the plat be disapproved.



   (C)   When the final plat is filed, it shall be accompanied by the
following fees:



      (1)   $400 per plat, plus $5 per lot.



      (2)   For multiple dwelling areas, commercial and/or
industrial districts and other areas not subdivided into lots the fee shall
be $400 plus $50 per acre.



   (D)   Construction fee equal to 3% of the cost of the construction
(as determined by the City Inspector) including water, sewer, paving and
drainage facilities shall be paid to the city prior to the construction of
any facilities. This construction fee will be used to defray expenses
incurred by construction inspection.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)  Penalty, see § 153.999



§ 153.999  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter or who shall fail to comply with any provisions hereof shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be required to attain
compliance with this chapter and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$500, and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable accordingly.



(Ord. 933, passed 8-9-05)



CHAPTER 154:  ZONING CODE



Section




General Provisions




   154.001   Definitions



   154.002   Purpose



   154.003   Zoning district map



   154.004   Zoning district boundaries



   154.005   Compliance required



   154.006   Preserving rights and continuity in enforcement, pending
litigation, and violations under chapter and amendments thereto



   154.007   Newly annexed areas



   154.008   Permits and certificates



   154.009   Enforcement




Districts




   154.020   Number of districts



   154.021   General application



   154.022   R-1 Residential District



   154.023   R-2 Residential District



   154.024   R-3 Residential District



   154.025   R-4 Residential District



   154.026   B Business District



   154.027   DT Downtown Business District



   154.028   I Industrial District



   154.029   Application of regulations to the uses of a more
restricted district




Special Use Permits




   154.040   General description of special use permits



   154.041   Use regulation of special use permits



   154.042   Temporary special use permits



   154.043   Special use conformance regulations



   154.044   Amendment to the zoning code




Nonconforming Uses




   154.055   Nonconforming uses




Special Parking, Area Regulations and Exceptions




   154.070   Storage and parking of trailers and commercial vehicles



   154.071   Open spaces



   154.072   Vision clearance



   154.073   Building lines



   154.074   Lot area



   154.075   Location of dwellings and buildings




Unplatted Property




   154.085   Zoning required



   154.086   Annexation pending



   154.087   Simultaneous hearings




Changes and Amendments




   154.100   General description



   154.101   Review by Planning and Zoning Commission



   154.102   Public hearing before Planning and Zoning Commission



   154.103   Public hearing before governing body



   154.104   Circumstances dictating voting requirements




Planning and Zoning Commission and Board of Adjustment




   154.115   Composition, term and vacancies of Planning and Zoning
Commission



   154.116   Powers, duties and responsibilities of the Commission



   154.117   Meetings of the Commission



   154.118   Composition, term and vacancies of Board of Adjustment



   154.119   Powers, duties and responsibilities of the Board



   154.120   Meetings of the Board



   154.121   Variance findings flowchart



 



   154.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 154.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.  Words
used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the
singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include the
singular, except where the natural construction of the writing indicates
otherwise.  The word “shall” is mandatory and not directory.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building or a portion of the main
building located on the same lot as the main building, the use of which is
incidental to that of the dominant use of the building or premises.



   ACCESSORY USE. A use customarily incidental, appropriate and
subordinate to the principal use of land or buildings and located upon the
same lot therewith.



   ANIMAL HOSPITALS. Buildings which are used or intended for use of
treatment and care of animals, including veterinarian clinics and dog pounds.



   APARTMENT HOUSE and APARTMENTS. Any building, or portion thereof, which
is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which
is occupied as the home or residence of more than two families living
independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the said building,
and shall include flats and apartments.



   BUILDING. Any structure intended for shelter, housing or enclosure for
persons, animals or chattel. When separated by dividing walls without
openings, each portion of such structure so separated, shall be deemed a
separate building.



   BUILDING AREA. The total area enclosed by a line formed by the outside
surface of all walls at the foundation line.



   BUILDING HEIGHT. Average vertical distance from finished grade or
ground level to the highest point of the roof, tower or obstruction.



   CHILD CARE CENTER. Any place, home or institution which receives three
or more children under the age of 16 years, and not of common parentage, for
care apart from their natural parents, legal guardians or custodians, when
received for regular periods of time for compensation; provided, however,
this definition shall not include public and private schools organized,
operated or approved under the laws of this state, custody of children fixed
by a court of competent jurisdiction, children related by blood or marriage
within the third degree to the custodial person, or to churches or other
religious or public institutions caring for children within the institutional
building while their parents or legal guardians are attending service or
meetings or classes or other church activities.



   COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL FACILITIES. Buildings designed for or occupied
by bowling alleys, health clubs, swimming pools, indoor golf, ice skating,
billiards and other recreational activities operated as a commercial
enterprise when approved.



   COVERAGE. The lot area covered by all buildings located thereon,
including the area covered by all overhanging roofs.



   DENSITY. Number of dwellings divided by acreage.



   DISTRICT. Any section or sections of the city for which the regulations
governing the use of land and the use, density, bulk, height, and coverage of
buildings and other structures are uniform for each class or kind of building
therein.



   DRINKING AND EATING ESTABLISHMENTS. Restaurants, bars, drive-in
establishments where food and drinks are served together.



   DWELLING or HOUSEHOLD. Any building or portion thereof, which is
designed or used as living quarters for one or more families.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached dwelling designed to be occupied by
one family.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. Detached buildings designed for or occupied
by more than five unrelated persons by marriage or blood in one or more
households and containing two or more kitchens for non-transient occupants.



   ENCLOSED STORAGE. Enclosed by walls and doors to a height of eight or
more feet to effectively screen the contents from view and protect from
spread of fire and vandalism.



   FAMILY. One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption or a
group of not to exceed five  persons not all related by blood or marriage,
occupying a single-family dwelling, boarding or lodging house, hotel, club or
similar dwelling for group use.



   FIRE WALL. Masonry wall, eight inches or more in width, continuous from
foundation to roof without openings other than fire-proof doors.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or a part of a main building
used for storage purposes only for automobiles used solely by the occupants
and their guests of the building to which it is accessory.



   GARAGE, REPAIR. A building in which are provided facilities for the
care, servicing, repair or equipping of automobiles.



   GASOLINE SERVICE or FILLING STATION. Any area of land, including
structures thereon, that is used for the retail sale of gasoline or oil
fuels, or other automobile accessories, and incidental services including
facilities for lubricating, washing and cleaning, or otherwise servicing
automobiles, but not including painting, major repair or the sale of butane
or propane fuels.



   GROSS AREA. Total area of block or subdivision including all streets,
easements, and public land therein and one-half of the area of abutting
streets and public lands.



   HOME OCCUPATION. Any use which does not change the character of the
dwelling and where no article is sold or offered for sale except such as may
be produced by members of the immediate family residing on premises.



   HOTEL, MOTEL, BOARDING HOUSE, LODGING HOUSE. A detached building
designed or occupied by transients or by five or more unrelated persons by
blood or marriage.



   KENNEL. A commercial kennel for boarding, breeding, training, renting
or selling, or any other commercial use.



   LIVE/WORK UNITS. A commercial structure containing a residential use
concurrent with the commercial use.



   LOT. Any plot of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one main
building, or a group of main buildings, and accessory buildings and uses,
including such open spaces as required by this chapter and other laws or
ordinances, and having its principal frontage on a street.



   LOT AREA. The total area measured on a horizontal plane, included
within lot lines.



   LOT, CORNER. A lot which has at least two  adjacent sides abutting for
their full lengths on a street, provided that the interior angle at the
intersection of such two sides is less than 135 degrees.



   LOT, DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.



   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having a frontage on two streets and not
located at the intersection of the same two streets.



   LOT FRONTAGE. That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a
street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot.



   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.



   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot.



   MANUFACTURED HOME, HUD CODE. A structure constructed on or after June
15, 1976, according to the rules of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling
mode, is eight body feet or more in width, or 40 body feet or more in length,
or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems.



   MOBILE HOME. A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976,
transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight
body feet or more in width, or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when
erected an site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems.



   MODULAR HOME.  A structure constructed of pre-made parts and unit
modules wherein wall sections, roof sections, and other prefabricated house
components are transported from the factory to the building site on flatbed
trucks and trailers.  At the building site, sections, unit modules, or
factory built structures are assembled or lifted onto a site built foundation
where they are permanently anchored. Modular homes may be completely
fabricated in a factory, but, unlike manufactured homes they are not built on
a permanent steel chassis.  Modular homes shall conform to the building,
plumbing and electric codes of the city.



   MEDICAL FACILITIES.



      (1)   CONVALESCENT, REST, or NURSING HOME. A health facility
where persons are housed and furnished with meals and continuing nursing care
for compensation.



      (2)   DENTAL CLINIC or MEDICAL CLINIC. A facility for the
examination and treatment of ill and afflicted human outpatients provided
that patients are not kept overnight except under emergency conditions.



      (3)   DENTAL OFFICE or DOCTOR’S OFFICE. Same as dental or
medical clinic.



      (4)   HOSPITAL. An institution providing health services
primarily for human inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or
injured and including related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient
departments, training facilities, central services facilities, and staff
offices which are an integral part of the facilities.



      (5)   PUBLIC HEALTH CENTER. A facility primarily utilized by a
health unit for providing public health services including related facilities
such as laboratories, clinics and administrative offices operated in
connection therewith.



   OPEN SPACE. A space which can be enjoyed by people. This could include
landscaped plazas, grass and trees, fountains, sitting areas, and the like,
and is meant to provide an open garden atmosphere. OPEN SPACE does not
include parking areas, vacant or undeveloped lots or any other space which
does not contribute to the quality of the environment.



   PARKING SPACE. A permanently surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed,
having an area of not less than 180 square feet which will accommodate a car,
minimum width nine feet.  PARKING, as used in this chapter, is to mean
off-street parking with access from streets or secondary means or as approved
by subdivision plat.



   PAVED SURFACE or PERMANENT SURFACE. An area that is surfaced with a
sealed surface pavement adequate to prevent the occurrence of mud and dust
with continued use.



   PUBLIC USES. Any use controlled by the city, county, state, federal
government or improvement district.



   SIGN AREA. The gross area determined by the longest line circumscribing
all parts of signs including structural supports. When the sign is on a
board, background, frame, or other device, it includes such board,
background, frame, or device. When the sign is placed on buildings without
painted backgrounds, backboards, frames or support other than the building,
the area shall not include that area not covered by the sign.



   SIGNS. Any words, lettering, parts of letters, figures, numerals,
phrases, sentences, devices, designs, pictures, trade names, or trademarks by
which anything is made known, such as used to designate an individual, a
firm, an association, a corporation, a profession, a business, a service, or
a commodity or product, or any type of publicity or propaganda, whether
placed on a building, flag, wall, roof, frame support, fence or other
man-made device which are visible from any public street, public highway or
public road or right-of-way.



   SPECIAL EXCEPTION. Refers to uses that a zoning ordinance permits, but
that are screened and specially approved by the Board of Adjustment for
situational suitability. Also referred to as SPECIAL USE.



   STREET. Any public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal
means of access to abutting property.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or
any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or which is attached to something having a location on
the ground.



   TRAILER, HAULING. A vehicle to be pulled behind an automobile or truck
which is designed for hauling animals, produce, goods or commodities,
including boats.



   TRAILER, TRAVEL or CAMPING and MOTOR HOME. A portable or mobile living
unit used for temporary human occupancy away from the place or residence of
occupants, and not constituting the principal place of residence of the
occupants.



   VARIANCE. Permission to depart from the literal requirements of a
zoning ordinance by virtue of unique hardship due to special circumstances
regarding a person’s property.



   YARD. An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot
lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the
ground upward, except where otherwise specifically provided in this chapter
that the building or structure may be located in a portion of a yard required
for a main building. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the
width of the side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear
yard, the shortest horizontal distance between the lot line and the main
building shall be used.



   YARD, FRONT. A yard located in front of the front elevation of a
building and extending across a lot between the side yard lines and being the
minimum horizontal distance between the front property line and the outside
wall of the main building.



   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured between
the lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot
line and the rear of the outside wall of the main building. On both corner
lots and interior lots the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite
end of the lot from the front yard.



   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the building and the side line of the lot
and extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line and being the
minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the outside wall of
the side of the main building.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05; Am. Ord. 1025, passed 5-10-11; Am. Ord. 1086,
passed 11-15-16)



§ 154.002  PURPOSE.



   It is hereby declared to be the purpose and intent of the City Council
in enacting this chapter that the zoning regulations and districts as herein
established have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the
purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
city. They have been designed to lessen the congestion in the streets; to
secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light
and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of
population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. They have been made
with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the character of the
district, and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified; and
with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most
appropriate use of land throughout the city consistent with a comprehensive
plan.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



§ 154.003  ZONING DISTRICT MAP.



   (A)   The boundaries of zoning districts set out herein are
delineated upon a zoning district map of the city adopted as part of this
chapter as fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail.



   (B)   All apartment complexes which were formerly zoned B-1, are now
zoned R-4 to comply with the definitions of this chapter.



   (C)   One original of the zoning district map shall be filed in the
office of the City Secretary. This copy shall be the official zoning district
map and shall bear the signature of the Mayor and attestation of the City
Secretary. This copy shall not be changed in any manner. In case of any
question, this copy, together with amending ordinances, shall be controlling.



   (D)   An additional copy of the original zoning district map shall
be placed in the office of the Building Inspector. The copy shall be used for
reference and shall be maintained up-to-date by posting thereon all
subsequent amendments.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



§ 154.004  ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such
centerlines.



   (B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot
lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.



   (C)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits
shall be construed as following city limits.



   (D)   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be
construed to be the established, the boundary shall be interpreted to be
midway between the right-of-way lines.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



§ 154.005  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   All land, buildings, structures or appurtenances thereon located within
the city which are hereafter occupied, used, erected, altered or converted
shall be used, placed and erected in conformance with the zoning regulations
prescribed for the zoning district in which such land or building is located
except as hereinafter provided. Land used in meeting the requirements of this
chapter with respect to a particular use or building shall not be used to
meet the requirements for any other use or building.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.006  PRESERVING RIGHTS AND CONTINUITY IN ENFORCEMENT, PENDING
LITIGATION, AND VIOLATIONS UNDER CHAPTER AND AMENDMENTS THERETO.



   By the passage of Ordinance 927, codified herein, no presently illegal
use or building shall be deemed to have been legalized unless such use falls
within a use district where the actual use and standards under the terms of
this chapter shall be conforming. Any use which does not conform to
provisions of this chapter shall be a nonconforming use or structure if it
legally existed as a conforming or nonconforming use or structure prior to
adoption of this chapter or an illegal use if it did not exist as a
conforming or nonconforming use or structure, as the case may be. It is
further the intent and declared purpose of this chapter that no offense
committed, and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either civil or criminal,
incurred prior to the time the previous zoning ordinance was repealed and
this chapter adopted shall be discharged or affected by such repeal; but
prosecutions and suits for such offense, liabilities, penalties or
forfeitures may be instituted or causes presently pending proceeded within
all respects as if such prior ordinance has not been repealed.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



§ 154.007  NEWLY ANNEXED AREAS.



   (A)   All territory hereafter annexed to the city shall be
temporarily classified R-1. The City Council, at its own initiative, may
establish permanent zoning as soon as practicable.



   (B)   The procedure for establishing the permanent zoning on any
annexed territory shall be the same as is provided by law for the amendment
of the zoning ordinance.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



§ 154.008  PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to commence
the construction, enlargement or structural alteration of any building or
structure in the city, or using or occupying the same without first applying
for and securing a building permit, or to use or occupy same without first
securing a certificate of occupancy and compliance from the City Secretary or
such other official designated by the City Council. Application shall be made
on forms furnished by the City Secretary.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.009  ENFORCEMENT.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by
the City Administrator, his or her designee, or such other person as may be
designated by the City Council. All applications for building permits shall
be accompanied by a plat or plot plan in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing
the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of
the building to be erected, the use of the property and such other
information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these
regulations. A careful record of such applications and plats shall be kept in
the office of the City Secretary, or such other person as may be designated
by the City Council.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



DISTRICTS



§ 154.020  NUMBER OF DISTRICTS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following districts are hereby
established for the city:



   (A)   Residential districts:



      (1)   R-1 Residential District.



      (2)   R-2 Residential District.



      (3)   R-3 Residential District.



      (4)   R-4 Residential District.



   (B)   Commercial districts:



      (1)   B Business District.



      (2)   DT Downtown Business District.



   (C)   Industrial districts:  I Industrial District.



   (D)   Special districts:  Special Use District.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



§ 154.021  GENERAL APPLICATION.



   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided:



      (1)   No building shall be erected and no existing building
shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land, building
or premises be used, designated or intended to be used for any purpose or in
any manner other than is included among the uses hereinafter listed as
permitted in the district in which such building, land or premises is located.



      (2)   No sign shall be erected, moved, altered, added to,
enlarged, painted or modified except in conformity to the sign regulation.



      (3)   No building shall be erected, nor shall any existing
building be altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open space
surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except
in conformity to the yard, building site area and building location
regulations hereinafter designated for the district in which such building or
open space is located.



      (4)   No yard or other open space provided about any building
for the purpose of complying with provisions of this chapter shall be
considered as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other lots.



   (B)   The regulations contained herein are not retroactive and apply
only to buildings and uses established after the effective date of this
chapter.



   (C)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to farm, ranch
and forestry dwellings, buildings or agricultural uses located, or to be
located, on a tract of five or more acres in size.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.022  R-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   General description. The principal use of land is for
single-family dwellings and related recreational, religious and educational
facilities normally required to provide an orderly and attractive residential
area. These residential areas are intended to be defined and protected from
the encroachment of uses which are not appropriate to residential environment.



   (B)   Uses permitted. In the R-1 Residential District, no building
or land shall be used and no building shall be hereinafter erected, converted
or structurally altered, unless otherwise provided herein, except for one or
more of the following uses:



      (1)   Single-family buildings and accessory uses thereto;



      (2)   Public and private parks, libraries, schools, nurseries,
public uses, accessory uses thereto;



      (3)   Churches and accessory uses thereto;



      (4)   Identification signs; and



      (5)   Home occupations subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   The home occupation is conducted entirely within a
dwelling unit which is the bona fide residence of the practitioner(s) or
entirely within only one accessory building (not to include a driveway, yard
or outside area).



         (b)   No person, not a family member who resides in the
dwelling unit, may participate in the home occupation on the premises.



         (c)   The lot and the dwelling maintain their
residential character. Neither the interior nor the exterior of the dwelling
shall be structurally altered so as to require compliance with nonresidential
construction codes to accommodate the home occupation. No additional
buildings shall be added on the property to accommodate the home occupation.



         (d)   The home occupation does not generate
customer-related vehicular traffic in excess of two vehicles at any one time
and a total of five vehicles per 24-hour day in the residential neighborhood.



         (e)   No equipment or materials associated with the home
occupation are displayed or stored where visible from anywhere off the
premises.



         (f)   The occupation produces no external noise,
vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, electrical interference or waste runoff
outside the dwelling unit or on the property surrounding the dwelling unit.



   (C)   Building regulations.



      (1)   In the R-1 Residential District no residence shall be
constructed with habitable building area of less than 1,100 square feet.



      (2)   No building shall be constructed unless paved area on
the lot where the building is placed, either covered or uncovered or enclosed
or otherwise, equal to the area of habitable buildings shall be provided for
the parking of vehicles.



      (3)   No building shall be constructed on a lot which does not
make provisions for space for the above uses plus an area equal to twice the
area of the building for playgrounds, gardens, landscaping and patios, nor
shall a residence be constructed on land where the density of the block, plot
or subdivision exceeds five dwellings per gross acre.



   (D)   Area regulations.



      (1)   In the R-1 Residential District no dwelling shall be
constructed closer than 25 feet from the front lot line; 25 feet from the
back lot line; and no closer than five feet from the side lines, except on a
corner lot, then no building shall be constructed closer than ten feet from
said lot lines adjoining said street.



      (2)   Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in
the rear yard of a main building no closer than five feet from the side lot
lines and no closer than five feet from the back lot line.



   (E)   Sign regulations. In the R-1 Residential District, no
permanent sign shall be constructed larger than two square feet in area with
the exception of a church bulletin board or sign, not exceeding 32 square
feet in area, located on the same lot with the church building. No temporary
sign shall be constructed larger than four square feet in area. No sign shall
be lighted or animated, or fluorescent, or phosphorescent except traffic
signs, street signs and house numbers may be lighted, fluorescent, or
phosphorescent provided the colors are not red, amber or flashing. The
maximum height to the top of signs shall be six feet. No sign shall be placed
on the ground, rocks, trees, tree stump or other natural objects.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.023  R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   General description. The principal use of land is for higher
density single-family dwellings and related recreational, religious and
educational facilities normally required to provide an orderly and attractive
residential area. These residential areas are intended to be defined and
protected from the encroachment of uses which are not appropriate to
residential environment.



   (B)   Permitted uses. In the R-2 Residential District, no building
or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, converted
or structurally altered, unless otherwise provided herein, except for one or
more of the following uses:



      (1)   Residential dwellings and accessory uses thereto;



      (2)   Home occupations;



      (3)   Professional buildings and accessory uses where services
are sold and no product nor article is sold or offered. Such services may
include architects, engineers, realtors, accountants, lawyers, artists,
veterinarians, physicians, morticians and others as approved;



      (4)   Pharmacies, clinics, hospitals, churches, public and
private schools, funeral homes,



parks, playgrounds, libraries, nurseries, public uses and accessory uses
thereto; and



      (5)   Identification signs.



   (C)   Building regulations.



      (1)   In the R-2 Residential District no building shall be
constructed with a habitable building area of less than 1,000 square feet.



      (2)   No building shall be constructed unless paved areas on
the lot which the building is placed, either covered or uncovered or enclosed
or otherwise, equal to the area of habitable buildings shall be provided for
the parking of vehicles.



      (3)   No building shall be constructed unless an area, equal
to the area of habitable buildings, is provided for playgrounds, gardens,
landscaping and patios.



   (D)   Area regulations.



      (1)   In the R-2 Residential District no dwelling shall be
constructed closer than 25 feet from the front lot line; 25 feet from the
back lot line; and no closer than five feet from the side lines, except on a
corner lot, then no building shall be constructed closer than ten feet from
said lot lines adjoining said street.



      (2)   Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in
the rear yard of a main building no closer than five feet from the side lot
lines and no closer than five feet from the back lot line.



   (E)   Sign regulations. No sign shall be erected larger than four
square feet in area and no sign shall be animated, or lighted with red, amber
or flashing lights. The maximum height to the top of signs shall be six feet.
No sign shall be placed on the ground, rocks, trees, tree stump or other
natural objects.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.024  R-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   General description. The principal use of land is for high
density residential dwellings, manufactured homes (by special use permit),
public facilities, accessory uses and other uses necessary to ensure the
healthy and orderly development of the district.



   (B)   Permitted uses. In the R-3 Residential District, no building
or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, converted
or structurally altered, unless otherwise provided herein, except for one or
more of the following uses:



      (1)   Residential dwellings and accessory uses thereto;



      (2)   Professional buildings, offices where services are sold
including architects, engineers, lawyers, accountants, artists,
veterinarians, physicians, morticians, realtors, and others as approved;



      (3)   Pharmacies, clinics, hospitals, churches, public and
private schools, parks, playgrounds, libraries, nurseries, public uses and
accessory uses thereto;



      (4)   Manufactured homes and accessory uses thereto; and



      (5)   Identification signs.



   (C)   Building regulations.



      (1)   In the R-3 Residential District, no building shall be
constructed with a habitable building area of less than 800 square feet.



      (2)   No building shall be constructed or moved into the
district unless paved areas on the lot which the building is placed shall
have been provided for parking of vehicles equal to one-half the area of
habitable building or 200 square feet, whichever is greater.



      (3)   No building shall be constructed or moved into the
district unless an area equal to the area of the habitable building shall
have been provided for playgrounds, gardens, landscaping and patios.



   (D)   Manufactured homes (special use permit required).



      (1)   All manufactured homes shall:



         (a)   Be less than ten years old; any used manufactured
homes must be inspected before allowed within the city limits.



         (b)   Be connected to city water and sewer services.



         (c)   Have axle and hitch assembly removed at the time
of placement on the foundation.



         (d)   Be totally skirted with metal, masonry, pressure
treated wood, or other nondegradable material which is compatible with the
design and exterior materials of the primary structure



         (e)   Have the frame supported by, and tied to, a
foundation system capable of safely supporting the structure. A tie down and
anchoring system separate and apart from the foundation ties shall be
provided as recommended by the manufacturer, if different from the foundation
ties.



         (f)   Have electrical power supply made from a meter
installation on the structure, or from a permanent pedestal.



      (2)   Living area additions are permitted, provided they meet
the minimum building setback requirements, have roof and siding material that
is compatible with the primary structure and comply with the same structural
standards as required of the primary structure.



      (3)   Patio and porch covers are permitted provided they cover
an improved patio, deck, or porch and meet the minimum building setback
requirements.



   (E)   Area regulations.



      (1)   In the R-3 Residential District, no dwelling shall be
constructed closer than 25 feet from the front lot line; 25 feet from the
back lot line; and no closer than five feet from the side lines, except on a
corner lot; then, no building shall be constructed closer than ten feet from
said lot lines adjoining said street.



      (2)   Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in
the rear yard of a main building no closer than five feet from the side lot
lines and no closer than five feet from the back lot line.



   (F)   Sign regulations. No signs shall be constructed larger than
four square feet, nor mounted with the top higher than six feet, nor lighted
with red, amber or flashing lights. No sign shall be placed on the ground,
rocks, trees, tree stump or other natural objects.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.025  R-4 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   General description. The principal use of land is for high
density residential dwellings, multi- family dwellings, apartments, public
facilities, accessory uses and other uses necessary to ensure the healthy and
orderly development of the district.



   (B)   Permitted uses. In the R-4 Residential District, no building
or land shall be used and no building shall be hereinafter erected, converted
or structurally altered, unless otherwise provided herein, except for one or
more of the following uses:



      (1)   Multi-family dwellings and apartments, and accessory
uses thereto;



      (2)   Public and private parks and playgrounds;



      (3)   Public and private schools, libraries, and nurseries,
nursery being defined as a place where children are temporarily cared for in
their parents’ absence; public uses, and churches; and



      (4)   Identification signs.



   (C)   Building regulations.



      (1)   In the R-4 Residential district, no building shall be
constructed with a habitable building area of less than 800 square feet.



      (2)   No building shall be constructed or moved into the
district unless paved areas on the lot on which the building is placed shall
have been provided for parking of vehicles equal to one-half the habitable
building area.



      (3)   No building shall be constructed or moved into the
district unless an area equal to one- fourth of the habitable building area
shall have been provided for playgrounds, gardens, landscaping and patios
with the placing of privacy fences to separate the adjoining land owners and
apartment dwellers.



   (D)   Area regulations.



      (1)   In the R-4 Residential District, no dwelling shall be
constructed closer than 25 feet from the front lot line; 25 feet from the
back lot line; and no closer than five feet from the side lines, except on a
corner lot, then no building shall be constructed closer than ten feet from
said lot lines adjoining said street.



      (2)   Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in
the rear yard of a main building no closer than five feet from the side lot
lines and no closer than five feet from the back lot line.



   (E)   Sign regulations. Identification signs shall be restricted to
a maximum of four square feet in area with a maximum height to the top of the
sign shall be six feet. No sign shall be animated or lighted with red, amber
or other colored flashing lights.



   COMPARISON CHART OF RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS



 


Zoning District

 

Uses Allowed

 

Off-Street Parking

 

Minimum Building Area

 

Yard Area



R-1
 
Single-family dwellings; public and private parks; libraries; schools;
nurseries; public uses; churches; home occupations and accessory uses
 
Paved areas equal to habitable building area on lot
 
Not less than 1,100 square feet
 
Twice area of building


R-2
 
Residential dwellings; professional buildings where services are sold and no
product or article is sold or offered for sale; pharmacies; clinics;
hospitals; churches; public and private schools; parks; playgrounds;
libraries; public uses
 
Paved areas equal to habitable building area on lot
 
Not less than 1,000 square feet
 
Equal to area of habitable building


R-3
 
Uses same as R-2 with addition of manufactured homes and duplexes
 
Paved area equal to one-half of habitable building area or 200 square feet,
whichever is greater
 
800 square feet
 
Equal to area of habitable building


R-4
 
Uses same as R-2 with addition of multi-family dwellings and apartments
 
Paved area equal to one-half of habitable building area
 
Not less than 800 square feet
 
Equal to one- fourth the habitable building



 



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.026  B BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   General description. This commercial business district is
intended for the conduct of personal and business services and the general
retail business of the community. Persons living in the community and in the
surrounding trade territory require direct and frequent access. Traffic
generated by the uses will be primarily passenger vehicles and only those
trucks and commercial vehicles required for stocking and delivery of retail
goods.



   (B)   Permitted uses. In the B Business District, no building or
land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, converted or
structurally altered, unless otherwise provided herein, except for one or
more of the following uses:



      (1)   Retail and wholesale sales when such sales are made or
offered within the enclosure of buildings. Exceptions will be allowed to
enclosure requirement when such sale is conducted by more than 50% of the
commercial establishments in the district;



      (2)   Professional services, personal services, hospitals,
clinics, funeral homes and pharmacies;



      (3)   Offices;



      (4)   Enclosed storage not involving flammable liquids or
gasses;



      (5)   Auto and equipment repair and storage when enclosed;



      (6)   Public and private parking;



      (7)   Assembly uses;



      (8)   Churches, schools, parks, nurseries, nursing homes,
public buildings and public uses;



      (9)   Private clubs no closer than 500 feet from another club
or church;



      (10)   Newspaper plants and printing plants;



      (11)   Food manufacturing and processing not involving animals
or animal processing;



      (12)   Multi-family dwellings, apartments, hotels, motels,
boarding houses and lodging houses;



      (13)   Furniture manufacture and repair;



      (14)   Signs;



      (15)   Restaurants, cafes, coffee shops;



      (16)   Drive-in services;



      (17)   Commercial recreational facilities;



      (18)   Drinking and eating establishments;



      (19)   Live/work units (special use permit required; and



      (20)   Accessory uses to the above uses.



   (C)   Building regulations.



      (1)   In the B Business District, no building shall be
constructed unless a paved area or areas are provided either covered or
uncovered or enclosed or unenclosed or otherwise equal in area to habitable
buildings, for parking of vehicles within 600 feet of the lot upon which the
building is placed.



      (2)   All exterior walls of buildings shall be fire resistant
construction.



   (D)   Screening. Screening shall be provided along the rear and/or
side property lines of the B Business District when the area backs up to
and/or sides to a residential district, or backs up to a public street. Such
screening may consist of landscaping or fencing.



   (E)   Site landscaping.



      (1)   Landscaped area is defined as the improving of land and
placing thereon live flowers, shrubs, trees or grasses, decorative fixtures
such as fountains, water treatments, sculptures, retaining walls, berms,
fences and specially treated walkways. These features shall be treated as
going toward the calculation of total landscaped area. Required sidewalks and
access sidewalks may not be included in the calculated landscaped area.



      (2)   All required landscaped open space shall be provided
with adequate and inconspicuous irrigation systems and shall be properly
maintained.



      (3)   Five percent of the lot area shall be maintained in
landscaped open area in front of the building line. Also, if the parking and
maneuvering space exceeds 20,000 square feet, at least 5% of such space shall
be maintained as landscaped area, a requirement in addition to the 5% of the
lot area requirement. It is the intent of this section to require design and
construction of parking areas in a manner to ensure areas unusable for
parking or maneuvering space be landscaped.



      (4)   A landscape plan must be submitted as part of the
required site plan and shall be approved by the Building Inspector before a
building permit shall be issued. The plan must be totally implemented,
inspected and approved before a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. The
landscape plan will be reviewed as part of the required site plan.



   (F)   Sign regulations. In the B Business District, no sign shall be
constructed, erected, altered or painted or improved which exceeds 60 square
feet in area or which contains flashing lights, animated parts or which
advertises an activity other than that on the lot placed. No sign or
lettering shall be placed on the ground, rocks, trees, tree stump or other
natural objects.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05; Am. Ord. 1086, passed 11-15-16)  Penalty, see §
154.999



§ 154.027  DT DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   General description. This downtown district is the 100 block
of East Main Street and consists of unique and historical buildings and is
intended for the conduct of personal and business services and the general
retail business of the community.



   (B)   Permitted uses. In the DT Downtown Business District, no
building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected,
converted or structurally altered, unless otherwise provided herein, except
for one or more of the following uses:



      (1)   Retail and wholesale sales when such sales are made or
offered within the enclosure of buildings. Exceptions will be allowed to
enclosure requirement when such sale is conducted by more than 50% of the
downtown establishments in the district;



      (2)   Professional services, personal services, and pharmacies;



      (3)   Offices;



      (4)   Drinking and eating establishments;



      (5)   Live/work units (special use permit required); and



      (6)   Accessory uses to the above uses.



   (C)   Building regulations. All exterior construction shall conform
to the architectural styles of the district.



   (D)   Sign regulations. In the DT Downtown Business District, no
sign shall be constructed, erected, altered or painted or improved which
exceeds 50 square feet in area or which contains flashing lights, animated
parts or which advertises an activity other than that on the lot placed. No
sign or lettering shall exceed the height of the building.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05; Am. Ord. 1086, passed 11-15-16)  Penalty, see §
154.999



§ 154.028  I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   General description. This industrial district is intended
primarily for manufacturing and assembly plants and warehousing. These
industries may require direct access to rail, air or street transportation
facilities. Buildings in this district should be architecturally attractive
and surrounded by landscaped yards.



   (B)   Uses permitted. In the I Industrial District, no building or
land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, converted or
structurally altered,



      (1)   Industries which could not omit obnoxious odors or
offensive noises or lint, or smoke, or smog; and which encloses all
activities;



      (2)   Parts assembly plants and mixing plants;



      (3)   Enclosed storage not involving oxygen or flammable
liquids, gasses;



      (4)   Manufacture not involving the breeding and raising of
animals;



      (5)   Residence of security guards, firemen and persons
employed at the activity placed;



      (6)   Parks and public uses;



      (7)   Railroads, depots and accessory uses other than open
storage;



      (8)   Body shops; and



      (9)   Any uses permitted in B Business District.



   (C)   Building regulations. All main buildings shall be masonry
construction or pre-engineered metal building systems in accordance with the
building code of the city.



   (D)   Area regulations. All buildings shall be set back from the
street right-of-way lines and lot lines to comply with the following yard
requirements:



      (1)   Front yard: All buildings shall set back from the street
right-of-way line to provide a front yard having not less than 25 feet in
depth.



      (2)   Side yard: A side yard of 25 feet shall be provided on
one side of a lot and no side yard is required on the opposite side of the
lot. There shall be a side yard setback from intersecting street of not less
than 25 feet.



      (3)   Rear yard: No rear yards are required except 25 feet
adjoining a dwelling district.



   (E)   Screening. Screening shall be provided along the rear and/or
side property lines of the property when the area backs up to and/or sides to
a residential district, business district and/or backs up to a public
building. Such screening may consist of landscaping or fencing.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.029  APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS TO THE USES OF A MORE RESTRICTED
DISTRICT.



   Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district
permit the uses of a more restricted district, such uses shall be subject to
the conditions as set forth in the regulations of the more restricted
district, unless otherwise specified. It is intended that these regulations
be interpreted as not permitting a dwelling unit to be located on the same
lot with or within a structure used or intended to be used primarily for
nonresidential purposes, without a special use permit.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05; Am. Ord. 1086, passed 11-15-16)



SPECIAL USE PERMITS



§ 154.040  GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF SPECIAL USE PERMITS.



   (A)   The City Council may authorize the location of a special use
permit after public hearings and proper notice to all parties affected, and
after recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (B)   The Planning and Zoning Commission, in considering and
determining its recommendations to the City Council on any request for a
special use permit, may require from the applicant plans, information,
operating data, and expert evaluation concerning the location and function
and characteristics of any building or use proposed.



   (C)   The City Council may, in the interest of the public welfare
and to assure compliance with this chapter, establish conditions of
operation, location, duration, arrangement and construction of any use for
which a permit is authorized. Said conditions shall be complied with by the
grantee before a certificate of occupancy may be issued. In authorizing the
location of any of the uses listed as special use permits, the City Council
may impose such development standards and safeguards as the conditions and
locations indicate important to the welfare and protection of adjacent
property from noise, vibration, dust, dirt, smoke, fumes, gas, odor, glare,
explosion, offensive view or other undesirable or hazardous conditions.



   (D)   Every special use permit granted under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be considered as an amendment to the zoning code as
applicable to such property.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



§ 154.041  USE REGULATION OF SPECIAL USE PERMITS.



   Any use which is not contrary to city, county, state or federal laws
which is not listed as an allowed use in this chapter shall hereby be deemed
a special use permit use in any district and subject to the provisions of
this subchapter. The following uses are hereby authorized in the specified
districts upon compliance with all of the requirements herein:



   (A)   Any public building to be erected or used by the city, county,
state or federal government in any district.



   (B)   Parochial or private schools, kindergartens and child care
centers, provided the building or buildings are set back from all required
yard lines in the district in which they are located, two feet for each foot
of building height and provided off-street parking facilities are provided,
and a minimum building area of 30 square feet per pupil and a minimum site
area of 200 square feet and 80 square feet of outdoor play space per pupil
are provided in any district.



   (C)   Institutions of a religious, educational or philanthropic
nature in any district.



   (D)   Commercial amusement enterprises such as circuses, carnivals,
driving ranges, pony rides, miniature golf courses, rodeos, water slides,
miniature train rides, go-cart tracks, giant slides, motorcycle tracks,
skateboard tracks or arenas, and similar enterprises, in any district other
than residential.



   (E)   Stables on sites of five acres or more, in agricultural or
commercial districts only.



   (F)   Any installation of public utility either privately or
publicly owned, fire stations, public museums, public libraries, water supply
reservoir, water pumping plant, water tower, or sewage lift station, in any
district.



   (G)   Gas and electrical public utility regulating stations in any
district.



   (H)   Drama schools or drama studios in a commercial district only.



   (I)   Dancing schools or dance studios in a commercial district only.



   (J)   Private recreation and cultural activities including museums,
libraries, amusement parks or centers, playgrounds, community centers, tennis
facilities, gymnasiums, swimming facilities, and the like; as well as private
residential or recreational clubs and community buildings in any district
with the following special conditions:



      (1)   Outdoor lighting shall be constructed and maintained or
screened so as to eliminate direct rays or glare and minimize reflective rays
of light on adjoining property; and



      (2)   Any special condition or restriction, including a time
limit for occupancy or site of tract, necessary to protect the public health,
safety and welfare as may be required by the City Council.



   (K)   Greenhouses and nurseries in any district, subject to parking
space requirements deemed appropriate by the City Council.



   (L)   Golf course or putting course, in any district.



   (M)   Hospital, dental and medical offices or clinics in excess of
14,000 square feet in a commercial district only.



   (N)   Rock quarries, sand, gravel and earth excavations, in any
district. At the time the permit is granted, the City Council may impose
reasonable conditions for the protection of public health and safety, and may
provide for the restoration of such property to a usable condition after uses
have been terminated.



   (O)   An establishment whose major income is derived from operating
a penny arcade, game room, or amusement center, where billiard machines,
shooting gallery, marble machine, marble table, marble shooting machine,
miniature racetrack machine, bowling machine, air hockey game, foosball
table, pinball machine, video games or similar device, is operated by a coin
or token, or for an admission charge or fee, and which dispenses or affords
skill or pleasure, in a commercial district only.



   (P)   College, university or private boarding school, in any
district.



   (Q)   Mini-warehouses or mini-storage buildings in commercial or
industrial districts only.



   (R)   Permanent concrete batch plants or transit batch plants in an
industrial district only.



   (S)   Live/work units in commercial or industrial districts only.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05; Am. Ord. 1086, passed 11-15-16)  Penalty, see §
154.999



§ 154.042  TEMPORARY SPECIAL USE PERMITS.



   A temporary special use permit may be granted by the City Administrator
or his or her designated representative for uses below or for a reasonably
similar use. Hearings and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission is
not required.



   (A)   Use regulation. All temporary uses will be required to apply
for a temporary use permit. These shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Produce stands;



      (2)   Christmas tree lots;



      (3)   Asphalt batching plant;



      (4)   Cement batching plant;



      (5)   Construction office;



      (6)   Real estate office;



      (7)   Portable church building; and



      (8)   Portable school building.



   (B)   Definitions; temporary use.  For the purpose of this section,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      ASPHALT BATCHING, TEMPORARY. A designated area, allowable after
application, for the temporary manufacturing of asphalt for installation
within subdivisions in the city.



      CEMENT BATCHING, TEMPORARY. A designated area, allowable after
application, for the temporary manufacturing of cement for the installation
within subdivisions in the city.



      CHRISTMAS TREE LOT. An open or covered area used for the sale of
Christmas trees for a specified period of time in a designated area.



      CONSTRUCTION OFFICE. The use of a portable trailer for
supervision of a construction site allowable for a specified period of time
in a designated area.



      PORTABLE CHURCH BUILDING. The use of a portable building or
structure as an accessory building or structure in conjunction with the
primary



use of real property by a congregation, classes or assembly of people for a
church or church-related activities, allowable for a specific period of time
in a designated area.



      PORTABLE SCHOOL BUILDING. The use of a portable building or
structure as an accessory building or structure in conjunction with or for
the primary use of real property by a class or assembly of people for a
school or school-related activities, allowable for a specific time period.



      PRODUCE STANDS, TEMPORARY. An open or covered area used for sale
of fruit, vegetables and/or dairy products for a specified period of time in
a designated area.



      REAL ESTATE SALES OFFICE. The use of a portable or permanent
building or structure for the sale of real estate within a subdivision
allowable for a specific time.



   (C)   Application information required. Each application for a
temporary special use permit shall be submitted to the city’s Building
Inspector on forms furnished by the Inspector and shall set out the following:



      (1)   Name of the applicant and permanent address;



      (2)   Name and address of firm applicant represents;



      (3)   Narrative statement of specific temporary special use
permit applied for;



      (4)   Specific site plan drawn to scale showing the specific
dimensions and arrangement of proposed temporary special use; and



      (5)   Specific time period for which applicant is requesting
temporary special use.



   (D)   Fees required. The permit fees for administering temporary
uses within the city shall be $50. When the work for which a permit is
required by this section is started or proceeded prior to obtaining said
permit, the fees above specified shall be doubled. The payment of such fee
shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the regulations
described in this section.



   (E)   General requirements.



      (1)   If temporary power is required, it must be supplied
overhead or underground directly to the specific special use. No open wiring
laying directly on the ground will be allowed.



      (2)   All building or structure setbacks shall conform to the
current zoning district for principal uses on the land in which the temporary
special use is occurring.



      (3)   The maximum time period for a temporary use permit for
real estate sales office and construction office is 12 months. The time
period for all other temporary requests will be determined by the City
Administrator.



      (4)   A new permit is required for each new location, whether
or not the temporary use is located on the same property or on a new site.



      (5)   A minimum of four parking spaces shall be designated on
the general site plan for construction offices and real estate sales offices.



      (6)   The Building Inspector may revoke a temporary special
use permit for noncompliance with the above requirements.



   (F)   City Administrator review.



      (1)   The City Administrator, or his or her designated
representative, shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove all
temporary use requests presented, except as approved by the Building
Inspector regarding construction offices and real estate offices.



      (2)   The City Administrator shall designate a specific time
limit on all temporary uses approved.



      (3)   No appeal on the same request shall be filed within a
period of one year from the date of denial.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.043  SPECIAL USE CONFORMANCE REGULATIONS.



   Unless the City Council specifies otherwise, all special permit uses
shall comply with the building and area regulations of the zoning district
for which the use is approved. All special permit uses shall also be required
to conform to:



   (A)   The land subdivision ordinance and regulations.



   (B)   Site plan approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission as
follows:



      (1)   Prior to the issuance of any building permit, there
shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its approval a
site plan drawn to an acceptable scale and with copies. The scale and number
of copies shall be that deemed necessary by the City Secretary or other
designated city official.



      (2)   The site plan shall show, but not be limited to, the
arrangement of the proposed improvements in detail, together with the
essential requirements, such as parking facilities, location of buildings and
other structures, means of ingress and egress, areas to be landscaped,
together with any other requirements provided by the comprehensive zoning
code, or other valid ordinance of the city.



      (3)   A landscape plan must be submitted as part of the
required site plan and approved by the Building Inspector before a building
permit shall be issued. The plan must be totally implemented, inspected and
approved before a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. The landscape
plan will be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission for
recommendation to and approval by the City Council as part of the required
site plan.



      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Commission consideration shall
include: paving and layout of streets, alleys and sidewalks; means of ingress
and egress, and provisions for drainage; parking space, protective screening
and open spaces; areas designated for landscaping; internal and perimeter
lighting which shall be designated so as to reflect light away from
surrounding areas and any other aspect deemed by the Planning and Zoning
Commission necessary to consider in the interest of promoting the public
health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare.



      (5)   In the approval or disapproval of the site plan, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall not be authorized to waive or vary
conditions and requirements contained in this chapter, or amendments thereto,
or other valid ordinances of the city.



      (6)   It shall be unlawful to issue a building permit prior to
the approval of the site plan by the Planning and Zoning Commission. No
building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the approved site
plan, including all conditions of approval applied by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.



      (7)   For the purpose of assisting in-process planning, a
preliminary site plan may be submitted for Planning and Zoning Commission
consideration. Such preliminary site plan may contain any or all of the site
plan requirements and must be drawn to scale, submitted in adequate quantity
and titled “preliminary site plan.” The approval of a preliminary site
plan will not imply approval of all elements of a site plan. It shall be
unlawful to issue a building permit on a preliminary site plan.



   (C)   Special requirements as may be required by the City Council,
as well as any special requirements in the zoning district for which the use
is approved, including but not limited to:



      (1)   The outside storage and display of goods, wares and
merchandise is prohibited, except as may be specifically authorized by the
City Council or by the zoning district for which the special use permit is
granted.



      (2)   Refuse and waste storage areas shall conform to
standards as may be required by the city.



      (3)   Security bond.



   (D)   Site landscaping.



      (1)   Landscaped area is defined as the improving of land and
placing thereon live flowers, shrubs, trees or grasses, decorative fixtures
such as fountains, water treatments, sculptures, retaining walls, berms,
fences and specially treated walkways. These features shall be treated as and
go toward the calculation of total landscaped area. Required sidewalks and
access sidewalks may not be included in the calculated landscaped area.



      (2)   All required landscaped open space shall be provided
with adequate and inconspicuous irrigation systems and shall be properly
maintained.



      (3)   Five percent of the lot area shall be maintained in
landscaped open area in front of the building line. Also, if the parking and
maneuvering space exceeds 20,000 square feet, at least 5% of such space shall
be maintained as landscaped area, a requirement in addition to the 5% of the
lot area requirement. It is the intent of this section to require design and
construction of parking areas in a manner to ensure areas unusable for
parking or maneuvering space be landscaped.



      (4)   If all of the city right-of-way is landscaped and
maintained, such landscaped portion will reduce the amount of required
landscaped area of the lot by that amount (square foot for square foot).



      (5)   The city shall have the power to plant, preserve, spray,
trim or remove any tree, shrub, or plant on any parkway, alley or public
ground belonging to the city.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.044  AMENDMENT TO THE ZONING CODE.



   Every special use permit granted under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be considered as an amendment to the zoning code as
applicable to such property. In granting such permit, the City Council may
impose conditions which shall be complied with by the grantee before a
certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Building Inspector for the use
of the building on such property pursuant to said special use permit; and
such conditions shall not be construed as conditions precedent to the
granting of the certificate of occupancy.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



NONCONFORMING USES



§ 154.055  NONCONFORMING USES.



   A nonconforming status shall exist under the following provisions of
this chapter:



   (A)   When, on the effective date of this chapter, the use or
structure was in existence and lawfully constructed, located and operating in
accordance with the provisions of the prior zoning code or which was a
nonconforming use thereunder, and which use or structure does not now conform
to the regulations herein prescribed for the district in which such use or
structure is located.



   (B)   (1)   When a use or structure which does not conform to the
regulations prescribed in the district in which such use or structure is
located was in existence at the time of annexation to the city and has since
been in regular and continuous use.



      (2)   Any nonconforming use of land or structure may be
continued for indefinite periods of time subject to such regulations as the
Board of Adjustments may require for immediate preservation of the adjoining
property prior to ultimate removal of the nonconforming use. The building
official may grant a change of occupancy from one nonconforming use to
another, providing the use is within the same or a more restrictive
classification as the original nonconforming use. In the event the
nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming use
of a more restrictive classification, it shall not be later changed to a less
restrictive classification of use and the prior less restrictive
classification shall be considered to have been abandoned. Existing
residences located in nonresidential districts may be improved, maintained,
or rebuilt as conforming structures.



      (3)   If a structure occupied by a nonconforming use is
destroyed by fire, the elements, or other cause, it may not be rebuilt except
to conform to the provisions of this chapter. In the case of a partial
destruction of a nonconforming use not exceeding 75% of its reasonable value,
reconstruction will be permitted but the size or function of the
nonconforming use cannot be expanded.



      (4)   If a nonconforming use on a particular parcel shall
cease operation for a period of more than six months, then such nonconforming
use shall be deemed to be permanently abandoned and shall not be reinstituted
on that parcel or any other parcel in any district which does not permit the
discontinued use. For the purposes of this section, to “cease operation”
shall mean to intentionally abandon the nonconforming use. The temporary
suspension of a use shall not constitute abandonment, provided the property
is not used during the period of suspension for any other purpose.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



SPECIAL PARKING, AREA REGULATIONS
AND EXCEPTIONS



§ 154.070  STORAGE AND PARKING OF TRAILERS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.



   Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types, including travel,
camping, hauling, motor homes and mobile homes shall not be parked or stored
on any lot occupied by a dwelling or on any lot in any residential district
except in accordance with the following provisions:



   (A)   Not more than one commercial vehicle, which does not exceed
one and one-half tons rated capacity, shall be permitted; and in no case
shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline or other
liquefied petroleum products be permitted.



   (B)   A camping or travel trailer or motor home shall not be
occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is parked or stored in
any area within the incorporated limits except in a trailer court authorized
under the ordinances of the city.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.071  OPEN SPACES.



   The following requirements are intended to provide exceptions or
qualify and supplement, as the case may be, the specific district regulations
set forth in §§ 154.020 through 154.028:



   (A)   An open space or lot area required for an existing building or
structure shall not be counted as open space for any other building or
structure.



   (B)   Open eaves, cornices, window sills, and belt courses may
project into any required yard distance not to exceed two feet. Open
uncovered porches may project into a front or rear yard a distance not to
exceed five feet. Fences, walls and hedges in residential districts may be
erected in any required yard, or along the edge of any yard, provided that no
fence, wall or hedge located in front of the front building line shall exceed
three feet in height, and no other wall or fence shall exceed eight feet in
height.



   (C)   Where the dedicated street right-of-way is less than 50 feet,
the front yard depth shall be determined by measuring 50 feet back from the
center line of the street easement.



   (D)   No dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut on
at least one street, at least 50 feet in width, for at least 35 feet. A
street shall form the direct and primary means of ingress and egress for all
dwelling units. Alleys, where they exist, shall form only a secondary means
of ingress and egress. Accessory buildings which are not part of the main
building may be built in the rear yard.



   (E)   No minimum lot sizes are prescribed for commercial and
industrial uses. It is the intent of this chapter that lots of sufficient
size be used by any business or industry to provide adequate parking,
unloading and loading space required for operation of the enterprise.



   (F)   On any corner lot on which a front and side yard is required,
no wall, fence, sign, structure or any plant growth which obstructs sight
lines at elevations between two feet, six inches and six feet above any
portion of the crown of the adjacent roadway shall be maintained in a
triangle formed by measuring from the point of intersection of the front and
exterior side lot lines a distance of 30 feet along the front and side lot
lines and connecting the points so established to form a right triangle on
the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection.



   (G)   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until
the construction of the main building has been actually commenced, and no
accessory building shall be used unless the main building on the lot is also
being used.



   (H)   Whenever one or more residential, institutional, commercial or
industrial buildings are proposed to be located in a cluster or grouping
which has different arrangement, orientation or other site planning variation
from that of other building, structures or uses in the area or on adjacent
properties, the architectural design, location, orientation, service and
parking areas of such buildings shall be planned so as not to adversely
affect the use of adjacent or other properties in the area, as determined by
the Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (I)   An ornamental fence exceeding six feet in height shall have a
ratio of solid portion to open portion not in excess of one to four.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.072  VISION CLEARANCE.



   On any corner lot on which front and side yards are required, no wall,
fence, structure, sign, tree, shrub or hedge may be maintained as to cause
danger to traffic by obstructing the view and when topography prevents a
clear view, this bank shall be removed.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.073  BUILDING LINES.



   (A)   The front building line of the main building hereafter
constructed in residence districts, or altered in such manner as to change
the position of such front building line, shall be located the distance
required from the front lot line as may be required in the residential
district in which such dwellings are located.



   (B)   Open porches of dwellings may extend into the front yard a
distance of ten feet from the main line of the building. Cornices and eaves
of the main building may project not more than three feet into the front yard.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.074  LOT AREA.



   On any lot separately owned on the date this chapter becomes effective,
a single family dwelling may be erected even though such lot has less area
than required by these qualifications.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



§ 154.075  LOCATION OF DWELLINGS AND BUILDINGS.



   Only one main building for single family, with permitted accessory
buildings, may be located upon a lot or unplatted tract. Every dwelling shall
face or front upon a street or officially approved place, other than an
alley, which means of access shall have a minimum width of 35 feet. Where a
lot or tract of land is used for commercial or industrial purposes, more than
one main building may be located upon the lot but only when such buildings
conform to all the open space, parking and density requirements applicable to
the uses and district, when all such main buildings face upon a street or
officially approved place, other than an alley.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)  Penalty, see § 154.999



UNPLATTED PROPERTY



§ 154.085  ZONING REQUIRED.



   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not approve any plat of any
subdivision within the city limits until the area covered by the proposed
plat shall have been permanently zoned by the City Council.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



§ 154.086  ANNEXATION PENDING.



   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not approve any plat of any
subdivision within any area where a petition or ordinance for annexation or
recommendation for annexation to the city is pending before the City Council.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



§ 154.087  SIMULTANEOUS HEARINGS.



   In the event the Planning and Zoning Commission holds a hearing on
proposed annexation, it may, at its discretion, at the same time hold a
hearing upon the permanent zoning that is to be given to the area or tract to
be annexed, and make a recommendation on both matters to the City Council so
that the City Council can, if it desires, act on the matter of permanent
zoning and annexation at the same time.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS



§ 154.100  GENERAL DESCRIPTION.



   The City Council may, from time to time, amend, supplement or change by
ordinance, the boundaries of the districts or the regulations herein
established as provided by state law.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



§ 154.101  REVIEW BY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



   Before taking action on any proposed amendment, supplement or change,
the governing body shall submit the same to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for its recommendation and report.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



§ 154.102  PUBLIC HEARING BEFORE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on any
application for any amendments or change prior to making its recommendation
and report to the City Council. When any such amendment or change relates to
a change in classification or boundary of a zoning district, written notice
of public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission on the proposed
amendment or change shall be mailed to all owners of real property lying
within 200 feet of the property on which the change is requested. Such notice
shall be given not less than ten days before the date set for hearing by
depositing in the mail such notice properly addressed and postage paid to
each taxpayer as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll.
When any such amendment relates to a change of a zoning regulation or to the
text of this chapter not affecting specific property, notice of the public
hearing of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be given by publication
in a newspaper of general circulation in the city without necessity of
notifying property owners by mail. Such notice shall state the time and place
of such hearing and the nature of the subject to be considered, which time
shall not be earlier than ten days from the date of publication.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



§ 154.103  PUBLIC HEARING BEFORE GOVERNING BODY.



   A public hearing shall be held by the governing body before adopting
any proposed amendment, supplement or change. Notice of such hearing shall be
given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city
stating the time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier
than 15 days from the date of publication.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



§ 154.104  CIRCUMSTANCES DICTATING VOTING REQUIREMENTS.



   If a written protest is submitted against such change, signed by the
owners of 20% or more either of the area of the lots or land included in such
proposed change, or of the lots or land immediately adjoining the same and
extended 200 feet therefrom, such amendment shall not become effective except
by the favorable vote of three-fourths of the City Council.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
AND BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT



§ 154.115  COMPOSITION, TERM AND VACANCIES OF PLANNING AND ZONING
COMMISSION.



   (A)   The City Council shall appoint a Planning and Zoning
Commission of five members who are residents and/or  ad valorem taxpayers of
the city. The members shall be appointed to two-year term and shall serve
until their successors are appointed and qualified.



   (B)   Commission members shall actively participate in the
Commission’s activities, and any member who is absent for three consecutive
meetings without valid excuse, as determined by the Commission, shall
automatically be dismissed from membership. The membership shall at once
notify the Council that a vacancy exists. Any vacancy on the Commission, for
any reason, shall be filled for the unexpired term by Council appointment
within 30 days of vacancy.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05; Am. Ord. 1077, passed 12-8-15)



§ 154.116  POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COMMISSION.



   (A)   Comprehensive plan. The Commission shall make, amend, extend,
and add to the comprehensive plan for the physical development of the city
and recommend the comprehensive plan to the City Council for approval.



   (B)   Zoning. The Commission shall make a zoning plan, recommend it
to the City Council for adoption and recommend for approval or disapproval
proposed changes to the plan.



   (C)   Land subdivision and platting. The Commission shall approve or
disapprove plats of proposed subdivisions submitted to the city. In
considering plats, the Commission shall require the proposed subdivision to
meet requirements set out in the subdivision code. The Commission shall
submit copies of all approved plats to the City Council for its approval
before the plats are released for recording.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



§ 154.117  MEETINGS OF THE COMMISSION.



   (A)   Three members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.  The Commission shall
keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations,
which shall become items of public record. The City Administrator or his or
her representative shall attend Planning and Zoning Commission meetings and
shall serve as liaison between the commission and the City Council.



   (B)   Upon final passage of this section the Planning and Zoning
Commission of the city shall consist of five members to be appointed by the
City Council of the city for a term of two years from date of appointment.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05; Am. Ord. 1077, passed 12-8-15)



§ 154.118  COMPOSITION, TERM AND VACANCIES OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   The City Council shall appoint a Board of Adjustment who, in
appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, may
make special exceptions to the terms of this chapter that are consistent with
the general purpose and intent of the chapter and in accordance with any
applicable rules contained in this chapter. The Board shall consist of five
members who are residents and/or taxpayers of the city. The members shall be
appointed to two-year terms and shall serve until their successors are
appointed and qualified.



   (B)   Members of the Board of Adjustment shall actively participate
in the Board’s activities, and any member who is absent for three
consecutive meetings without valid excuse, as determined by the Board, shall
automatically be dismissed from membership. The membership shall at once
notify the Council that a vacancy exists. Any vacancy on the Board, for any
reason, shall be filled for the unexpired term by Council appointment within
30 days of vacancy.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



§ 154.119  POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE BOARD.



   (A)   Appeals. The Board may hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by an dministrative official of the city in the enforcement of this
chapter.



   (B)   Variances. The Board may permit variances or modifications to
height, yard, area, coverage and parking regulations.



   (C)   Special exceptions. The Board may hear and decide special
exceptions to the terms of this chapter which are limited in scope and apply
to the following:



      (1)   Reconstruction of nonconforming buildings.



      (2)   Expansion of nonconforming buildings.



      (3)   Discontinuance of nonconforming uses.



   (D)   Signs. The Board may permit such variances or modifications of
sign regulations as may be necessary.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



§ 154.120  MEETINGS OF THE BOARD.



   All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. Four members of
the Board of Adjustment shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. The Board shall keep a record of its proceedings that indicate the
vote of each member on each question or the fact that a member is absent or
fails to vote. The Board shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions. The records shall be filed immediately in the office of the
City Secretary and are public records.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



§ 154.121  VARIANCE FINDINGS FLOWCHART.



To guide the Board of Adjustment in their deliberations, the following is a
variance findings flowchart:



   FINDINGS – VARIANCES







 



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



§ 154.999  PENALTY.



   Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, or who shall build or alter any building or use in violation of any
detailed statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine of not more than $500, and
each day that such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense. The owner or owners of any building or premises or part
thereof, where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall
exist, any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation
employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission
of any such violations shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon
conviction shall be fined as herein provided.



(Ord. 927, passed 4-12-05)



APPENDIX 1:  FEE SCHEDULE



Section



   1.00   Copying charges for public records



   2.00   Tax certificates



   3.00   Vehicle towing and impoundment charges



   4.00   Animal impoundment fees



   4.01   Adoption fees



   5.00   Impoundment fees; abandoned motor vehicles and other property



   6.00   Parade, circus, carnival, or tent show permit fee



   6.01   Coin operated machines



   7.00   Permit fee for public fireworks displays



   8.00   Auto salvage license fees



   9.00   Peddlers, vendors, and itinerant vendors license fee



   10.00   Building and zoning fees



   11.00   Service charge for insufficient funds check



   11.01   Collection services fee



   12.00   Electrical System: rates and charges; related regulations



   13.00   Alarm system fees



   14.00   [Reserved]



   15.00   Garbage collection charges



   16.00   Water rates



   16.01   Sewer rates



   16.02   Meter reread fee



   16.03   Meter inaccessibility charge



§ 1.00  COPYING CHARGES FOR PUBLIC  RECORDS.



   The following service charge for copying governmental and public
records shall be as follows:



   (A)   For readily available information on standard size pages (up
to 8½ inches x 14 inches), the copying charge shall be $0.10 per page.



   (B)   For information which is not readily available, the copying
charge shall be $0.10 per page plus labor costs not to exceed $15 hour
incurred by the municipality in providing the requested information.



   (C)   In addition, the municipality may also add any postal expenses
which may be necessary to transmit the reproduced documents to the requesting
party.



   (D)   The Municipal Secretary shall establish the copying or
reproduction charge for nonstandard sized pages or documents (maps, books,
and the like). For guidance refer to Texas Administrative Code rule § 70.10.



   (E)   For any charges that will exceed $40 a detailed written
estimate shall be provided to the requestor.



(Ord. 1046, passed 12-11-12)



Cross-reference:



   Authorized, see § 31.060



§ 2.00  TAX CERTIFICATES.



   There shall be a fee of $10 for each tax certificate issued as payment
for such services as duly rendered.



Cross-reference:



   Authorized, see § 36.044



§ 3.00  VEHICLE TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT CHARGES.



   (A)   Operator agrees to charge no more than the following prices
for services within the municipality (Police Department calls):



      Base charge               $65.00



      Towing per mile            2.00



      Light trucks (one ton and over)      85.00



      Towing per mile            2.25



      Motorcycles               $65.00



      Use of dollies               35.00



      Use of winch (per hour)         65.00



      Drive shaft removal            35.00



      Drive shaft replacement         35.00



      Standby time (per hour)         65.00



      Car and light trucks storage charge



         Per day            15.00



      Truck and trailer storage charge



         Per day            30.00



      No keys in vehicle            25.00



   (B)   Non-consent rates; heavy-duty wrecker/ recovery:



      Wrecks and off-road recovery      $225.00/hour portal to
portal



      Drive shaft removal            40.00



      Drive shaft replacement         40.00



      Wait time truck and operator         55.00/15 minutes



      Clean up labor per person         25.00/15 minutes



   (C)   No charges shall be made for calls or service in the
municipality except those listed charges.  For hauls to points outside the
municipality, or originating outside of the municipality, the operator and
owner shall negotiate a price and the municipality shall not be responsible
for supervision of this charge.



(Ord. 908, passed 4-12-04; Am. Ord. 928, passed 6-14-05)



Cross-reference:



   Authorized, see § 72.07



§ 4.00  ANIMAL IMPOUNDMENT FEES.



   (A)   (1)   Impoundment fee.  Twenty dollars per animal for the
first offense.  Each subsequent impoundment shall increase by $10.  There
shall be no limit to the amount of impound fees paid by an owner or harborer
of any animal.



      (2)   Boarding fees.  Ten dollars per day (or part of each
day) per animal (dog or cat); $20 per day (or part of each day) per any other
animal.



      (3)   Rabies vaccination.  The actual cost of any
vaccinations required.



      (4)   City registration.  Five dollars per domestic animal
(dog or cat); $50 per exotic animal permit; $50 per overage permit (in
addition to separate license for each animal).



      (5)   Veterinary bills.  All veterinary bills incurred during
city custody of any animal shall be the actual cost charged by the
veterinarian.



      (6)   Rabies quarantine.  Fifteen dollars per day ($150
maximum) per animal at clinic or shelter; $50 per home quarantine.



      (7)   Testing of rabies specimen.  Fifty dollars per animal.



      (8)   Owner release of unwanted animal.  Fifty dollars per
adult animal.



      (9)   Deceased animal removal.  Ten dollars per animal.



      (10)   Preparation of rabies specimen by veterinarian. 
Actual charge by veterinarian.



      (11)   Frontline flea treatment.  Ten dollars per animal.



      (12)   Bordetella vaccination.  Actual charge by veterinarian.



      (13)   Exemption from certain fees.  There shall be no charge
for livestock permits or registration for domestic animals owned by senior
citizens (age 65 or over; proof of age required), guide dogs, assistance
animals or foster care animals.  Registration of these animals is required.



   (B)   The owner of an animal shall pay the municipality the
following fees for service rendered on behalf of the owner’s animal:



      (1)   Ten dollars for pickup and disposal of a dead animal;



      (2)   Fifty dollars for an animal which is voluntarily
surrendered to the shelter by its owner; and



      (3)   One hundred-fifty dollars for the quarantine of an
animal.



(Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04; Am. Ord. 921,
passed 9-9-04)



Cross-reference:



   Authorized, see § 90.071(A)



§ 4.01  ADOPTION FEES.



   The following fees shall be charged for adoption of an animal:  $15
for dogs and $10 for cats.  These fees may be waived by the City
Administrator.



(Ord. 914, passed 10-14-04)



Cross-reference:



   Authorized, see § 90.071(B)



§ 5.00  IMPOUNDMENT FEES; ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES AND OTHER PROPERTY.



   The following fees shall be charged for impoundment by the municipality
of abandoned, seized, or unclaimed property:



   (A)   Vehicles and vehicle parts, $10 per day.



   (B)   Large items requiring outdoor storage, $10 per day.



   (C)   Large items requiring indoor storage, $15 per day.



   (D)   All other items, $5 per day.



Cross-reference:



   Authorized, see § 95.34(B)



§ 6.00  PARADE, CIRCUS, CARNIVAL, OR TENT SHOW PERMIT FEE.



   The fee for a permit required under § 70.090 and §§ 110.01 - 110.02
of this code shall be $25.



Cross-reference:



   Authorized, see §§ 70.090(D) and 110.02(C)



§ 6.01  COIN OPERATED MACHINES.



   A license fee of $50 per year shall be collected from each
establishment or business using coin operated machines that are non-exempt
and such payment shall accompany the application filed with the city.



(Ord. 598, passed 2-5-81)



Cross-reference:



   Authorized, see § 110.20



§ 7.00  PERMIT FEE FOR PUBLIC FIREWORKS DISPLAYS.



   A permit to conduct a public fireworks display may be issued upon the
receipt of a permit fee of $25.



Cross-reference:



   Authorized, see § 92.050



§ 8.00  AUTO SALVAGE LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a
filing fee of $100, which is nonrefundable to applicant, except that if such
application is withdrawn prior to the publication of the required public
hearing and before notice is given to those persons entitled to notice, the
filing fee will be refunded to applicant.



   (B)   Licensee shall pay an annual license fee in the amount of $25,
in advance on the first day of January of each year he or she operates as an
auto salvage dealer.  Upon the granting of a license, the Municipal
Secretary shall prorate such license fee by annual quarters and such initial
fee shall be calculated for the number of quarters remaining in that current
year from the quarter preceding the grant of such license.



Cross-reference:



   Authorized, see § 111.09



§ 9.00  PEDDLERS, VENDORS, AND ITINERANT VENDORS LICENSE FEE.



   The fee for an itinerant vendor’s license shall be $50.  Where any
person engages in any activity mentioned in § 112.01 of this code through
one or more agents or employees, such person or association shall, in
addition to such $50 fee, pay a license fee of $10 for each agent or employee
so engaged.



Cross-reference:



   Authorized, see § 112.07



§ 10.00  BUILDING AND ZONING FEES.



   The following fees should be charged by the city for the described
permits and fees:



   (A)   Building inspection fees.



      (1)   Building permits:



 



Minimum fee
 
$10


Residential accessory building
 
$0.04 per sq. ft.


Fences, pools, hot tubs, spas per $1,000 cost
 
$1.80


Residential (one & two family dwellings)
 
$0.094 per sq. ft.


Commercial & Multi-family
 
$0.06 per sq. ft.


Remodeling or general repairs per $1,000 cost
 
$1.80


Demolition of buildings
 


   Less than 1,000 sq. ft.
 
$10


   Over 1,000 sq. ft.
 
$20


Plug or cap sewer line
 


   Generally
 
$200


   Under concrete
 
$350


Moving permits for buildings
 
$30


Certificate of occupancy
 


   Application fee
 
$20


   Inspection fee
 
$60


   Reinspection
 
$50


Service inspection
 
no charge


Red-tag reinspection
 
$10


Appeal fee to Building Code Board of Adjustment
 
$50


Building relocation/installation fee
 
$0.94  per sq. ft.


Building relocation inspection fee
 
$35 plus $0.35 per mile of travel outside the city




 



      (2)   Electrical permits:



Minimum fee                  $10



New construction only            $0.015 per sq. ft.



Add-on or repairs:



   Temporary electric meter (Sawrig)      $50



   Electric service (meter)         $50



   Electrical openings (each)         $0.20



   If no service, 1st opening         $5




For each reinspection            $10





Inspection of installation, device,




   or equipment not specified above      $10



Appeal fee                  $50



      (3)   Heating/air conditioning permits:



New construction fee               $0.01 per sq. ft.



0-1500,000 btu’s and/or 0-3 tons cooling      $10



For each additional 100,000 btu’s heating



   and/or each ton cooling         $2



Appeal fee                  none



      (4)   Gas permits:



Minimum fee                  $10



Each pressure or meter loop test         $5



Each additional pressure test            $5



Each opening over 5               $1



Reinspection fee               $10



Appeal fee                  $50



      (5)   Plumbing permits:



Minimum fee                  $10



New construction only            $0.015 per sq. ft.



Add-on or repairs:



   Each plumbing fixture, floor drain,



      trap, or water heater, or etc.      $2.50



   Each building sewer            $3.50



   Replacement building sewer         $10



   Replacement water heater         $10



   Replacement water line         $10



   Each yard sprinkler atmospheric



      vacuum breaker         $12



   Remodeling drainage system, bath,



      or portion thereof         $10



Reinspection                  $10



Appeal fee                  $50



Sewer tap fee                  $450



Water tap fee                  $450



      (6)   Contractor’s registration schedule:



Electrician registration            $20



HVAC registration               $20



General contractor registration         $20



Irrigator’s registration               $20



   (B)   Zoning fees.



Zoning change request            $150



Board of Adjustment request            $50



   (C)   Change of zoning request.



      (1)   The request for rezoning of any lot, tract or  parcel
of land within the corporate limits of the city shall hereinafter require a
fee of $150 in addition to reimbursement for the following costs:



         (a)   All legal publications necessary and required as a
result of the request to change zoning;



         (b)   A fee of $3 per letter plus certified mailing
costs necessary in order to fill the requirement of notifying all property
owners within 200 feet of the proposed rezoning.



      (2)   The $150 fee will be required to be deposited with the
city office at the time the application for rezoning is received.  The
additional charges for the costs incurred as outlined above shall become due
and payable by the applicant upon receipt by applicant of a statement from
the city and such charges must be paid prior to any hearings of the Planning
and Zoning Commission on the request of the zoning change.



   (D)   Plat fees.



Minor plat (short form)            $100



Preliminary plat               $250 plus $2 per lot



   Multidwelling areas, commercial



     or industrial, not divided into



     individual lots            $300 plus $30 per acre



Final plat                  $400 plus $5 per lot



   Multidwelling areas, commercial



     or industrial, not divided into



     individual lots            $400 plus $50 per acre



(Ord. 638, passed 10-6-83; Am. Ord. 762, passed 7-11-95; Am. Ord. 790, passed
10-12-96; Am. Ord. 921, passed 9-9-04; Am. Ord. 932, passed 8-9-05; Am. Ord.
944, passed 9-6-05; Am. Ord. 949, passed 12-13-05; Am. Ord. 953, passed
12-13-05; Am. Ord. 1004, passed 4-13-10)



Cross-reference:



   Authorized, see §§ 150.003, 150.018, 150.025, 150.042, 150.051,
150.081, 150.082, 150.085



§ 11.00  SERVICE CHARGE FOR INSUFFICIENT FUNDS CHECK.



   A service charge of $25 shall be assessed against any person who pays
the municipality with a check, draft, or money order which is returned unpaid
for lack of sufficient funds or closed or nonexistent account.



§ 11.01  COLLECTION SERVICES FEE.



   Collection services fee. A collection services fee of 20% shall be
added to each account for collection by a collection agency if such account
is delinquent for at least 30 days.



(Ord. 1074, passed 11-10-15)   



Cross-reference:



   Authorized, see § 51.037



§ 12.00  ELECTRICAL SYSTEM: RATES AND CHARGES; RELATED REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Deposits.  The charges for electrical deposits shall be as
follows:



   Residential (all)      $200



   General Service      $250



   Large Power         $350



   (B)   Refund of deposits.



      (1)   Any residential or commercial consumer who has been a
customer of the Whitesboro Electric System for the last 24 consecutive months
and has not been delinquent in payment and has not been disconnected for
non-payment will not be required to make a deposit nor pay an increase in
deposit when transferring service from one premise to another within the
service area.



      (2)   Deposits shall be refunded after two years, upon request
of customer, provided that the customer has not been delinquent in payment
and has not been disconnected for non-payment during the last 24 consecutive
months.



      (3)   In the event the commercial or industrial deposit is not
sufficient to protect the system from loss, the manager of the Whitesboro
Electric System shall set the appropriate amount subject to review by the
City Council.



   (C)   Rates.



   Residential Service Rate



Designation:     RS - C - 2



Application:  to any customer for electric service used for residential
purposes in individual, private dwellings and in individually metered
apartments supplied at one point of delivery and measured through one
meter.  If demand exceeds 15kw for three consecutive months, large power
rate will apply.



Net Monthly Rate:




     Facilities charge:      $16.00 which includes 30 kwh





     Energy charge:      $0.104337 per kwh for additional kwh




Minimum bill:            $16.00 per month, plus adjustment charge.



Type of service: service shall be single phase at 60 cycles and any standard
secondary voltages.



   School and Public Buildings



Designation:     C & S - C - 2



Application:  to school and public building customers for all uses when
service is taken through one meter at a single point of delivery not
applicable to resale or breakdown service.  If demand exceeds 15kw for three
consecutive months, large power rate will apply.



Net monthly rate:




   Facilities charge:      $25.00 per month





   Energy charge:      $0.110281 per kwh for all kwh




Minimum bill:           $25.00 per month, plus adjustment charge.



Type of service:  service shall be single or three phase at 60 cycles and
any standard voltages available from the distribution system and through one
standard transformation.  Where entire service cannot be measured at one
utilization voltage with one standard type meter, it will be measured at
primary voltage.



   General Service Rate



Designation:     SCS - C - 2



Application:  to general customers for all uses when service is taken
through one meter at a single point of delivery.  Not applicable to resale
or breakdown service.  If demand exceeds 15 kw for three consecutive months,
large power rate will apply.



Net monthly rate:



   Facilities charge:      $31.00 per month




   Energy charge:      $0.109837 per kwh for all kwh




Minimum bill:          $31.00 per month, plus adjustment charge.



Type of service:  service shall be single or three phase at 60 cycles and
any standard voltages available from the distribution system and through one
standard transformation.  Where entire service cannot be measured at one
utilization voltage with one standard type meter, it will be measured at
primary voltage.



   Large Power Rate



Designation:     CIS - C - 2



Application:  to any customer for electric service supplied at one point of
delivery and measured through one meter.  This applies to all customers
using above 15 kw.



Net monthly rate:



   Facilities charges:      $33.50 per month




   Energy charge:      $0.087879 per kwh for all kwh, plus
adjustment charges





   Demand charge:      $8.80 per kw of billing demand




Minimum charge:   $176.00



Type of service:  service shall be single or three phase at 60 cycles and
any standard voltages available from the distribution system and through one
standard transformation.  Where entire service cannot be measured at one
utilization voltage with one standard type meter, it will be measured at
primary voltage.



   Municipal Service Lighting



Designation:  MSL - C - C - 2



Application:  applicable to the city for street lighting and for all
municipal purposes other than water and sewage pumping.



Net monthly rate:




   Energy charge:      $0.085310 per kwh for all kwh, plus
adjustment charges




   Water and Sewage Pumping Service



Designation:     MW - C - 2



Application:  applicable to the city for water and sewage pumping and for
lighting incidental thereto.



Net monthly rate:



   Facilities charge:      $16.00 per month




   Horsepower charge:      $0.88 per connected hp





   Energy charge:      $0.069010 per kwh for all kwh




Minimum bill:  $3.70 per connected hp, plus adjustment charges.



   Outdoor Lighting Service



Designation:     OLS - C - 2



Application:  to any customer.  If a utility pole is required, customer
will pay installation cost in advance.



Net monthly rate unmetered:




   175 watt mvl - 68 kwh   $8.00 each per month, plus adjustment charges




Net monthly rate metered:




   175 watt mvl         $6.00 each per month, plus adjustment
charges




   (D)   Adjustments.



      (1)   Power Cost Adjustment:



Designation:  PCA



Application:  the monthly bills will be adjusted on a per kwh basis for
purchased power cost which is above or below the amount included in the base
rates as follows:



   P  -  C  /  D  =  B  or  P  +  C / S = B




where  PCA   =   power adjustment in $ / kwh





   P   =   estimated power cost for current month





   C   =   over or under collection in previous months





   S   =   estimated kwh sales in current month





   B   =   base at wholesale power cost




      (2)   Tax adjustment clause:  bills may be increased by the
proportionate part of any new tax, or increased rate of tax, or governmental
imposition or charge (except state, county, city and special district ad
valorem taxes, payments in lieu of taxes, and any taxes on net income) levied
or assessed against the city of its supplier of wholesale power or upon its
electrical business as a result of any new or amended laws after May 1, 1996.



      (3)   Furthermore, the rates set forth in division (C) above
may be changed and amended by the City Council in a manner provided by law.



   (E)   Service fees.  The following charges shall be made for
service provided by the Whitesboro Electric System:



      (1)   Connect fee: to all new customers and any customer
moving within the system at location with existing
service         $15.00



      (2)   Reconnect fee: when service is disconnected for any
reason and request to be reconnected                  $15.00



      (3)   Reconnect fee: outside of regular office
hours                                 $30.00



      (4)   Reconnect fee - tampered meter: reconnect fee after
customer tampered with disconnected service            $50.00



      (5)   Service fee: when seal is broken on meter without prior
notification of the Whitesboro Electric System or trouble call
         where such call is necessitated by failure of customer’s
equipment or apparatus                     $15.00



      (6)   Returned check
fee:                                     �
�       $25.00



      (7)   Temporary service fee: paid upon request of service by
contractor or builder for construction power of 100 amps or less.
         Service over 100 amps based on system
cost                                    $10
0.00



      (8)   Residential service fee:



   New dwelling               $350.00



   Upgrading service to existing dwelling   $40.00



      (9)   Single or three-phase small commercial service fee:
for  new  installation  or  upgrading  of  existing service, 
standard  secondary  voltage,  75  kva  load or less   $650.00



      (10)   Single or three-phase large commercial or industrial
service fee: for new installation or upgrading of existing service, standard
secondary voltage, 100 kva or more   $650.00 plus $7.00 per 1/3 of
connected kva



   (F)   Terms of payment.  Each bill for utility service(s),
regardless of the nature of the service(s), is due and payable on the 10th of
each month unless that date falls on a holiday or weekend, in which case,
payment is due on the next work day.  If payment is not received in the
office of the Whitesboro Electric System by the above stated time, the
customer’s account will be considered delinquent and disconnected on the
22nd of the month.



   (G)   Penalty.  For those payments received after the due date,
they shall be assessed a late fee of 10% of the amount due and owing.



   (H)   Termination date.  If payment is not received by 10:00 a.m.,
C.D.T., the 22nd day from the date of issuance and if proper notice has been
given, a customer’s utility service shall be discontinued unless a life
threatening situation exists that can be documented (in writing) by a
physician licensed to practice medicine in the state.



   (I)   Proper notice.  Proper notice shall consist of a separate
mailing at least seven days prior to a stated date of discontinuance, with
the words “termination notice” prominently displayed on the notice.  The
cut- off date may not fall on a holiday or weekend, but shall fall on the
next working day after the seventh day.  Disconnect notices to customers
shall not be mailed any earlier than the first day the bill becomes
delinquent so as to allow for a reasonable length of time to ascertain
receipt of payment by mail or at the utility’s authorized payment agency.



   (J)   Causes for termination of services.  Utility service may be
disconnected after proper notice for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   Failure to pay a delinquent account for utility service;



      (2)   Violation of the utility rules pertaining to the use of
the service in a manner which interferes with the service of others or the
operation of non- standard equipment, if a reasonable attempt has been made
to notify the customer and the customer is provided with a reasonable
opportunity to remedy the situation;



      (3)   Where a known dangerous condition exists and for as long
as the condition exists;



      (4)   Tampering with the utility company’s meter or
equipment or by-passing the same;



      (5)   Failure to comply with any deposit or guarantee
arrangements.



   (K)   Customer’s responsibility.  It shall be the customer’s
responsibility to insure that payment has been received or that prior
arrangements have been made for the payment of the account prior to the
disconnect date.



   (L)   Method of payment.  Personal checks, United States currency
or money orders will be



accepted for payment of utility bills.  In the event that the customer give
two checks within a one-year period of time that the bank will not honor, the
city will no longer accept personal checks from the customer.  (Ord. 812,
passed 2-10-98; Am. Ord. 882, passed 9-10-02; Am. Ord. 905, passed 3-16-04;
Am. Ord. 910, passed 9-9-04; Am. Ord. 943, passed 9-13-05; Am. Ord. 944,
passed 9-6-05; Am. Ord. 946, passed 10-11-05; Am. Ord. 952, passed 12-13-05;
Am. Ord. 1013, passed 9-14-10; Am. Ord. 1085, passed 11-15-16)



Cross-reference:



   Authorized, see § 52.01



§ 13.00  ALARM SYSTEM FEES.



   (A)   The permit fee shall be $25.  The renewal permit fee shall be
$25.  Permits acquired after the date of expiration shall require a new
application and an additional $10 late charge.



   (B)   Each false alarm after three will be billed at the rate of $50
per response.



(Ord. 806, passed 11-17-97)



Cross-reference:



   Authorized, see §§ 113.03 and 113.10



§ 14.00  [RESERVED]



§ 15.00  GARBAGE COLLECTION CHARGES.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   BAGS.  Plastic sacks, designed to store refuse with sufficient wall
strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the top.  Reasonable
care and technique should be used when lifting to prevent accidental ruptures
of bags.  Total weight of a bag and its contents shall not exceed 35 pounds.



   BRUSH.  Plants or grass clippings, leaves or tree trimmings.



   BULKY WASTES.  Stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines,
furniture, and other materials other than construction debris, dead animals,
hazardous waste, or stable matter with weights or volumes greater than those
allowed for containers.



   CITY.  The City of Whitesboro.



   COMMERCIAL.  Any structure or business other than one or two family
residential units, including hotels, motels, structures containing more than
four dwellings, and residential care facilities.



   COMMERCIAL CONTAINERS.  Containers commonly used by commercial garbage
collectors for the storage and transportation of solid waste.  Such
containers shall be equipped with suitable covers to prevent blowing or
scattering of waste and shall be maintained in a sanitary and safe
condition.  Such containers shall be clearly marked with the contractor’s
name and telephone number in letters not less than two inches in height. 
Such containers shall be maintained in the city approved single color or
color scheme.



   COMMERCIAL GARBAGE.  All normal establishment waste products of
commercial buildings or establishments and including multi-family dwellings
other than private residences, other than sewage and body waste, manure, dead
animals over ten pounds in weight, large tree trimmings, demolition or
remodeling debris, or any other waste material that cannot be broken down to
fit into the regular garbage containers herein specified.



   CONTRACTOR.  Such private firm designated by the city for the
collection, transportation, and/or disposal of the solid waste and
collection, transportation, and/or processing of recyclable materials.



   CUSTOMER.  An occupant of a residential, commercial hand collect,
commercial or industrial unit in the city limits who generates refuse and is
serviced by the contractor.



   DEAD ANIMALS.  Animals or portions thereof equal to or greater than
ten pounds in weight that have expired from any cause except those
slaughtered or killed for human use.



   DISPOSAL SITE.  A site having a current, valid operating permit from
the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission.



   DUMPSTER.  An enclosed metal container used to collect commercial or
institutional waste.



   GARBAGE.  Solid waste consisting of putrescible animal and vegetable
waste materials (see residential/  commercial garbage).



   HAZARDOUS WASTE.  Waste, in any amount, which is defined,
characterized, or designated as hazardous by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency or appropriate state agency by or pursuant to federal or
state law, or waste, in any amount, which is regulated under federal or state
law.



   HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE.  Waste, in any amount, regulated or
non-regulated, as described herein under hazardous waste, that is generated
in a household.



   PREMISES. All public and private establishments, including individual
residences, all multi-family dwellings, residential care facilities, schools,
businesses, other buildings, and all vacant lots.



   RECYCLE,  RECYCLING,  and  RECYCLABLES.  Reclamation and/or
recovery from solid waste of all recyclable matter including, but not limited
to, glass, newsprint, paper, plastic, tin, aluminum, corrugated and chipped
cardboard.



   REFUSE.  Non-putrescible solid waste (excluding ashes), consisting of
both combustible and noncombustible waste materials; combustible rubbish
includes paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics,
yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials; non-combustible rubbish
includes glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and the
like materials which will not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures
(1,600° Fahrenheit to 1,800° Fahrenheit).



   REQUEST TO COLLECT.  The city will contact the contractor requesting
collection and/or service at a specific location with the nature of the
request.  This request may be in the nature of a telephone call, or
facsimile (fax), and/or in writing.



   RESIDENTIAL GARBAGE.  All normal household waste of private residences
and multi- family dwellings of not more than four units, especially including
putrescible, but not including sewage and body waste, manure, dead animals
over ten pounds in weight, large tree trimmings, demolition or remodeling
debris, or any other waste material that cannot be broken down to fit into
the regular garbage containers herein specified.



   RUBBISH.  Non-putrescible solid waste (excluding ashes), consisting of
both combustible and noncombustible waste materials; combustible rubbish
includes paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics,
yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials; non-combustible rubbish
includes glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and like
materials which will not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600°
Fahrenheit to 1,800° Fahrenheit).



   SHARED DUMPSTER.  Enclosed metal container used to collect commercial
or institutional waste used by at least two but no more than three customers.



   SPECIAL WASTE.  Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes that
because of its quantity, concentration, physical or chemical characteristics
or biological properties require special handling and disposal to protect the
human health or the environment.  If improperly handled, transported,
stored, processed, or disposed of or otherwise managed, it may pose a present
or potential danger to the human health or the environment.



   SOLID WASTE.  Any garbage, rubbish, refuse, water supply, or air
pollution control facility, and other discarded material, including solid,
liquid semi- solid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial,
municipal, commercial, mining, and agriculture operations, and from community
and institutional activities



   UNUSUAL ACCUMULATIONS.



      (1)   For residences, each regular collection more than ten
containers (30 gallon plastic trash bags) of garbage, or the equivalent;



      (2)   For commercial establishments accumulations that would
not occur in the ordinary course of business;



      (3)   Large, heavy, or bulky objects such as furniture or
appliances; and



      (4)   Materials judged by the City Administrator, or
designated person, to be hazardous such as oil, acid, or caustic materials.



   (B)   Rates.



      (1)   The rates charged for the collection and removal of
household garbage and solid waste from houses, buildings and premises used
for residential purposes shall be as follows:



   Single-family residences      $17.26 per month



   Each additional residence



   located on same premises      $17.26 per month



   Each additional 96-gallon cart   $5.82



      (2)   The rates charged for the collection and removal of
garbage and solid waste from businesses, institutions and commercial
establishments shall be charged as follows:



   Billing Classifications



 

Code
 
Rate




402 Multi-dwelling
 
17.26 per unit, billed individually



Commercial 96 Gallon Toter



404 Once per week pickup
 
$16.57


405 Twice per week pickup
 
$27.84


Additional 96-gallon cart
 
$5.82



Commercial Dumpster, 2 cubic yard



415 Once per week
 
$66.00


416 Twice per week
 
$111.58


417 Three per week
 
$157.17



Commercial Dumpster, 3 cubic yard



406 Once per week
 
$78.91


407 Twice per week
 
$103.45


Three per week
 
$223.20



Commercial Dumpster, 4 cubic yard



Once per week
 
$102.15


408 Twice per week
 
$138.51


Three per week
 
$249.14



Commercial Dumpster, 6 cubic yard



Once per week
 
$110.12


Twice per week
 
$176.22


Three per week
 
$304.96


Four per week
 
$402.37



Commercial Dumpster, 8 cubic yard



Once per week
 
$121.49


Twice per week
 
$226.19


Three per week
 
$402.37


Four per week
 
$533.15


Five per week
 
$634.71



Shared Commercial Dumpster, Twice per week



409 3 cubic yard
 
$51.72 per pickup


410 4 cubic yard
 
$69.25 per pickup



Two and Three Toters



411 Two Toters, Once per week
 
$29.43


412 Three Toters, Once per week
 
$42.32


413 Two Toters, Twice per week
 
$51.98



Roll-Off, Non-compacted for up to 3 tons



— 20 cubic yard
 
$509.00 per pickup


—  30 cubic yard
 
$594.17 per pickup


—  40 cubic yard
 
$117.07 delivery and $4.87 per day rental.


All roll-offs exceeding 3 tons will be charged at the rate of $37.19 per ton.




 



   (C)   All commercial accounts that do not require a dumpster shall
be required to use 95 gallon toters as provided by the contractor.



   (D)   It shall be a violation of this section for any non-resident
of the city to place for collection any solid waste or garbage in or near any
device or dumpster used for the collection of solid waste by the municipal
solid waste collection service.  Persons found to be guilty of violating
this section shall be punished by the payment of fines hereinafter set out.



   (E)   No subscriber to the city’s solid waste collection service
shall knowingly allow any non-resident person to deposit for collection any
solid waste, if not generated on the premises of the subscriber.  Violation
of this section shall subject the subscriber to a fine hereinafter set out.



   (E)   Authority to enforce this section shall be vested in the City
Administrator or his or her assigns.



   (F)   Upon conviction in municipal court, any violator of any
provision of this section shall be punished as provided in § 10.99.



   (G)   A fee of $10 per cubic yard shall be charged by the city for
the dumping of solid waste at Wilson Street Yard.



   (H)   A fee of $5.00 shall be charged by the city for a lock on
dumpster requested by the customer.



(Ord. 794, passed 3-24-97; Am. Ord. 799, passed 8-4-97; Am. Ord. 846, passed
11-13-00; Am. Ord. 875, passed 8-13-02; Am. Ord. 921, passed 9-9-04; Am. Ord.
958, passed 8-8-06; Am. Ord. 967, passed 7-10-07; Am. Ord. 986, passed
10-14-08; Am. Ord. 1012, passed 9-14-10; Am. Ord. 1046, passed 12-11-12; Am.
Ord. 1048, passed 8-13-13; Am. Ord. 1064, passed 11-10-14)



Cross-reference:



   Authorized, see §§ 50.07 and 50.15



§ 16.00  WATER RATES.



   (A)   Water service fee.  The following fees shall be paid to the
city as water service fees and shall be paid prior to the commencement of
service.



      (1)   Fees.



   ¾-inch meter               $825



   1-inch meter               $825



   plus current invoiced cost for 1-inch meter from wholesale supply
company



   1½-inch meter               $825



   plus current invoiced cost for 1½-inch meter from wholesale supply
company



   2-inch meter               $825



   plus current invoiced cost for 2-inch meter from wholesale supply
company



   All other meters larger than 2-inch       $825



   plus current invoiced cost for large meter from supply company



      (2)   Any water tap or installation of meter that requires
cutting a street surface will require an additional fee of $4.50 per square
foot of street surface cut in order to make repairs to the street surface.



   (B)   Deposits.



      (1)   Connection deposit for water utilities:



   Residential water      $100



   Small commercial      $125



   Restaurants         $200



   Car wash         $200



   Motels            $200



   Multi-family dwellings   Number of units times $11



               Minimum - $100



      (2)   Residential property owners having service on property
owned and occupied by them shall not be required to place a deposit; however,
non- owners requiring services shall place a deposit in addition to
connection fees.



      (3)   In the event the commercial deposit is not sufficient to
protect the system from loss, the City Administrator shall set the
appropriate amount of deposit, subject to review by the City Council.



   (C)   Late payment fee.  Payments made after the 10th day of the
month following the date of billing shall have an additional 10% added as a
late payment fee.



   (D)   Connect and reconnect fees.



      (1)   Connect fee:  to all new customers and any customer
moving within the system at a location with existing service   $15



      (2)   Reconnect fee:  when service is disconnected for any
reason and request to be reconnected            $15



      (3)   Reconnect fee:  outside of regular office
hours                              $30



   (E)   Rates: Residential and Commercial.



      (1)   Customers inside the city limits base rate, if less than
2,000 gallons used                     $22.38



      (2)   Customers inside the city limits base rate, if more than
2,000 gallons used                     $25.62



   plus $3.24 per thousand for next 3,000



   Next 3,000: $4.33 per thousand



   Next 5,000: $4.87 per thousand



   Above 13,000: $5.41 per thousand



      (3)   Customers outside the city limits base rate, if less
than 2,000 gallons used                     $33.67



      (4)   Customers outside the city limits base rate, if more
than 2,000 gallons used                   $40.10



   plus $4.33 per thousand for next 3,000



   Next 3,000: $5.41 per thousand



   Next 5,000: $5.95 per thousand



   Above 13,000: $6.49 per thousand



      (5)   For apartments, apartment complexes or other
multi-family dwellings, each living unit is considered to be a separate
customer for billing purposes; for example, the minimum bill is the number of
living units times the minimum bill established by this section; the minimum
usage is the number of units times 2,000 gallons.  Each separate living unit
will be presumed to use at least the minimum usage.  The bill for the
apartment complex or multi-family dwelling will be comprised of the minimum
bill, which is the total number of living units times the minimum bill; the
minimum usage will be the total number of units times 2,000 gallons; after
the minimum usage has been reached, the bill will be based on the rate tables
in divisions (E)(1) - (E)(4).



   (F)   Penalty.



      (1)   A fine as provided in § 10.99 is hereby established for
any person or entity who shall tap a water main without first making payment
to the city for one of the scheduled fees; failure to pay such fee in
violation of this section shall warrant the immediate removal of water meter
and discontinuance of service until such time as fees are paid.



      (2)   It shall be a violation for any person to reconnect or
turn water on after a disconnection for non payment has been made by the city
and upon such conviction, the city shall pull the meter and a fine as
provided in § 10.99 shall be assessed.



      (3)   To reinstall a water meter after disconnection, a
reinstatement fee of $50 shall be paid in addition to all water deposits.



(Ord. 796, passed 10-14-97; Am. Ord. 862, passed 10-9-01; Am. Ord. 881,
passed 8-22-02; Am. Ord. 909, passed 8-10-04; Am. Ord. 944, passed 9-6-05;
Am. Ord. 991, passed 2-10-09; Am. Ord. 1011, passed 9-14-10; Am. Ord. 1052,
passed 9-10-13; Am. Ord. 1085, passed 11-15-16; Am. Ord. 1070, passed 9-8-15;
Am. Ord. 1085, passed 11-15-16)



Cross-reference:



   Authorized, see §§ 51.020, 51.021, 51.022, 51.030, 51.034, 51.036,
51.064



§ 16.01  SEWER RATES.



   (A)   Sewer taps.



      (1)   The city shall be responsible for the tapping of all the
sewer lines and maintenance of the sewer lines from the main sewer line to
one foot within the property adjoining the street.



      (2)   Any sewer tap or installation of a sewer line that
requires cutting a street surface will require an additional fee of $4.50 per
square foot of street surface cut in order to make repairs to the street
surface.



   (B)   Sewer service fees.  A sewer service fee of $900 shall be
paid to the city prior to commencement of service.



   (C)   Rates.



      (1)   The charges for sanitary sewer service, regardless of
class or type of service, shall be set at a rate of $15.66 minimum charge for
the use of less than 2,000 gallons, or portion thereof, for water billed to
that user; and $19.71 minimum charge for use of more than 2,000 gallons, plus
$2.43 per 1,000 gallons used thereafter up to 20,000 gallons.



      (2)   For apartments, apartment complexes or multifamily
dwellings, the minimum bill shall be the number of living units times the
minimum rate; the minimum usage shall be the number of living units times
2,000 gallons; after attaining the minimum usage, the bill for the
apartments, apartment complex or multifamily dwelling shall be calculated on
the usage described in division (C)(1).



      (3)   The maximum sewer bill for the months of May, June,
July, August and September shall not exceed the maximum monthly sewer bill
incurred during the months of October, November, December, January, February,
March and April; applicable only to the Whitesboro Independent School
District exclusively.



      (4)   The rates of residential customers shall be limited to a
maximum of 20,000 gallons during the months of May, June, July, August and
September.



   (D)   Penalty.  It shall be unlawful for any person, association or
cooperation to connect with any sewer main or to utilize the sewer mains for
disposal of sewage without payment of the herein named charges.  Any person
or persons violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as
provided in § 10.99.



(Ord. 797, passed 8-12-97; Am. Ord. 862, passed 10-9-01; Am. Ord. 881, passed
8-22-02; Am. Ord. 944, passed 9-6-05; Am. Ord. 1011, passed 9-14-10; Am. Ord.
1052, passed 9-10-13; Am. Ord. 1070, passed 9-8-15)



Cross-reference:



   Authorized, see § 51.030



§ 16.02  METER REREAD FEE.



   A charge of $15 shall be made for rereading meters upon request of the
customer.  This fee is refundable if the meter reading is found to be in
error as described in § 51.080 of this code.



Cross-reference:



   Authorized, see § 51.080



§ 16.03  METER INACCESSIBILITY CHARGE.



   A charge of $25.00 shall be made for meter inaccessibility created by
the customer.



(Ord. 1056, passed 3-11-14)



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Texas Statutes





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO TEXAS STATUTES




BUSINESS & COMMERCE CODE




 

State Cite
 
Code Section


17.46 et seq.
 
112.09


17.81 et seq.
 
36.070


 



 




CIVIL PRACTICE & REMEDIES CODE




 

State Cite
 
Code Section


78.001
 
31.070, 31.080


101.023
 
31.070


101.055
 
31.070, 31.080


Ch. 102
 
31.070


Ch. 106
 
31.040


 



 




CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE




 

State Cite
 
Code Section


Ch. 18
 
31.027


Art. 18.17 - 18.19
 
31.020


Art. 18.182
 
90.015


Ch. 59
 
31.020


 



 




FAMILY CODE




 

State Cite
 
Code Section


Ch. 31
 
130.05


51.08
 
130.05


 



 




GOVERNMENT CODE




 

State Cite
 
Code Section




29.002
 
34.02


29.003
 
34.01, 34.02


29.004 - 29.007
 
34.26


29.010
 
34.41


29.011
 
34.41


418.101 - 418.109
 
Ch. 38


551.001 et seq.
 
33.03, 36.025


552.001 et seq.
 
32.21


606.021 et seq.
 
39.100


615.001 et seq.
 
33.24


851.001 et seq.
 
39.110


2253.001 et seq.
 
36.071


 




 




HEALTH & SAFETY CODE




 

State Cite
 
Code Section




Ch. 121
 
94.01


122.005
 
93.051, 94.01


Ch. 342
 
94.35


342.001
 
93.010, 93.051, 94.16


342.002
 
93.051


342.003
 
93.051


342.004
 
93.051, 94.01, 94.16


342.006
 
94.34


342.007
 
70.052, 94.34


Ch. 365
 
94.16


481.159
 
31.024


481.160
 
31.024


694.003
 
93.074


713.001 et seq.
 
93.074


756.011 - 756.013
 
94.22


756.021 et seq.
 
36.072


Ch. 821
 
90.002


821.023
 
90.009


821.024
 
90.009


822.041 et seq.
 
90.020


822.0423
 
90.020


Ch. 826
 
90.027


826.017
 
90.001


826.022
 
90.020


Ch. 828
 
90.063


 




 




LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE




 

State Cite
 
Code Section




Ch. 6
 
30.01


22.038(c)
 
32.20


22.071 - 22.074
 
39.012


22.071
 
39.001


22.073
 
39.012


22.075
 
39.013


22.076(b)
 
39.060


22.077
 
39.003, 39.012


41.001 et seq.
 
31.010


Ch. 42
 
153.040


42.021
 
116.02


Ch. 43
 
37.12


Ch. 51
 
32.01


Ch. 52
 
32.01


52.003
 
32.07


52.004
 
31.001


52.011
 
32.05


Ch. 53
 
10.01


54.001
 
10.18, 10.99


54.017
 
90.002


Ch. 102
 
36.025, 36.026


Ch. 103
 
36.030


Ch. 105
 
36.010


150.021(b)(2)
 
39.010, 39.030


201.001 et seq.
 
Ch. 40


Ch. 212
 
153.041


212.071 et seq.
 
36.070


214.012 et seq.
 
150.041


215.026
 
90.062


215.026(b)
 
90.040, 90.044


215.031
 
Ch. 112


215.032
 
110.05


217.002
 
94.01


217.003
 
92.050


Ch. 232
 
153.041


Ch. 243
 
114.01


Ch. 252
 
36.071


252.023
 
36.070


252.041
 
36.070


Ch. 271
 
36.071


271.025
 
36.070


341.001
 
33.10


341.011
 
33.29


341.012
 
33.20


Ch. 342
 
92.020


342.003
 
92.020


342.003(a)(8)
 
92.050


342.005
 
92.030


Ch. 362
 
33.40, 33.43


362.002
 
33.42


Ch. 391
 
31.090


402.001
 
51.001


431.001
 
71.02


552.001 et seq.
 
10.18


 




 




PARKS & WILDLIFE CODE




 

State Cite
 
Code Section


Ch. 31
 
95.01


 



 




PENAL CODE




 

State Cite
 
Code Section




1.08
 
Ch. 130


Ch. 21
 
114.10


Ch. 22
 
114.10


22.01
 
114.15


Ch. 25
 
114.10


42.09
 
90.009


Ch. 43
 
114.10


Ch. 46
 
31.026


Ch. 47
 
31.027


 




 




REVISED CIVIL STATUTES




 

State Cite (Article)
 
Code Section


5190.6, § 4A
 
33.04


5190.6, § 4B
 
33.05, 36.053


6243-101
 
150.041


 



 




TAX CODE




 

State Cite
 
Code Section




Ch. 33
 
36.042, 36.043


33.01
 
36.043


Ch. 321
 
36.050, 36.051


321.210
 
36.052


Ch. 351
 
36.065


351.101
 
36.065


 




 




TRANSPORTATION CODE




 

State Cite
 
Code Section




396.001 et seq.
 
111.12


501.001 et seq.
 
95.01, 111.01


542.201 et seq.
 
70.002


542.202
 
70.093, 71.02


544.002
 
70.014


544.004
 
70.014


544.005
 
70.014


545.303
 
71.03, 71.04


545.356
 
70.071


546.002
 
70.041


550.067
 
70.020, 70.023


551.001 et seq.
 
70.102


643.101
 
72.08


683.001 et seq.
 
95.02


683.001
 
31.020


683.071 et seq.
 
95.18


683.071
 
95.01


721.004 - 721.006
 
31.050


 




 




WATER CODE




 

State Cite
 
Code Section


13.042
 
51.001


Ch. 26
 
50.16


26.176
 
51.096


26.177
 
51.096


 



 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




284
 
5-21-48
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


311
 
5-5-52
 
Ch. 74 Sched. II


394
 
2-2-61
 
Ch. 74 Sched. II


399
 
12-7-61
 
Ch. 74 Sched. II


401
 
6-1-62
 
Ch. 73 Sched. IV


414
 
- -64
 
31.111


451
 
3-4-68
 
150.004


452
 
3-4-68
 
150.005


461
 
5-20-69
 
36.050


495
 
6-26-73
 
51.096


496
 
8-7-73
 
Ch. 74 Sched. II


500
 
10-4-73
 
Ch. 74 Sched. II


504
 
5-2-74
 
130.09


515
 
12-5-74
 
Ch. 74 Sched. II


521
 
9-4-75
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


538
 
7-8-76
 
Ch. 74 Sched. II


573
 
3-8-79
 
36.051


582
 
2-8-80
 
96.20, 96.23


590
 
9-9-80
 
130.08


598
 
2-5-81
 
110.20, App. § 6.01


621
 
9-9-82
 
Ch. 73 Sched. II, Ch. 74 Sched. I


638
 
10-6-83
 
App. § 10.00


643
 
10-20-83
 
70.005


653
 
12-18-84
 
52.02


669
 
2-4-86
 
71.08


687
 
11-3-87
 
Ch. 74 Sched. II


695
 
6-21-88
 
31.110


696
 
7-12-88
 
70.004


701
 
4-11-89
 
130.07


702
 
4-11-89
 
94.50, 94.51


708
 
11-14-89
 
50.16


713
 
5-8-90
 
70.070, Ch. 73 Sched. II


714
 
7-10-90
 
Ch. 73 Sched. I


715
 
8-14-90
 
130.06


716
 
8-14-90
 
Ch. 73 Sched. II


724
 
6-3-91
 
70.003, 96.05


726
 
7-9-91
 
71.02


744
 
11-9-93
 
96.07


747
 
4-12-94
 
97.02


756
 
9-13-94
 
130.05


757
 
12-13-94
 
33.03


762
 
7-11-95
 
App. § 10.00


768
 
8-24-95
 
93.080 - 93.093


769
 
11-14-95
 
Ch. 73 Sched. II


770
 
10-10-95
 
Ch. 73 Sched. III


776
 
11-14-95
 
Ch. 73 Sched. II


777
 
2-15-96
 
Ch. 73 Sched. II


779
 
6-11-96
 
33.02


783
 
7-18-96
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


790
 
10-12-96
 
App. § 10.00


791
 
11-12-96
 
39.090


794
 
3-24-97
 
App. § 15.00


796
 
10-14-97
 
App. § 16.00


797
 
8-12-97
 
App. § 16.01


798
 
8-18-97
 
92.050


799
 
8-4-97
 
50.15, App. § 15.00


804
 
9-9-97
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


806
 
11-17-97
 
113.01 - 113.13, 113.99, App. § 13.00


807
 
12-2-97
 
36.053


810
 
1-13-98
 
90.045


812
 
2-10-98
 
52.01, App. § 12.00


813
 
4-14-98
 
39.030 - 39.032


814
 
4-14-98
 
39.010 - 39.012


815
 
6-9-98
 
33.04


816
 
6-9-98
 
33.05


818
 
7-14-98
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


819
 
7-14-98
 
Ch. 73 Sched. V


821
 
8-11-98
 
Ch. 73 Sched. II


822
 
8-11-98
 
51.050, 51.051


826
 
9-8-98
 
150.040, 150.041


828
 
10-13-98
 
Ch. 73 Sched. V


837
 
4-11-00
 
93.080 - 93.084, 93.089 - 93.093


838
 
4-11-00
 
Ch. 73 Sched. V


840
 
8-8-00
 
Ch. 73 Sched. I


846
 
11-13-00
 
App. § 15.00


851
 
2-15-01
 
39.110


854
 
3-13-01
 
Ch. 73 Sched. I, Ch. 74 Sched. I


857
 
8-14-01
 
71.01, 71.09


862
 
10-9-01
 
App. §§ 16.00, 16.01


863
 
10-16-01
 
Ch. 73 Sched. II


864
 
11-13-01
 
150.010 - 150.030


865
 
1-8-02
 
90.060


867
 
3-12-02
 
93.089


868
 
4-9-02
 
93.083


875
 
8-13-02
 
App. § 15.00


876
 
8-13-02
 
92.034


881
 
8-22-02
 
App. 1 §§ 16.00, 16.01


882
 
9-10-02
 
App. 1 § 12.00


884
 
11- -02
 
114.01 - 114.04, 114.10 - 114.17, 114.25 - 114.32, 114.99


886
 
1-14-03
 
App. 1 § 4.00


888
 
3-11-03
 
150.010 - 150.030


889
 
3-11-03
 
115.01 - 115.06, 115.99


890
 
4-8-03
 
31.110, 31.111


892
 
5- -03
 
Ch. 73 Sched. V


898
 
9-9-03
 
97.01


902
 
1-13-04
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


905
 
3-16-04
 
34.40, 34.50, 35.17, 35.20, 36.010, 39.090, 50.15, 51.021, 51.036, 51.061,
51.067, 51.072, App. 1 § 12.00


907
 
5-11-04
 
150.041, 150.043, 150.044


908
 
4-12-04
 
72.01, 72.08, 72.09, 72.14, App. 1 § 3.00


909
 
8-10-04
 
App. 1 § 16.00


910
 
9-9-04
 
App. 1 § 12.00


914
 
10-14-04
 
90.001 - 90.009, 90.014 - 90.020, 90.024 - 90.027, 90.030 - 90.031, 90.035 -
90.037, 90.040 - 90.047, 90.050 - 90.052, 90.060 - 90.063, App. 1 §§ 
4.00, 4.01


915
 
11-9-04
 
150.001


916
 
11-9-04
 
150.040


917
 
11-9-04
 
150.006


918
 
11-9-04
 
150.050


919
 
11-9-04
 
92.020


920
 
11-9-04
 
92.020, 92.023, 92.024, 92.033, 150.001, 150.003, 150.006, 150.050, 150.040


921
 
11-9-04
 
App. 1 §§ 4.00, 10.00, 15.00


923
 
3-29-05
 
150.025


927
 
4-12-05
 
154.001 – 154.009, 154.020 – 154.029, 154.040 – 154.044, 154.055,
154.070 - 154.075, 154.085 – 154.087, 154.100 – 154.104, 154.115 –
154.121, 154.999


928
 
6-14-05
 
App. 1 § 3.00


929
 
7-12-05
 
51.012


931
 
7-12-05
 
90.043


932
 
8-9-05
 
App. 1 § 10.00


933
 
8-9-05
 
153.001 – 153.009, 153.020 - 153.026, 153.040, 153.041, 153.055 –
153.064, 153.075 - 153.078, 153.09 - 153.092, 153.999


935
 
8-15-05
 
150.110 – 150.115


936
 
9-6-05
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


943
 
9-13-05
 
App. 1 § 12.00


944
 
9-6-05
 
51.020 – 51.023, App. 1 §§ 10.00, 12.00, 16.00, 16.01


946
 
10-11-05
 
App. 1 § 12.00


949
 
12-13-05
 
153.009, 153.024, 153.027, App. 1 § 10.00


950
 
12-13-05
 
116.01 – 116.09


951
 
12-13-05
 
71.02


952
 
12-13-05
 
App. 1 § 12.00


953
 
12-13-05
 
150.080 – 150.084, App. 1 § 10.00


954
 
4-11-06
 
Ch. 73 Sched. III


958
 
8-8-06
 
App. 1 § 15.00


963
 
5-8-07
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


964
 
5-8-07
 
39.090


966
 
7-10-07
 
94.10, 94.11, 94.13


967
 
7-10-07
 
App. 1 § 15.00


968
 
8-14-07
 
51.075


977
 
4-15-08
 
36.060 – 36.065


978
 
4-15-08
 
116.02, 116.03


979
 
5-13-08
 
150.060 – 150.071


985
 
9-9-08
 
Ch. 73 Sched. V


986
 
10-14-08
 
App. 1 § 15.00


987
 
11-18-09
 
98.001 – 98.006, 98.020 – 98.022, 98.030 – 98.033, 98.040 – 98.045,
98.060 – 98.066, 98.999


991
 
2-10-09
 
App. 1 § 16.00


992
 
5-12-09
 
51.003


997
 
10-13-09
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VI


998
 
10-13-09
 
70.006


1003
 
4-13-10
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


1004
 
4-13-10
 
App. 1 § 10.00


1009
 
8-10-10
 
130.10


1010
 
9-14-10
 
96.09


1011
 
9-14-10
 
App. 1 §§ 16.00, 16.01


1012
 
9-14-10
 
App. 1 § 15.00


1013
 
9-14-10
 
App. 1 § 12.00


1019
 
9-14-10
 
130.05


1021
 
12-21-10
 
71.01, 71.09


1025
 
5-10-11
 
154.001


1033
 
12-13-11
 
150.110 – 150.115


1035
 
1-10-12
 
50.09


1036
 
3-13-12
 
130.02


1038
 
3-13-12
 
99.01 – 99.06, 99.99


1040
 
4-10-12
 
Adopting Ordinance


1046
 
12-11-12
 
App. 1 §§ 1.00, 15.00


1048
 
8-13-13
 
App. 1 § 15.00


1052
 
9-10-13
 
App. 1 §§ 16.00, 16.01


1056
 
3-11-14
 
App. 1 § 16.03


1057
 
3-11-14
 
52.03 – 52.05


1058
 
5-13-14
 
130.05


1064
 
11-10-14
 
App. 1 § 15.00


1067
 
6-9-15
 
150.089


1070
 
9-8-15
 
App. 1 §§ 16.00, 16.01


1074
 
11-10-15
 
App. 1 § 11.01


1075
 
11-10-15
 
93.080 – 93.084, 93.090 – 93.093


1077
 
12-8-15
 
154.115, 154.117


1078
 
4-12-16
 
93.080 – 93.084, 93.087, 93.090 – 93.093


1085
 
11-15-16
 
App. 1 §§ 12.00, 16.00


1086
 
11-15-16
 
154.001, 154.026, 154.027, 154.029, 154.041


1088
 
12-13-16
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


 
 




 


