CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF WICHITA FALLS, TEXAS 
____________ 
Published in 2014 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
WICHITA FALLS OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Glenn Barham 
Mayor 
____________ 
Michael Smith 
Councilor At Large 
____________ 
Ben Hoover, District 1 Councilor 
Annetta Pope-Dotson, District 2 Councilor 
Brian Hooker, District 3 Councilor 
Tim Ingle, District 4 Councilor 
Tom Quintero, District 5 Councilor 
City Council 
____________ 
Darron Leiker 
City Manager 
____________ 
Julia Vasquez 
Acting City Attorney 
____________ 
Tracy B. Norr, MMC 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Stephen L. Santellana 
Mayor 
____________ 
Michael Smith 
Councilor At Large 
____________ 
Eric West, District 1 Councilor 
DeAndra Chenault, District 2 Councilor 
Brian Hooker, District 3 Councilor 
Jesse Brown, District 4 Councilor 
Romeo Montez, District 5 Councilor 
City Council 
____________ 
Darron Leiker 
City Manager 
____________ 
Julia Vasquez 
Acting City Attorney 
____________ 
Tracy B. Norr, TRMC/MMC 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Wichita Falls, Texas. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2001 Code, as supplemented through October 15, 2012, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1966 Code and the 2001 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX A CDA:1 CODE APPENDIX B CDB:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Senior Code Attorney, and Kayla Mahnken, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Tracy B. Norr, MMC, City Clerk, Miles Risley, former City Attorney, Peter Scott, City Prosecutor, and the other members of the city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Wichita Falls, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Wichita Falls, Texas. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Wichita Falls, Texas. 2014. 
ORDINANCE NO. 52-2014 
Ordinance adopting and enacting a new Code for the City of Wichita Falls, Texas; providing for the repeal of certain ordinances not included therein; providing a penalty for the violation thereof; providing for the manner of amending such Code; and providing when such Code and this Ordinance shall become effective 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WICHITA FALLS, TEXAS, THAT: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Wichita Falls, Texas," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 110, Appendix A. Subdivision and Development Regulations and Appendix B. Zoning, each inclusive, are hereby adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 5, 2014, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule, order or regulation where any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of such provision of this Code or of any ordinance, rule, regulation or order that governs or regulates fire, safety, zoning or public health or sanitation, including dumping of refuse, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00. The violation of any other provision of this Code or any other ordinance, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00, unless specifically stated otherwise in this Code. If the maximum penalty provided by this Code for any offense is greater than the maximum penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state, the maximum penalty for such violation provided by the state statute shall be the maximum penalty under this Code. Except where otherwise provided in this Code, each day an offense shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
    The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, administrative adjudication and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 5, 2014 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective December 4, 2014. 
    PASSED AND APPROVED this the 4th day of November, 2014. 
/s/ ___________ MAYOR   ATTEST: 
/s/ ___________ City Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 42-2014  9-16-2014 Include 1 44-2014  9-16-2014 Include 1 47-2014 10-21-2014 Include 1 52-2014 11- 4-2014 Include 1 56-2014 11- 4-2014 Include 1 58-2014 12- 2-2014 Include 1 03-2015  1- 6-2015 Include 1 04-2015  1- 6-2015 Include 1 15-2015  4- 7-2015 Include 1 26-2015  7- 7-2015 Include 1 34-2015  8- 4-2015 Include 1 35-2015  8- 4-2015 Include 1 44-2015  9-15-2015 Include 2 50-2015 10-20-2015 Include 2 53-2015 11-17-2015 Include 2 57-2015 12- 1-2015 Include 2 02-2016  1- 5-2016 Include 2 05-2016  2- 2-2016 Include 2 06-2016  2-16-2016 Include 2 09-2016  3- 1-2016 Include 2 14-2016  6- 7-2016 Include 2 21-2016  7-19-2016 Include 2 23-2016  6-19-2016 Include 2 28-2016  8-16-2016 Include 2 31-2016  9- 6-2016 Include 2 32-2016  9- 6-2016 Include 2 43-2016 11- 1-2016 Include 3 44-2016 11- 1-2016 Include 3 46-2016 11- 1-2016 Include 3 49-2016 11-15-2016 Include 3 50-2016 11-22-2016 Include 3 55-2016 12-20-2016 Include 3 56-2016 12-20-2016 Include 3 01-2017  1- 3-2017 Include 3 02-2017  1- 3-2017 Include 3 05-2017  2-21-2017 Include 3 12-2017  4- 4-2017 Include 3 17-2017  6- 6-2017 Include 3 21-2017  6-20-2017 Include 3 24-2017  7-18-2017 Include 3 35-2017  9- 5-2017 Include 3 40-2017  9-19-2017 Include 4 42-2017 10-17-2017 Include 4 50-2017 12- 5-2017 Include 4 03-2018  1- 2-2018 Include 4 04-2018  1-16-2018 Include 4 20-2018  5- 1-2018 Include 4 15-2018  4- 3-2018 Include 4 28-2018  7-17-2018 Include 4 30-2018  7-17-2018 Include 4 35-2018  8- 7-2018 Include 4 45-2018  9-18-2018 Include 5 51-2018 10- 2-2018 Include 5 52-2018 10- 2-2018 Include 5 65-2018 12-18-2018 Include 5 02-2019  2-19-2019 Include 5 03-2019  3- 5-2019 Include 5 07-2019  4- 2-2019 Include 5 17-2019  5-21-2019 Include 5  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of Wichita Falls, Texas, as adopted by referendum on March 20, 1920 and subsequently amended by referendums on April 9, 1928; April 7, 1931; July 27, 1934; February 9, 1937; December 5, 1950; April 2, 1977; April 7, 1979; April 2, 1983; May 7, 1988, August 14, 1999 and May 13, 2006. Amendments to the Charter as amended through May 13, 2006, are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the Charter as amended through May 13, 2006. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citation to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Home rule municipality, Texas Const. art. 16, § 5, Texas Local Government Code § 5.004. 

ESTABLISHMENT AND CORPORATE NAME 

Sec. 1. - Incorporation. 
    The inhabitants of the City of Wichita Falls, within the boundaries herein stated, or within such boundaries as may hereinafter be established, shall be a body politic and corporate under the name of "The City of Wichita Falls," and as such shall have perpetual succession, may use a common seal, may sue and be sued, contract and be contracted with, may plea and be impleaded in all courts and places in all matters whatever. 
    The government for the City of Wichita Falls shall be known as the Council-Manager form of government. 
    The city council shall set policy for the city by the enactment of ordinances, the passage of resolutions, the adoption of a budget and the passage of such other rules as necessary to establish city policy under the laws and Constitution of the State of Texas. 
    The City Manager shall execute policy by serving as the chief city administrator and conducting the day-to-day operations of the city. 
State Law reference- Home rule form of government, Texas Local Government Code § 26.001 et seq. 
Sec. 2. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the City of Wichita Falls, Texas, shall be the same as have heretofore been established, as of this date, which boundaries are more fully set out on an official map recorded in the official minutes of the city, to be kept in the office of the City Clerk, and here referred to for a more complete metes and bounds description. The boundaries of the City may be altered by extension through annexation or contraction through disannexation by one of the methods described in the following section. 
ANNEXATION AND DISANNEXATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Annexation, Texas Local Government Code § 43.001 et seq. 

Sec. 3a. - Annexation by action of the council. 
    Territory adjacent to the City may be annexed by ordinance with or without the consent of the owners or inhabitants thereof, subject to such procedural rules as may be prescribed by law. 
Sec. 3b. - Annexation on petition of owners. 
    Upon presentation of a petition in writing signed by a majority of the owners of adjacent territory, the Council, after hearing arguments for and against such action, may by ordinance annex such territory into the city. Hearing on such petition must take place not less than five (5) nor more than thirty (30) days after the date of its filing. At any time within ninety (90) days after the public hearing, an ordinance may be introduced providing for the annexation of the territory described in such petition. 
State Law reference- Annexation, Texas Local Government Code § 43.021 et seq. 
Sec. 3c. - Disannexation of territory. 
    Territory lying within the boundary limits of the City and adjacent to the outer limits may be disannexed from the City upon presentation to the Council of a petition in writing signed by a majority of the owners of land within the territory. Sparsely inhabited territory containing less than 100 residents may be disannexed by the Council, when the Council determines that such disannexation is for the best interests of the city. 
    The Council, after hearing the arguments for and against such proposed disannexation, may grant or deny the request; however, any territory so detached shall be liable for its prorata share of any debts incurred while it was a part of the City, and the City shall continue to levy and collect taxes on the property until such indebtedness has been discharged. 
[Secs. 4-6. - Reserved for future use.] 
POWERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal home rule powers, Texas Const., art. 16, § 5, Texas Local Government Code §§ 26.001 et seq., 51.001, 51.071 et seq. 

Sec. 7. - Express corporate powers. 
    The City of Wichita Falls shall have the power: 
(a)  To acquire property, within or without the city, in fee simple or lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise appropriation, lease, or lease with privilege to purchase, for any municipal purpose and may sell, lease, hold, manage, and control such property as though a natural person; 
(b)  To furnish all local public service of whatever nature; 
(c)  To purchase, hire, construct, own, maintain, and operate or lease local public utilities, and to acquire by condemnation or otherwise, within or without the corporate limits, property necessary for any such purpose; 
(d)  To grant local public utility franchises and regulate the exercise thereof; 
(e)  To assess, levy and collect taxes for general and special purposes on all subjects or objects which the city may lawfully tax; 
(f)  To borrow money on the faith and credit of the city by the issue or sale of bonds or notes of the city; 
(g)  To appropriate the money of the city for all lawful purposes; 
(h)  To create, provide for, construct, regulate and maintain all things in the nature of public work and improvements; 
(i)  To levy and collect assessments for local improvements on property benefited thereby; 
(j)  To license and regulate persons, corporations and associations engaged in any business, occupation, profession or trade; 
(k)  To define, prohibit, abate, suppress and prevent within the City, and for a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet outside its limits, all nuisances and causes thereof and all things detrimental to the health, morals, safety, convenience and welfare of its inhabitants; 
(l)  To make all needful regulations, applicable within and without the city, for securing and preserving the purity of its water supply; 
(m)  To provide for such inspection service within and without the city as may be necessary to ensure the purity and wholesomeness of food products sold within the city; 
(n)  To do all things necessary or desirable to secure and promote the public health; 
(o)  To regulate the construction, location, height and material used in all buildings and the maintenance and occupancy thereof; 
(p)  To regulate and control the use, for whatever purpose of the streets and other public places of the city; 
(q)  To create, establish, organize and abolish departments and offices, and fix the salaries and compensation of all officers and employees; 
(r)  To make and enforce local police, sanitary and other regulations; 
(s)  To fund projects which promote the economic development of the city; 
(t)  To pass such ordinances as may be expedient for maintaining and promoting the peace, safety, good government and welfare of the city and for the performance of the functions thereof; 
(u)  To exercise in addition to the powers enumerated in this section, all powers that now are, or hereafter may be, granted to municipalities by the constitution or laws of the State of Texas; and all the powers of the city whether expressed or implied, shall be exercised and enforced in the manner prescribed in this Charter, or when not so prescribed then in such manner as may be provided by ordinance or resolution of the city council; 
(v)  To have and exercise all of the powers, rights, privileges and immunities of every character and description whatsoever conferred upon and granted to cities of more than five thousand [5,000] inhabitants to adopt and amend their charters by Chapter 147, page 307, of the General Laws of Texas passed by the thirty-third Legislature of said State in 1913, and approved April 7th, 1913, as well as any and all amendments thereof heretofore or which may be hereafter adopted thereto. 
State Law reference- Home rule powers generally, Texas Local Government Code § 51.071 et seq. 
Sec. 8. - Other corporate powers. 
    The enumeration of powers by this Charter shall not be held to be deemed to be exclusive but, in addition to the powers enumerated herein implied thereby or appropriate to the exercise thereof the city shall have, and may exercise, all other powers, which, under the constitution and laws of Texas, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate, it being the intention hereof that the powers of the City of Wichita Falls shall extend to all matters of local and municipal government. 
CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 9. - Creation of city council. 
    All legislative and executive powers of the city shall be vested in a city council and shall be exercised in the manner provided by this Charter. 
Sec. 9a. - Designation of council and councilors. 
    The name of the board of aldermen is changed to the city council. Any reference in this Charter or in any ordinances, resolutions or other documents to the board of alderman shall be construed as meaning the city council. Members of the city council shall be known as councilors. 
Sec. 10. - Membership of the city council. 
    The city council shall consist of a mayor and six councilors, whose terms, qualifications, and method of election shall be prescribed in the Code of Ordinances, Section 2-01 [2-26(a)]. 
Sec. 11. - Candidacy for the city council. 
    Any qualified voter of the City of Wichita Falls may apply in writing for a place on the ballot for election to the city council, who: 
(1)  Is a least twenty-one [(21)] years of age; 
(2)  Has resided within the city and applicable district for twelve (12) months prior to filing deadline for that election; 
(3)  Pays a filing fee of [one hundred dollars] ($100.00) or presents a petition signed by [fifty] (50) or more qualified voters in the city and applicable district, in lieu of the filing fee; and 
(4)  Meets all other eligibility requirements of the Texas election laws. 
The written application (and petition in lieu of filing fee) shall be filed with the city clerk in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 14-2006, § 2, 2-21-2006, ref. 5-13-2006) 
State Law reference- Qualifications generally, Texas Election Code § 141.001 et seq. 
NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 

Sec. 12. - Terms of office. 
    A councilor or mayor can serve a maximum of three (3) successive two-year terms in the same office, provided that the term served in filling a vacancy or unexpired term shall not be considered as part of the three (3) successive terms of two (2) years each. However, in no event shall an elected official of the city be eligible to be elected to more than ten (10) consecutive years (exclusive of unexpired terms) in any combination of elective office. After at least a two-year absence from office, the person will be eligible to hold an elective office with the city again. 
(Ord. No. 32-2009, § 3, 5-19-2009, ref. 5-9-5009) 
Sec. 13. - [Number and] gender references. 
    Unless the context requires otherwise, singular nouns and pronouns include the plural, and references to gender include both male and female. 
Secs. 14-19. - Reserved. 
    (Repealed by Charter Amendment of 4-2-1977) 
Sec. 20. - Notice of election by publication. 
    Notice of the election, and the polling places, shall be published by the city clerk on election day, and as otherwise specified in the Texas election laws. 
Sec. 21. - Election by majority. 
    A candidate at an election for a place on the council or for mayor who shall receive a majority of all votes cast for the office for which he is a candidate shall be declared elected to such office. In the event any candidate for an office fails to receive a majority of all votes cast for all the candidates for such office at such election, the council shall order a runoff election, to be held in compliance with state law. The two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of votes for any such office in the first election shall be placed upon the ballot to be voted on in the runoff election. 
(Ord. No. 14-2006, § 2, 2-21-2006, ref. 5-13-2006) 
Sec. 21a. - Breaking tie votes. 
    If by reason of their having received the same number of votes, it cannot be determined which of two (2) or more candidates has been elected, a decision between them shall be made in their presence by lot under the direction of the city clerk. 
    In the event a runoff is required, and it cannot be determined from the vote which two (2) candidates shall advance to a runoff, because of a tie vote, the decision shall be made by lot as specified above. 
(Ord. No. 14-2006, § 2, 2-21-2006, ref. 5-13-2006) 
Sec. 22. - Procedure for holding elections. 
    All elections held under this Charter, whether for the choice of candidates or for the submission of questions to the electors, shall be conducted in accordance with the Texas election laws; and except as otherwise provided in this Charter such election laws shall be applicable to, and control all such elections. 
Sec. 23. - City council vacancies. 
    If a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor or in any other place on the city council, some eligible person shall be chosen to fill the place by a majority vote of the remaining members. Any person chosen by the city council to fill a vacancy therein shall continue in office as a result of such choice only until the next regular municipal election, at which time some person shall be elected to fill the office either for the regular term or for the unexpired term as the case may be. A place on the city council held, or which might be held, by a person chosen by the city council shall be regarded as a place to be filled at any regular municipal election. When at any such election, a person is to be chosen to fill out an unexpired term candidates shall be nominated for the position and the election shall be held as hereinbefore provided. 
RECALL OF OFFICERS 

Sec. 24. - Recall authorized. 
    The mayor or any other member of the city council may be removed from office in the following manner: 
    Any qualified voter of the city may make and file with the city clerk an affidavit containing the name of any member of the city council whose removal is sought and a statement of the grounds for removal, provided only qualified voters within a council district may make and file an affidavit for recall for that council position. 
    The city clerk shall thereupon deliver to the qualified voter making such affidavit copies of petition blanks for demanding such a removal, printed forms of which he shall keep on hand. 
    Such blanks shall be issued by the city clerk with his signature thereto attached, and they shall be dated, addressed to the city council, indicate the person to whom issued, and state the name of the member whose removal is sought. 
    A copy of the petition shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk in accordance with state law. 
    A recall petition to be effective must be returned and filed with the city clerk within thirty (30) days after the filing of the affidavit, and must bear the signatures of registered voters of the city equal in number to at least five (5%) percent of the registered voters at the date of the last regular municipal election for that position, whether opposed or unopposed. Only registered voters within a council district may sign a recall petition for that council position. 
(Ord. No. 14-2006, § 2, 2-21-2006, ref. 5-13-2006) 
Sec. 25. - Petition for recall. 
    Signatures to a recall petition need not be appended to one paper, but to each such petition paper there shall be attached an affidavit of the circulator thereof, stating that each signature thereto was made in his presence and is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. 
    Each signer of a recall petition shall sign his name in ink or indelible pencil, and shall comply with any other applicable requirements prescribed by law. 
    Recall petition papers provided by the city clerk shall be in form substantially as follows: 
    TO THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCILORS OF THE CITY OF WICHITA FALLS, TEXAS: 
    I, ___________, City Clerk of the City of Wichita Falls, did hereby issue upon request to ___________ this blank form for a recall petition for the removal of ___________ from the office of ___________, Wichita Falls City Council. 
    Dated: ________ 
    Signed: ___________, City Clerk 
    RECALL PETITION 
    TO THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCILORS: 
    We, the undersigned electors of the City of Wichita Falls, hereby demand that the question of removing ___________ from the city council be submitted to a vote of the electors. 
    Grounds for Removal: ________ 
_____ 
VOTER'S 
PRINTED 
NAME SIGNATURE RESIDENCE 
ADDRESS D.O.B. V.R.# DATE SIGNED  
_____ 
STATE OF TEXAS      ) § COUNTY OF WICHITA ) §  
    ___________, being duly sworn, deposes and says that he/she is the circulator of the foregoing petition paper, and that the signatures appended thereto were made in his/her presence, and are the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be. 
_____
Signed  
    Subscribed and sworn to before me this _____ day of _______ 20___. 
_____
Notary Public  
(Ord. No. 14-2006, § 2, 2-21-2006, ref. 5-13-2006) 
Sec. 26. - Filing the recall petition. 
    All papers and affidavits comprising a recall petition shall be assembled and filed with the city clerk as one instrument, with a statement attached thereto giving the names and addresses of three (3) electors, who, as a committee of the petitioners, shall be officially regarded as filing the petition. Within thirty (30) days of the date of filing a recall petition, the city clerk shall determine the sufficiency thereof and attach thereto a certificate showing the result of his examination. 
    If the city clerk shall certify that the petition is insufficient he shall set forth in the certificate the particulars in which it is defective and shall at once notify the committee of the petitioners of his finding. 
(Ord. No. 14-2006, § 2, 2-21-2006, ref. 5-13-2006) 
Sec. 27. - Amendment of recall petition. 
    A recall petition may be amended at any time within twenty (20) days after the making of the certificate of insufficiency by the city clerk, by filing a supplementary petition upon additional papers issued, signed and filed as provided herein for an original petition. 
    The city clerk shall, within thirty (30) days after such an amendment is filed, make examination of the amended petition and, if his certificate shall show the petition still to be insufficient, he shall file the petition in his office and notify the committee of the petitioners of his finding. The finding of the insufficiency of a recall petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
(Ord. No. 14-2006, § 2, 2-21-2006, ref. 5-13-2006) 
Sec. 28. - Action on recall petition. 
    If a recall petition or amended petition shall be certified by the city clerk to be sufficient, he shall at once submit it to the city council with his certificate to that effect, and shall notify the member whose removal is sought of such action. 
    If the member whose removal is sought does not resign within five (5) days after such notice, the city council shall thereupon order and fix a day for holding a recall election. Any such election shall be held at the next uniform election day as specified by state law. 
(Ord. No. 14-2006, § 2, 2-21-2006, ref. 5-13-2006) 
Sec. 29. - Multiple recall. 
    The question of recalling any number of members of the city council may be submitted at the same election, but as to each member whose removal is sought a separate petition shall be filed and there shall be an entirely separate ballot. 
Sec. 30. - The recall ballot. 
    The ballots used in a recall election shall submit the two following propositions in the order indicated: 
    "For the recall of (name of mayor or councilor)." 
    "Against the recall of (name of mayor or councilor)." 
Except as provided in this section, ballots used in a recall election shall comply with the provisions of this Charter regarding ballots for a regular municipal election. 
Sec. 31. - Council action on recall election. 
    If a majority of the votes cast on the question of recalling the mayor or a councilor be against his recall he shall continue in office for the remainder of his unexpired term, but subject to recall as before. If a majority of such votes be for the recall of the officer designated on the ballot he shall, regardless of any defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office. When the mayor or a councilor is removed from office by the recall, the place thus made vacant shall be filled as hereinbefore provided for filling vacancies arising from other causes. 
Sec. 32. - Resignation pending recall. 
    If the mayor or a councilor in regard to whom sufficient recall petition is submitted to the city council shall resign within five (5) days after notice thereof, the place thus made vacant on the city council shall be filled by the appointment of some eligible person by a majority vote of the remaining members, as hereinbefore provided for filling vacancies arising from other causes. 
Sec. 33. - Limitation on recall. 
    No recall petition shall be filed against the mayor or a councilor within three (3) months after he takes office. A mayor or councilor may be subject to only one recall election during a term of office. 
(Ord. No. 14-2006, § 2, 2-21-2006, ref. 5-13-2006) 
PROCEDURE OF THE CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 34. - Meetings of the council. 
    At the next regular or special meeting following the regular municipal election, the city council shall meet at the usual place for holding such meetings at which time the first order of business shall be the canvassing of votes and swearing in of new members. 
    Thereafter the city council shall meet at such time and place as may be prescribed by ordinance, but not less frequently than once each month. Special meetings may be called by the mayor and shall be called by the city clerk upon the written request of three (3) councilors or the city manager. 
    All meetings of the city council, and of committees thereof except as hereinafter provided, shall be open to the public and the city council shall provide by its rules that citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard at any such meeting in regard to any matter considered, or to be considered, thereat. 
    Executive session of the city council may be held in accordance with state law. 
    The city council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its members, subject to review by the courts, but any councilor convicted of a felony while in office shall thereby immediately forfeit his office. The city council may determine its own rules of procedure, punish its members for disorderly behavior and, with the consent of five-sevenths ( 5/7 ) of all the members, may expel a council member. 
    A majority of all the members elected to the city council shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 14-2006, § 2, 2-21-2006, ref. 5-13-2006) 
State Law reference- Open Meetings Act, Texas Government Code § 551.001 et seq. 
Sec. 35. - The mayor. 
    The mayor shall have all the powers and shall be subject to all the duties conferred on or required of other members of the city council by this Charter. He shall preside at meetings of the city council and perform such other duties consistent with his office as may be imposed thereby. 
    He shall be recognized as the official head of the city for all ceremonial purposes, by the courts for the purposes of serving civil processes, and by the Governor for military purposes. 
    In time of public danger or emergency, he may, with the consent of the city council, take command of the police, maintain order and enforce laws. 
    During the absence or disability of the mayor, the mayor's duties shall be performed by the Mayor Pro-Tem, who shall be a councilor appointed by the city council, following each year's election. 
Sec. 36. - The city clerk. 
    The city council shall choose a city clerk who shall also be clerk of the city council. The city clerk shall perform the duties imposed upon him by this Charter and such other duties not inconsistent therewith, as may be imposed by the city council. 
Sec. 37. - Ordinances and resolutions. 
    Each proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in written or printed form and except ordinances or resolutions making appropriations shall not contain more than one subject which shall be clearly expressed in the title. 
    The vote upon the passage of all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by "yeas" and "nays" and entered upon the minutes of the city council and every such ordinance or resolution shall require for passage the affirmative vote of a majority of all the members of the city council. No council member shall be excused from voting except on matters involving the consideration of his own official conduct, or where his financial interests are involved. 
    Upon the passage of any ordinance prescribing a penalty for the violation thereof, there shall be published at least one time in the official newspaper of the city a descriptive caption or title stating in summary the purpose of the ordinance and the penalty for violation thereof. 
    As soon as practical after the close of each fiscal year all ordinances passed during the previous year shall be compiled by the city clerk and printed in such form as may be directed by the city council. 
State Law reference- Publication of ordinances, Texas Local Government Code § 52.013. 
Sec. 38. - Mayor and councilor salaries. 
    The city council may, by ordinance, provide for the compensation of its members to be paid in equal monthly installments. The salary of the mayor shall in no event exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per month, and the salary of each council member shall in no event exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month. 
    The mayor or any council member absent from a regular or regularly called meeting of the city council, except on account of his own illness, or illness in his immediate family, or absence from the city where excused by the city council prior to such absence, shall forfeit two percent (2%) of his entire annual compensation for each such absence. 
(Ord. No. 14-2006, § 2, 2-21-2006, ref. 5-13-2006) 
Sec. 39. - Initiative. 
    The electors shall have power at their option to propose ordinances and resolutions, including ordinances granting franchises and privileges, and to adopt the same at the polls, such power being known as the initiative. 
    A petition meeting the requirements hereinafter provided and requesting the city council to pass an ordinance or resolution therein set forth shall be termed an initiative petition and shall be acted upon as hereinafter provided. 
    The term "measure" as used in this Charter shall include the terms "ordinance" and "resolution." 
Sec. 40. - The initiative petition. 
    Signatures to initiative petitions need not all be on one paper, but the circulator of each such paper shall make an affidavit that the signatures appended thereto were made in his/her presence and are the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be. 
    For a petition signature to be valid, a petition must contain, in addition to the signature, the signer's printed name as it appears on his/her voter registration card, the signer's voter registration number, his/her residence address by street and number, and if there is no street number, such other description sufficient to identify the place and the date of the signing. The signature is the only information that is required to appear on the petition in the signer's own handwriting. 
    All such petition papers pertaining to any one measure shall have written or printed thereon the names and addresses of at least five (5) electors who shall be officially regarded as filing the petition, and who shall constitute a committee of the petitioners for the purposes hereinafter named. All petition papers relating to the same measure shall be assembled and filed in the office of the city clerk as one instrument. 
    If this section is in conflict with any state law, such state law shall prevail. 
Sec. 41. - Certification of initiative petition. 
    An initiative petition to be sufficient shall be signed by registered voters of the city in a number equal to or greater than ten (10) percent of those who voted in the last preceding regular municipal election, and in no case by less than three thousand (3,000) voters. 
    Within forty-five (45) days after the filing of a petition, the clerk shall ascertain whether it is signed as provided in this section, and shall attach thereto a certificate showing the result of his examination. 
    If, by the clerk's certificate, of which notice in writing shall be given to the committee of the petitioners, the petition is shown to be insufficient, it may be amended within fifteen (15) days of the date of such certificate by filing supplementary petition papers with additional signatures. Within thirty (30) days after such an amendment, the clerk shall make an examination of the amended petition, and if his certificate shall show the same still to be insufficient, he shall file the petition in his office and notify each member of the committee of that fact. 
    The final finding of the insufficiency of a petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
    If this section is in conflict with any state law, such state law shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 14-2006, § 2, 2-21-2006, ref. 5-13-2006) 
Sec. 42. - Council action on initiative. 
    If an initiative petition be found sufficient, the clerk shall so certify and shall submit the measure to the city council at its next meeting, and the city council shall at once read and refer it to an appropriate committee, which may be a committee of the whole. Provisions shall be made for public hearings upon the proposed measure before the committee to which it is referred. 
    Thereafter the committee shall report the measure to the city council, with its recommendation thereon, not later than sixty (60) days after the date upon which such measure was submitted to the board by the city clerk. Upon receiving the measure from the committee the city council shall at once proceed to consider it and shall take final action thereon within thirty (30) days from the date of such committee report. 
Sec. 43. - Council refusal or modification of initiative. 
    If the city council shall fail to pass a proposed measure, or shall pass it in a form different from that set forth in the petition therefor, the committee of the petitioners may require that it be submitted to a vote of the electors either in its original form or with any change or addition presented in writing at a public hearing before the committee to which it was referred, or during its consideration by the city council. 
    If the committee of the petitioners require the submission of the measure to a vote of the electors they shall certify that fact to the clerk and file in his office a certified copy of the measure, in the form in which it is to be submitted, within ten (10) days after final action on such measure by the city council. 
Sec. 44. - Initiative election. 
    Upon receiving the certificate and certified copy of the proposed measure, as provided in the foregoing section, the city clerk shall certify the fact to the city council at its next regular meeting. 
    The city council shall forthwith call an election on the measure at the earliest date authorized by the Texas election laws. 
    Any such measure approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon shall be considered adopted and shall take effect at the time indicated therein. 
Sec. 45. - Abeyance of council action. 
    When a measure proposed by initiative petition is passed by the city council, but not in its original form, and is required by the committee of the petitioners to be submitted to a vote of the electors, the measure as passed by the city council shall not take effect until after such vote, and, if the measure so submitted be approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon, the measure as passed by the city council shall be deemed repealed. 
Sec. 46. - Referendum. 
    The electors shall have power at their option to approve or reject at the polls any ordinance or resolution passed by the city council or submitted by such city council to a vote of the electors, such power being known as the referendum; provided, however, that such right of referendum shall not apply to ordinances or resolutions passed by the city council authorizing the issuance of bonds theretofore voted by the resident qualified property taxpaying voters of the city. 
    Measures submitted to the city council by initiative petition and passed by the city council without change or passed in an amended form and not required by the committee of petitioners to be submitted to a vote of the electors shall be subject to the referendum in the same manner as other measures. 
Sec. 47. - Limitations on referendum. 
    No ordinance shall go into effect until thirty (30) days after its passage by the city council except ordinances authorizing the issuance of bonds theretofore voted by the resident qualified property taxpaying voters of the city, unless it be declared an emergency measure on the ground of urgent public need for the preservation of the peace, health and safety of property of the city, the facts showing such emergency and need being stated specifically in the ordinance itself, and the ordinance being passed by a vote of a majority of all members of the city council. 
    No ordinance granting or amending any public utility franchise or amending or repealing any measure adopted by the electors at the polls or adopted by the city council in compliance with an initiative petition shall be regarded as an emergency measure. 
Sec. 48. - Ordinance abatement on filing of referendum petition. 
    If within thirty (30) days after the passage of a measure by the city council a petition signed by the registered, qualified voters of the city in a number equal to or greater than ten percent (10%) of those who voted in the last preceding regular election and in no case by less than three thousand (3,000) voters be filed with the city clerk requesting that such measure or any part thereof be either repealed or submitted to a vote of the electors, it shall not, unless it be an emergency measure, become operative until the steps indicated herein have been taken. Provided that this section shall not apply to ordinances passed by the city council authorizing the issuance of bonds therefore voted by the qualified voters of the city. 
    If this section is in conflict with any state law, such state law shall prevail. 
Sec. 49. - The referendum petition. 
    The signatures to a referendum petition need not all be on one (1) paper, but the circulator of each separate paper shall make affidavit that the signatures appended thereto were made in his/her presence and are the genuine signatures of the person whose name they purport to be. 
    For a petition signature to be valid, a petition must contain, in addition to the signature, the signer's printed name as it appears on his/her voter registration card, the signer's voter registration number, his/her residence address by street and number, and if there is no street number, such other description sufficient to identify the place and the date of the signing. The signature is the only information that is required to appear on the petition in the signer's own handwriting. 
    All such petition papers pertaining to any one measure shall have written or printed thereon the names and addresses of at least five (5) electors who shall be officially regarded as filing the petition, and who shall constitute a committee of the petitioners for the purposes hereinafter named. All petition papers relating to the same measure shall be assembled and filed in the office of the city clerk as one instrument. 
    If this section is in conflict with any state law, such state law shall prevail. 
Sec. 50. - City clerk to review referendum petition. 
    Within forty-five (45) days after the filing of a referendum petition, the city clerk shall ascertain whether it is signed as provided in section 48 of this Charter and shall attach to the petition a certificate showing the result of such examination, and shall give notice thereof to the committee of the petitioners. 
    If by the city clerk's certificate the petition is shown to be insufficient, it may be amended within fifteen (15) days from the date of such certificate by filing supplementary petition papers with additional signatures. The city clerk shall, within thirty (30) days after such an amendment, make a like examination of the amended petition and certify the result thereof. 
(Ord. No. 14-2006, § 2, 2-21-2006, ref. 5-13-2006) 
Sec. 51. - Certification of referendum petition. 
    If a referendum petition, or amended petition, be found sufficient that city clerk shall certify that fact to the city council at its next regular meeting, and unless the measure or part thereof specified in the petition be an emergency measure it shall not go into effect unless approved by the electors as hereinafter provided. 
    Upon receipt of the city clerk's certificate of sufficiency the city council shall proceed to reconsider the measure and its final vote upon such reconsideration shall be upon the question "shall the measure, (or part of the measure) as specified in the referendum petition, be repealed?" If upon such reconsideration the measure, or part thereof, be not repealed it shall be submitted to the electors at the next municipal election held not less than thirty (30) days after such final vote by the board. 
    The city council by a four-fifths ( 4/5 ) vote of its members may submit the measure to the electors at a special election to be held not sooner than the time aforesaid. If when submitted to the electors any such measure, or part thereof, be not approved by a majority of those voting thereon it shall be deemed repealed. 
Sec. 52. - The referendum ballot form. 
    Measures proposed by initiative petition, or required by referendum petition or by the city council to be submitted to the electors, shall be submitted by ballot title. 
    There shall appear upon the official ballot a ballot title, which may be distinct from the legal title of any such proposed or referred measure, and which shall be a clear, concise statement, without argument or prejudice, descriptive of the substance of such measure. 
    The ballot title shall be prepared by the committee of the petitioners if for an initiative or referred measure, and by a committee of the city council when submitted by such city council. The ballots used when voting upon any such measure shall have below the ballot title thereof the two (2) propositions in order herein indicated: "For the Measure" and "Against the Measure." 
Sec. 53. - The referendum ballot issues. 
    Any number of measures may be voted on at the same election and may be submitted on the same ballot, but the ballot used for voting on measures shall be for that purpose only. 
Sec. 54. - Referendum of emergency measures. 
    Measures passed as emergency measures other than ordinances authorizing the issuance of bonds shall be subject to referendum but they shall not be suspended from going into operation while referendum proceedings are pending. 
    If when submitted to a vote of the electors, such emergency measure be not approved by a majority of those voting thereon, it shall be considered repealed and any further action thereunder and all rights and privileges conferred by it shall thereafter be null and void; but any such measure so repealed shall be deemed sufficient authority for any payments made or any indebtedness incurred in accordance therewith prior to the vote thereon. 
Sec. 55. - Conflicting referendum measures. 
    If two or more measures adopted or approved at the same election conflict in respect to any of their provisions they shall go into effect in respect of such of their provisions as are not in conflict, and the one receiving the highest affirmative vote shall prevail insofar as their provisions conflict. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, measures adopted or approved by the electors shall be subject to amendment or repeal by the city council as in the case of measures. 
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE 

Sec. 56. - City manager. 
    The city council shall appoint a city manager who shall have the powers and perform the duties herein conferred on and required of the city manager by this Charter. 
Sec. 57. - City manager appointment and dismissal. 
    The city manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, and need not, when appointed be an inhabitant of the city or state. 
    The city manager shall not be appointed for a definite term, but shall be removable at the pleasure of the city council. If removed at any time after he has served six (6) months he may demand written charges and the right to be heard thereon at a public meeting of the city council prior to the date on which his final removal shall take effect, but pending and during such hearing the city council may suspend him from office. The action of the city council in suspending or removing the city manager shall be final, it being the intention of this charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility for any such suspension or removal wholly in the city council. 
    In case of the absence or disability of the manager, the city council shall designate some qualified person to perform the duties of the office. The city manager shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the city council. 
Sec. 58. - City manager's authority. 
    The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city placed in his charge and to that end shall appoint all officers and employees of the city except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
    Neither the city council nor any of its committees or members shall dictate the appointment of any person to office or employment by the city manager or in any manner interfere with him or prevent him from exercising his own judgment in the appointment of officers and employees in the administrative service. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the city council and its members shall deal with that part of the administrative service for which the city manager is responsible solely through such city manager, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately. 
Sec. 59. - City manager service to the council. 
    Except when his removal is being considered, the city manager shall have the right to be present at all meetings of the city council and of its committees and to take part in their discussions. He shall prepare and submit the annual budget estimate and may make such other recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as may seem to him desirable. 
Sec. 60. - Administrative code. 
    There shall be a department of law, a department of finance, a department of health, and such other departments and offices as may be established by ordinance. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council shall by ordinance prescribe and define the functions of all departments and offices and may abolish any department or office established by ordinance or transfer its duties in whole or in part to any other department or office. In establishing departments and offices, providing for their organization and defining and distributing their functions, the city council shall pass a general ordinance with the title "An ordinance to establish an administrative code." After the passage of such ordinance, which shall thereafter be known as "The Administrative Code," all subsequent changes made by the city council in the number, functions and organization of departments and offices, shall be in the form of amendments or additions thereto. The purpose of the foregoing requirements is that the city council shall provide a comprehensive and systematic plan of administrative organization for the city, and that all facts of the city council relating thereto may be found in one ordinance. 
    The city clerk shall prepare and keep constantly revised at least three copies of the administrative code. One such copy shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, one shall be for the use of the city manager and one for the city attorney. The administrative code shall be printed in pamphlet form immediately upon its passage, and it shall be reprinted in revised form at least once every two (2) years if changes have been made therein since it was last printed. The copy of the administrative code for printing, as herein provided, shall be prepared under the direction of the city attorney. 
Sec. 61. - Department directors and officers. 
    A city attorney and a city clerk shall be appointed by the city council, without definite term, and may be removed at the pleasure of such council. Each shall appoint, and may remove, such assistants and subordinates as the city council may authorize each to employ. 
    All other directors and heads of departments and officers shall be appointed by the city manager on the basis of executive and administrative ability, and education, training and experience in the work which they are to administer. All such officers shall be immediately responsible to the city manager, and may be removed by him at any time. In the case of the removal, if the officer so demands, a written statement shall be made by the city manager of the reasons therefor, and the officer shall be given a public hearing by the city manager before the order of removal is made final. The statement of the city manager and the written reply of the officer thereto shall be filed as a public record in the office of the city clerk. 
    All other employees of the city, unless otherwise provided herein, shall be appointed by, or under the direction and supervision of the city manager, who shall have authority to discharge any such employee with or without cause at any time. 
Sec. 62. - Employment preferences. 
    In making appointments the city manager shall give preference to [the] citizens of Wichita Falls, provided any citizen thus considered is qualified by education, training, or experience to perform the duties of the position to which he/she, is to be appointed. The city manager shall have the authority to determine the qualifications of all such appointees. 
Sec. 63. - Investigation of internal affairs. 
    The city council, city manager, and any officer or committee authorized by either of them, shall have the power to make investigations as to city affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the production of books and papers, and it shall be the duty of the city manager to designate a police officer to serve such subpoena. 
Sec. 64. - Department of law-city attorney. 
    The city attorney shall have practiced as an attorney at law for at least two (2) years in the State of Texas. He shall be chief legal advisor of, and attorney for the city. 
    He shall attend all meetings of the city council, and when so requested, shall give advice in writing to the city council, the city clerk, the city assessor and collector and all other officers of said city and the city manager. He shall prosecute or defend, as the case may be, all suits or cases to which the city is a party. He shall attend sessions of the municipal court, either in person or by deputy, and prosecute all persons charged with offenses therein. He shall approve the form of all official bonds, and of all contracts to which the city is a party, and render such other professional legal service as may be required by the city council. 
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Financial matters, Texas Local Government Code § 101.001. 

Sec. 65. - Department of finance. 
    The city manager shall have the power to appoint a director of finance to have supervision over the department of finances and to administer the financial affairs of the city, including the levy, assessment and collection of taxes, or other revenues, and the custody and disbursement of city funds and money. 
Sec. 66. - Director of finance. 
    The director of finance shall keep accounts showing the financial transactions for all city departments, divisions and offices. 
    Forms for such accounts shall be prescribed by the director of finance and shall be adequate to record all cash receipts and disbursements, all revenues accrued and liabilities incurred, and all transactions affecting the acquisition, custody and disposition of values, and to make such reports of the financial condition and transactions of the city as may be required by the city manager or city council. 
Sec. 67. - Submission of annual budget. 
    Prior to the end of each fiscal year the city manager shall prepare and submit to the city council a budget of the expenditures and revenues of all city departments, divisions, and offices for the next ensuing fiscal year. In the preparation and submission of such budget the city manager shall be governed by the general laws of the State of Texas, relating to the preparation and submission of budgets by cities and towns of the State. 
    The city council shall provide a reasonable number of copies of the budget for distribution to citizens who may request copies thereof. Copies shall be furnished to the newspapers of the city and to each public library of the city. 
Sec. 68. - Council action on budget. 
    Upon receipt of the budget estimate the city council shall prepare an appropriation ordinance using the manager's estimate as a basis. Provision shall be made for public hearings on the proposed appropriations ordinance before the city council sitting as a committee of the whole. 
State Law reference- Budgets, Texas Local Government Code § 102.001 et seq. 
Sec. 69. - Annual appropriation ordinance. 
    Before the annual appropriation ordinance has been passed the city council may make appropriations for current expenses of the city, chargeable to the appropriations of the year when passed to an amount sufficient to cover the necessary expenses of various departments, divisions and offices until the annual appropriation ordinance is in force. 
    No other liabilities shall be incurred by any officer or employee of the city, except in accordance with the provisions of the annual appropriation ordinance, or under continuing contracts and loans authorized under the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 70. - Transfer of unencumbered balances. 
    The city council may transfer any part of an unencumbered balance of an appropriation to a purpose or object for which the appropriation for the current year has proved insufficient or may authorize a transfer to be made between items appropriated to the same office, department or divisions, where not in contravention of the constitution and laws of this State or other provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 71. - Non-appropriated revenues. 
    Any accruing revenue of the city, not appropriated as hereinbefore provided and any balance at any time remaining after the purposes of the appropriation shall have been satisfied or abandoned, may from time to time be appropriated by the city council to such uses as will not conflict with any uses for which specifically such revenues accrued, and where not in conflict with the constitution and laws of this State, or other provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 72. - Unauthorized expenditures. 
    No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except pursuant to appropriations made by the city council. 
    At the close of each fiscal year the unencumbered balance of each appropriation shall revert to the fund from which it was appropriated and shall be subject to future appropriations; but appropriations may be made in furtherance of improvements or other objects or works of the city which will not be completed within the current year. 
Sec. 73. - Ordinance to levy taxes. 
    Not later than one (1) week after the passage of the appropriation ordinance the city council shall by ordinance levy such taxes as may be necessary to meet the appropriations made (less the estimated amount of revenue from other sources), and to provide all sums required by this Charter to be raised on account of the bonded indebtedness of the city and for all other purposes. In fixing such tax rate the city council shall designate what portion of the total is for such bonded indebtedness, and shall also designate what portions of the total are levied for other specific purposes. 
    The portion of the tax rate designated for the city's bonded indebtedness shall be adequate to provide sufficient revenue to meet the requirements of interest and provide the necessary sinking fund to pay the principal of such bonds at maturity. 
    Any tax payer of the city or holder of any bonds of said city may file suit in the district court of Wichita County to enforce the foregoing requirements, and, if upon such suit, it be found that the portion of the tax rate for the bonded indebtedness is inadequate the court shall order and fix an adequate rate as hereinbefore provided. If in any year the revenue from taxation shall be inadequate to meet the requirements of interest and provide the necessary sinking fund of such bonded indebtedness for such year, the city council shall by revision of its appropriations for general city purposes provide sufficient funds to meet any such deficiency, and any taxpayer or holder of any of its bonds may file suit in the court above mentioned to compel the city council to carry out this requirement. 
AUTHORIZED TAXATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Taxation, Texas Tax Code § 1.01 et seq. 

Sec. 74. - Ad valorem taxes. 
    The city council shall have the power and is hereby authorized to assess, levy and collect ad valorem taxes on each one hundred dollars ($100.00) of assessed valuation of property situated in the city not exempt from taxation by the Constitution and the laws of the State of Texas, in the amounts and for the purposes as follows: 
(a)  To pay the general governmental operation expenses of the city for general improvements of the city and its property, including a public library, roads, bridges, streets, public parks, cemeteries, and other governmental purposes authorized by state law. 
(b)  To pay the principal of and interest on bonds of the city hereto authorized, and hereafter authorized, by the qualified voters of the city, or as otherwise authorized by state law. 
Providing that the total amount of ad valorem taxes thus authorized to be levied shall never exceed in any one year two dollars and twenty-five cents ($2.25) on the one hundred dollars ($100.00) of assessed value of property situated in the city not exempt from taxation by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
State Law reference- Property taxation, Texas Tax Code § 1.01 et seq. 
Sec. 75. - Borrowing of money. 
    The city council shall have the authority by ordinance to borrow money on the credit of the city and issue bonds therefor for permanent improvements and for any other lawful municipal purpose, including the purchase of fire fighting equipment, as may be determined by the city council, providing that no bonds shall be authorized unless the proposition for the issuance thereof has been approved by the majority of the qualified voters of the city voting at an election held for said purpose. Such election shall be ordered by the city council and notice thereof shall be given in the manner and for the length of time provided by the general laws of Texas applicable to cities and towns. Except as otherwise provided by laws relating to the issuance of bonds by cities and towns such election shall be held and conducted in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas governing general elections. The foregoing provisions requiring an election on the proposition for the issuance of bonds shall not apply to funding or refunding bonds issued or to be issued for the purpose of funding or refunding any valid indebtedness or any valid outstanding bonds of the City of Wichita Falls provided that such refunding bonds shall not bear interest at a rate exceeding the rate borne by the bonds thus refunded. All such bonds shall be issued in the manner provided by the general laws of Texas applicable to cities and towns. 
    The city council is authorized to issue, by ordinance, such other bonds and obligations for municipal purposes as are authorized by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, subject to the procedures and limitations established thereby. 
State Law reference- Authority to issue bonds, Texas Ann. Civ. St. arts. 701 et seq., 823 et seq.; authority to issue bonds for public improvements, Texas Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175(1). 
Sec. 76. - Restriction of funds. 
    Whenever the city council, in fixing the general tax rate for the city, shall designate any portion of such rate to be levied for a specific purpose, a corresponding part of the revenue of the city derived from such general tax shall be set aside as a fund to be used only for the purpose so specified. No payments shall be made out of such special funds except for the satisfaction of the purpose for which it was established; but any such fund created for the payment of principal or interest of the bonded indebtedness of the city may be invested in any valid interest-paying bonds of the City of Wichita Falls, the United States, the State of Texas or in any legally issued bonds of any county, city or school district in Texas, as the city council may determine. 
    When so invested the bonds purchased and the interest thereon shall be held in trust for the particular fund from which the money was taken and shall not be sold or otherwise used except for the benefit of such fund. 
    Any balance remaining in any such special fund, after the purpose for which it shall have been created has been satisfied or abandoned, shall revert to the general fund of the city and shall be subject to appropriation by the city council for other municipal purposes. 
ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF TAXES 

Sec. 77. - Property tax appraisals. 
    The mode and manner of making out tax list inventories and appraisals of property for taxation purposes shall be in accordance with state law. 
Sec. 78. - Reserved. 
    (Repealed by Charter Amend. of 4-2-1983) 
Sec. 79. - Delinquent tax seizures. 
    The city council shall have full power and authority to provide by ordinance for the seizure and sale of a sufficient amount of personal property of any delinquent taxpayer to pay all taxes due on said personal property by said delinquent to the city, together with all interest, penalties and costs, which seizure and sale shall be made without necessity of any writ, and by virtue of the tax rolls of said city, which shall be sufficient warrant for said purpose, and such sale shall be conducted and notice given in the same manner now provided by law for the sale of personal property, and at such sale the purchaser shall acquire absolute title to the property sold. 
ADVERTISEMENT AND SALE OF PROPERTY DELINQUENT TAXES 

Sec. 80. - Sale of delinquent tax seizures. 
    The city council shall have full power and authority to pass all ordinances necessary to regulate advertisements and sales, by the assessor and collector, of personal property upon which taxes may be unpaid, and to provide for the perpetuation of all proceedings with reference to such advertisements and sale; and to pass all ordinances necessary to enforce the collection of such taxes. 
TAXES WHEN DUE AND PAYABLE INTEREST AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 81. - The payment of taxes. 
    All taxes due the City of Wichita Falls shall be payable in accordance with, and as permitted by, the applicable provisions of the Texas tax laws, as to the dates of payment, interest rates, collection fees, creation of tax liens, and other applicable procedures. 
PROPERTY OF RAILROAD COMPANIES 

Sec. 82. - Assessment of railroad property. 
    All property of railroad companies of whatever description lying and being within the City of Wichita Falls on the first day of January of each year shall bear its proportionate share of municipal taxation, and, if any such property shall not have been heretofore rendered for taxation for any year, the same shall be assessed and taxes collected thereon in the same manner as herein provided for other unrendered property of previous years. 
Sec. 83. - Tax liens. 
    The annual assessment of taxes made by the City of Wichita Falls upon landed property shall be a special lien thereon, and all property, both real and personal, belonging to any delinquent taxpayer shall be liable to seizure and sale for the payment of all taxes and penalties due by such delinquent; provided that the homestead of such delinquent shall only be liable for the taxes due thereon. 
    All real property in the City of Wichita Falls on the first day of January of each year and subject to taxation by said city, shall stand charged with a special lien in favor of the city for all taxes levied against the owner thereof during the year, superior to all mortgages and other liens thereupon, except the liens for the state and county taxes, and all persons purchasing the same after the first day of January of any year shall take the same subject to such lien, and the city may intervene in any suit for the foreclosure of any other lien and assert its right or may institute an independent suit and make all mortgages and lien holders and subsequent purchasers parties for the purpose of enforcing its lien, or recovering personal judgment for its taxes; and the said city shall be authorized and it is hereby made the duty of the city assessor and collector to file the proper statement of the taxes in any court of bankruptcy administering the estate of any bankrupt taxpayer. 
    In all cases where a taxpayer makes an assignment of his property for the payment of his debts, or where his property is levied upon by creditors by writs of attachment or otherwise, or where the estate of a decedent has become insolvent and the taxes assessed against such in whole, the amount of such unpaid taxes shall be a first lien upon all such property; provided that when taxes are due upon the estate of the deceased person the lien herein provided for shall be subject to the allowances to widows and minors, funeral expenses and expenses of last sickness, and such unpaid taxes shall be paid by the assignee when said property has been assigned, by the sheriff out of the proceeds of sale in case such property has been seized by attachment or other writ, and by the administrator or other legal representative of decedents, and if said taxes shall not be paid, all said property may be levied on by tax collector and sold for such taxes in whomsoever's hands it may be found. 
PERSONAL PROPERTY REMOVAL PROCEDURE 

Sec. 84. - Removal of taxable property. 
    If it comes to the knowledge of the city assessor and collector at any time after the levy of taxes for the year that any personal property subject to taxation in the city is about to be removed from the city, and the owner of such property has no other tangible property in the city sufficient to satisfy all assessments against him, the assessor and collector shall, if said property has not been assessed, proceed at once to assess the same and he shall thereupon levy upon a sufficiency of such property to satisfy such taxes and all costs and sell the same as provided in the preceding section; and the ordinance levying taxes for the year and the assessment made upon such property shall be sufficient warrant for so doing and to vest title in the purchaser. 
Sec. 85. - Tax foreclosure, sale and redemption. 
    The City of Wichita Falls shall be authorized and it is hereby given the right to institute suit in any court in Wichita County having jurisdiction under the constitution and laws of the state at any time after taxes become due and are delinquent as herein provided, and recover personal judgment for the amount of taxes remaining unpaid by any person, firm or corporation, together with all interest, penalties and costs, and if any part of such delinquent tax shall be due upon any landed property, the city shall have the right in the same or any subsequent writ to have its lien thereon foreclosed and such property sold as provided by law for the foreclosure and sale of property under mortgage or other liens; provided that in all cases where the lands are sold, the owner shall have the right of redemption as may be specified by the Texas tax laws, and failing to do so, the title of the purchaser shall become absolute without further act or proceeding. 
Sec. 86. - Process and notice in nonresident tax suits. 
    In all suits for the foreclosure of a lien upon lands or lots by the city, if the defendants or any of them be alleged to reside in any county of the State of Texas, service shall be had as required by law in civil suits. And if the defendants or any of them be alleged to be nonresidents, or if the residences of such defendants are unknown, or the owner or owners of said land or lots are unknown and the city tax assessor and collector or city attorney shall make oath to that effect at the time of filing the petition, or at any time subsequent thereto, then citation shall issue and service shall be had as is now required by law in suit for the collection of state and county taxes in like cases. 
Sec. 87. - Procedure in nonresident tax suits. 
    In case the service of citation provided in the preceding section be by publication the case shall stand for trial at the time and manner now provided by the Statutes of this State in similar cases. The suit shall be held in all respects to be a proceeding in rem, and the court shall hear proof and render judgment in favor of the City of Wichita Falls against each parcel of land for the amount of tax, interest, penalty and costs legally chargeable against the same, and shall foreclose the lien of the city thereon and condemn the land to be sold under execution for the purpose of satisfying such judgment, provided that for the purpose of foreclosing the lien of the city on all lands and lots where the owners thereof are alleged to be unknown, it shall not be necessary to institute a separate suit against each piece of property, and all such property may be embraced in one suit and judgment entered against each parcel and condemning the same to be sold as aforesaid; and provided further, that in all cases where lands are sold under judgment based upon service by publication, the owner shall have the right of redemption as may be specified by the Texas tax laws, and upon failure to do so the title of the purchaser shall become absolute without further act or proceeding. 
    The privilege of redemption herein given shall constitute a part of the judgment and deed made to the purchaser in such case and need not be inserted therein. In such sales each lot or parcel of land shall be sold separately and the purchase price shall be stated in the deed. 
TAX SUITS PROCEDURE 

Sec. 88. - Property description in tax suits. 
    It shall be competent in all cases to supplement the description contained in the assessment rolls with full proof of the identity of the whole tract or parcel of land therein assessed, and in suits to enforce collection of taxes by the city, such additional matters may be inserted in the petition and reference may be made to any map, plat or survey of said city or any addition or subdivision made thereto or to any deed or decree or other instrument describing the same, which shall be on file or of record in the General Land Office of Texas or in the office of the District or County Clerk of Wichita County, and such reference shall constitute part of such petition and all proceedings had in said suit. 
Sec. 89. - Evidence requirements in tax suits. 
    In all suits for the collection of taxes which have been heretofore or which may hereafter be levied upon the tax rolls of said city a certified statement made therefrom by the assessor and collector shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all recitation and facts shown by said rolls and shall be held to be sufficient proof (subject to rebuttal only by pleading and proof by defendant) of the following facts, viz: 
(a)  That the person, firm or corporation therein shown to be a taxpayer was such and owned the property therein listed, and that such property was subject to taxation in said city and was rendered by such person, firm or corporation or by his or its agent at the value placed thereon in such rolls, or was unrendered and placed on the unrendered rolls. 
(b)  That the taxes due upon such property were duly and legally levied for the purpose shown in such rolls and that the same are valid and unpaid. 
(c)  That all acts and proceedings required by law or by ordinance of said city in the manner for rendering, appraising and fixing the values upon said property and the giving of all notices to such taxpayers have each and all been performed and complied with at the time and in the manner and form required and that all things that might be construed as conditions precedent to the lawful demand upon such taxpayers to pay the amount of taxes in such rolls shown to be due by him or them have been performed at the time and in the manner required by law, provided that in the event that defendant shall show that his property was voluntarily rendered by him, and that the valuation of the same was subsequently changed by the assessor or board of equalization without notice to him or his agent, or shall show that the said rate of taxation for any purpose was to any extent illegal, judgment shall thereupon be rendered against him for the proper amount due based upon the value of his property as rendered by him and the amount of tax which is found to be legal. 
Sec. 90. - Court costs in tax suits. 
    In all suits for the collection of taxes the costs of such proceedings shall be collected in the same manner provided by law for the collection of costs in suits for taxes by the state and county. 
Sec. 91. - Tax sales purchases. 
    When any property, real or personal, is sold to enforce the collection of taxes the City of Wichita Falls shall not become the purchaser thereof unless no one else is present who will purchase the same and pay the full amount due the city, including all costs and penalties, and it is hereby made the duty of the city attorney or the person acting as such to attend all sales and bid therefor for the city, and upon such sale the officer making the same shall execute to the city or other purchaser proper evidence of the title and place the purchaser of personal property in possession thereof. 
Sec. 92. - Assessment of taxes-supplemental. 
    If the city assessor and collector shall discover any property, real or personal, which was subject to taxation for any year heretofore and which from any cause had escaped taxation, he shall require the same to be listed and assessed according to the rate of taxation levied for the year or years it was omitted and enter the same as a supplement to his next roll, stating the year, and the taxes thereon shall be collected in the same manner as other assessments; providing that such supplemental rolls shall be due at once upon the approval of such rolls by the city council, and if not paid within sixty (60) days thereafter shall bear a penalty and interest as authorized by the Texas tax laws, and may be collected by seizure and sale or suit as herein provided for the collection of other taxes. 
Sec. 93. - Unrendered property-unknown owners. 
    The city assessor shall list all property which for any cause has not been rendered to him for taxation in such form as may be prescribed by the city council, such valuation thereon as he may deem just, provided same shall not be higher than rendered property of like character. If the owners of such property are unknown to the assessor he shall so state, and such assessments shall be sufficient warrant for the collection of taxes due upon said property by seizure and sale or suit as herein provided for the collection of taxes or other property. 
Sec. 94. - Statute of limitations-irregularities. 
    No taxes due the City of Wichita Falls shall ever be held to be barred by any statute of limitation and no irregularities in the time and manner of making the annual levy of taxes or in making any inventory, list or appraisement, or in making or returning the city assessment rolls or the approval thereof shall ever be held to invalidate any assessment, and all taxes heretofore levied by the city council of said city and which are unpaid, are hereby continued in force and may be collected by seizure and sale of the property of the person owning the same or by suit as herein provided. 
Sec. 95. - Property subject to taxation. 
    All property, real or personal or mixed, made taxable by the laws of the State of Texas, which is situated in the City of Wichita Falls on the first day of January of each year, and all personal property owned and controlled by persons residing herein and taxable by law at the place where the owner or agent in charge may reside, shall be subject to taxation by said city for all purposes provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 96. - Occupation tax. 
    The city council shall have the power to levy and collect an annual occupation tax on all occupations, callings, business and professions in the amount and to the extent now and hereafter permitted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and shall provide by ordinance means for enforcing the collection of such tax. No personal tax or poll tax shall ever be levied. 
State Law reference- Occupation tax, Texas Tax Code §§ 301.004, 302.101. 
Sec. 97. - Application of other laws. 
    All laws and parts of laws now in force providing for the levy and collection of taxes not in conflict with this Charter relating to the City of Wichita Falls are hereby continued in full force and effect. 
State Law reference- Local taxes authorized, Texas Tax Code § 301.001 et seq. 
Sec. 98. - Council's failure to levy taxes. 
    If the city council shall fail, refuse, or neglect to pass an ordinance levying the taxes for any year, the ordinance last passed levying taxes shall be considered in force and a failure to pass such ordinance shall in no wise invalidate the collection of any taxes. 
Sec. 99. - Reserved for future use. 
Sec. 100. - Borrowing in anticipation of tax revenue. 
    Money may be borrowed, in anticipation of the receipts from taxes during any fiscal year, by the issue of notes, certificates of indebtedness, or revenue bonds; but the aggregate amount of such loans at any time outstanding shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the receipts from taxes during the preceding fiscal year. All such loans shall be paid out of the receipts from taxes for the fiscal year in which they are issued. 
    A vote of authorization of the qualified property taxpaying electors shall not be necessary to validate any such temporary loan; but no temporary loan authorized by this section shall be made without public notice of at least two (2) weeks before final action by the city council and the approval of four-fifths ( 4/5 ) of the members of such board. 
    Any ordinance providing for a temporary loan shall be subject to a referendum as in the case of other ordinances. 
Sec. 101. - Limitation on city borrowing. 
    No money shall be borrowed by the city except by the issue of bonds or temporary loans, as authorized by section 100 of this Charter; and the credit of the city shall not in any manner be given or loaned to or in aid of any individual, association or corporation. 
Sec. 102. - Collection and deposit of city monies. 
    All taxes, special assessments, license fees and other revenues accruing to the city shall be collected by the city assessor and collector, unless otherwise provided by the city council. All money received by any officer or employee of the city for or in connection with the business of the city shall be paid promptly into the city treasury and shall be deposited with the depository of said city as provided by the laws of this state. All interest on money so deposited shall accrue to the benefit of the city and shall be paid into the general fund of said city. The city council shall provide by ordinance for the prompt and regular payment and deposit of all city monies as required by this action. 
Sec. 103. - Long term contracts. 
    No continuing contract (which involves the payment of money out of the appropriations of more than two (2) years), except public utility franchises, shall be made for a period of more than ten (10) years, and no such continuing contract shall be valid without public notice at least two (2) weeks before final action thereon by the city council and the approval of four-fifths ( 4/5 ) of the members of such board, or submission to the electors of the city at a regular or special election and the approval of a majority of those voting thereon. 
Sec. 104. - Awarding public works contracts. 
    Any public work or improvement may be executed either by contract or by direct labor as may be determined by the city council. Before authorizing the direct execution of any work or improvement, detailed plans and estimates thereof shall be available to the city council; and there shall be separate accounting as to each work or improvement so executed. 
    All such contracts for any public work or improvement for an amount more than the amount specified by state law for the taking of sealed competitive bids, shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, after public advertisement and competition as required by state law; but the city manager or the city council shall have power to reject all bids and to advertise again. 
    All advertisements as to contracts shall contain a reservation of the foregoing right. Contracts for public works and improvements shall be signed by the city manager after approval by the city council. 
Sec. 105. - Modification of public works contracts. 
    Modifications in a contract for any public work or improvement shall be made only when authorized by the city council and upon the written recommendation of the city manager, if there be a city manager. No such alteration shall be valid unless the price to be paid for the work, or material, or both, under the altered or modified contract shall have been agreed upon in writing and signed by the contractor and the city manager or mayor prior to such authorization by the city council. 
Sec. 106. - Payment of city monies. 
    No claim against the city shall be paid except upon a voucher certified by the head of the appropriate department, division or office of the city government, and by means of a warrant on the city treasury, issued by the director of finance and countersigned by the city manager. 
    The director of finance shall examine all payrolls, bills, and other claims and demands against the city, and shall issue no warrant for payment unless he finds that the claim is in proper form, correctly computed and duly certified; that an appropriation has been made therefore [therefor] which has not been exhausted; that the payment has been otherwise legally authorized, and that there is money in the city treasury to make payment. He may require any claimants to make oath to the validity of a claim. He may investigate any claim, and for such purposes may examine witnesses under oath. If he finds a claim to be fraudulent, erroneous, or otherwise invalid, he shall not issue a warrant therefor. 
Sec. 107. - Annual audit. 
    The city council may at any time provide for an examination or audit of the accounts of any officer or department of the city government. The city council shall provide for an independent annual audit of all city accounts and may provide for such more frequent audits as it deems necessary. Such independent audits shall be made by a certified public accountant or firm of such accountants who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city government or any of its officers. If the state makes such an audit, the city council may accept it as satisfying the requirements of this section. 
State Law reference- Annual audit required, Texas Local Government Code § 103.001 et seq. 
Secs. 108-120. - Reserved. 
Sec. 120a. - Incorporation of state law. 
    The authority, powers, and procedures specified by Texas Local Government Code § 402.001 et seq., are hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this charter for all purposes. 
State Law reference- Utility services, Texas Local Government Code § 402.001 et seq. 
Sec. 121. - Public utility franchises. 
    All public utility franchises and all renewals, extensions and amendments thereof shall be granted or made only by ordinance. No such proposed ordinance shall be adopted by the city council until it has been printed in full and until a public written report containing recommendations thereon shall have been made to the council by the city manager, or by the mayor if there be no city manager, until adequate public hearings have thereafter been held on such ordinance and until at least two (2) weeks after its official publication in final form. 
    No public utility franchise shall be transferable except with the approval of the city council expressed by ordinance and copies of all transfers and mortgages or other documents effecting the title or use of public utilities shall be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the execution thereof. 
Sec. 122. - Public utility termination. 
    Any public utility franchise hereafter granted may be terminated by ordinance at specified intervals of not more than five (5) years after the beginning of operation, whenever the city shall determine to acquire by condemnation the property of such utility, necessarily used in or conveniently useful for the operation thereof. In the event of such condemnation, the procedure to be used shall be that set forth in Texas Property Code § 21.001 et seq. 
Sec. 123. - Public utility grants, renewals, extensions or amendments. 
    All grants, renewals, extensions, or amendments of public utility franchises whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the city. 
(a)  To repeal the same by ordinance at any time for misuse or nonuse, or for failure to begin construction within the time prescribed. 
(b)  To require proper and adequate extensions of plant and service, and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest practicable standard of efficiency. 
(c)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and to prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates. 
(d)  To prescribe the form of accounts and at any time to examine and audit the accounts and other records of any such utility; but if a public service commission or any other authority shall be given the power by law to prescribe the form of accounts for public utilities throughout the state, the forms so prescribed shall be controlling so far as they go but the city council may prescribe more detailed forms for the utilities within their jurisdiction. 
(e)  To impose such other regulations as may be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public. 
Sec. 124. - [Consent of adjacent property owners not required.] 
    The consent of abutting or adjacent property owners shall not be required for the construction, extension, maintenance or operation of any public utility; but any property owner shall be entitled to recover from the owner of such public utility the actual amount of damage to such property on account thereof less any benefits received therefrom, provided suit is commenced within two years after the damage is begun. 
Sec. 125. - Temporary public utility permits. 
    Permits revocable at the will of the city council for such minor or temporary public utility privileges as may be specified by general ordinances may be granted and revoked by the city council from time to time in accordance with the terms and conditions to be prescribed thereby, and such permits shall not be deemed to be franchises as the term is used in this Charter. 
Sec. 126. - [Public utilities extensions.] 
    All extensions of public utilities within the city limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the public utility to which they relate, shall be operated as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this Charter and in the original franchise grant. 
    The right to use and maintain any extension shall terminate with the original grant and shall be terminable as provided in section 122 of this Charter. In case of an extension of a public utility operated under a franchise hereafter granted, such extension shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original grant. 
Sec. 127. - [Franchise subject to terms.] 
    Every public utility franchise hereafter granted shall be held subject to all the terms and conditions in sections 121 to 126 hereof inclusive whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchise. Nothing in this Charter shall operate to limit in any way, except as specifically stated, the discretion of the city council or the electors of the city in imposing terms and conditions in connection with any franchise grant. 
Sec. 128. - [Franchise filed with city; public record.] 
    Within six (6) months after this Charter takes effect, every public utility and every owner of a public utility franchise shall file with the city clerk certified copies of all franchises owned or claimed or under which such utility is operated. The city shall compile and maintain a public record of all public utility franchises, and of all public utility fixtures in the streets or other public places of the city. 
Sec. 129. - [Utility accounts.] 
    Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the city, distinct from other accounts, and in such manner as to show the true and complete financial result of such city ownership, or ownership and operation, including all assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. These accounts shall show the actual cost to the city of each public utility owned; the cost of all extensions, additions and improvements; all expenses maintenance; the amount set aside for sinking fund purposes; and, in case of city operation, all operating expenses of every description. They shall show as nearly as possible the value of any service furnished to or rendered by any such public utility by or to any other city or governmental department. They shall also show a proper allowance for depreciation, insurance, interest on the investment, and estimates of the amount of taxes that would be chargeable against the property if privately owned. 
    The city council shall annually cause to be made and printed for public distribution a report showing the financial results of such city ownership or ownership and operation, which report shall give the information specified in this section and such other information as the city council shall deem expedient. 
Sec. 130. - Municipal court. 
    A city recorder [municipal judge] and a clerk of the municipal court shall be appointed by the city council to serve a term of two (2) years, and until their successors are appointed and have qualified, but subject to removal by the city council at any time. 
    The city clerk may be appointed clerk of the municipal court and he may be authorized by the city council to serve in that capacity either in person or by deputy. 
    The recorder and the clerk of the municipal court shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by ordinance. The recorder shall be the judge of the municipal court, which shall have the jurisdiction and shall be conducted in the manner prescribed and authorized by law. 
    All costs and fines imposed by the municipal court, or by any other court in cases appealed from judgments of the municipal court, shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city. 
State Law reference- Municipal court, Texas Government Code § 29.001 et seq. 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 131. - Open records. 
    All accounts and records of every office and department of the city shall be open to the public at all reasonable times, except records and documents from which might be secured information which might defeat the lawful purpose of the officer or department withholding them from access of the public. 
Sec. 132. - Conflicts of interest. 
    No member of the city council or any officer or employee of the city shall have financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the city, be an employee of any person or corporation holding a utility franchise from the city, or be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale to the city of any land, materials, supplies, or services, except on behalf of the city as an officer or employee or as a member of the city council. 
    The ownership of less than five percent (5%) of the stock of a corporation or association, other than a corporation holding a public utility franchise from the city, with which a contract may be made shall not be considered as involving an interest in the contract within the meaning of this section. 
    Any willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office, and any member of the city council, officer, or employee found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit his office or position. Any violation of this section with the knowledge, expressed or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with the city, shall render the contract involved voidable by the city manager or city council. 
State Law reference- Conflict of interest, Texas Local Government Code § 171.001 et seq. 
Sec. 133. - Political patronage. 
    No person in the administrative services of the city shall directly or indirectly solicit or receive, or be in any manner concerned in soliciting or receiving any assessment, subscription or contribution for any political party or purpose whatever. No person shall orally or by letter solicit or be in any manner concerned in soliciting any assessment, subscription or contribution for any political party or purpose from any person holding a position in administrative service of the city. 
    No person shall use or promise to use his influence or official authority to secure any appointment, or prospective appointment, to any city position as a reward or return for personal or partisan political service. No person shall take a part in preparing any political assessment, subscription or contribution with the intent that it shall be sent or presented to or collect from any person in the service of the city and no person shall knowingly send or present, direct or indirectly, in person or otherwise, any political assessment, subscription or contribution to, or request its payment by any person in such service. 
Sec. 134. - Political partisanship. 
    No person about to be appointed to any position in the service of the city shall sign or execute a resignation, dated or undated, in advance of such appointment. No person in the service of the city shall discharge, suspend, lay off, reduce in grade or in any manner change the official rank or compensation of any person in such service, or promise or threaten to do so, for withholding or neglecting to make any contribution of money or service, or any other valuable thing, for any political purpose. 
    No person in the service of the city shall use his official authority or influence to coerce the political action of any person or body, or to interfere with any nomination or election to public office. 
    No person holding an appointive office or place under the provisions of this Charter shall act as an officer of a political organization or take any active part in a political campaign, or service as a member of a committee of any such organization, or circulate or seek signatures to any petition provided for by this Charter, or by the primary or election laws of the state, other than an initiative or referendum petition, or act as a worker at the polls in favor of or opposed to any candidate for nomination or election to a public office, whether federal, state, county or municipal. 
Sec. 135. - Penalties for sec[tions] 133 and 134. 
    Any person who shall willfully or through culpable negligence violate any of the provisions of sections 133 and 134 of this Charter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall on conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). No such person shall be appointed to any position in the service of the city and if he be an officer or employee of the city he shall immediately forfeit his office or employment. 
Sec. 136. - Dual office holding. 
    No member of the city council shall, during the term for which he is elected, be appointed to any city, county, or state office or employment for which he would be paid compensation or which would create the possibility and/or appearance of conflicts of interest, which would be determined by the city council. 
    Any appointive officer or employee of the city (except policemen and firemen), shall forfeit his office or employment if he shall be elected to any public office, if his holding of the elective office could create the possibility and/or appearance of conflicts of interest, or if it might materially interfere with his loyalty, efficiency and effectiveness as an officer or employee of the city, which would be determined by the city manager. 
Sec. 137. - Condemnation of railroad property. 
    Whenever the city shall seek to exercise the power of eminent domain it shall be controlled, as nearly as practicable, by the law governing the condemnation of property of railroad corporations in this State, the city taking the position of the railroad corporations in any such case. 
Sec. 138. - Garnishment. 
    The property, real and personal, belonging to the city shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ of execution or cost bill. 
    The funds belonging to the city in the hands of any person, firm or corporation, shall not be liable to garnishment; nor shall the city be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the city nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ of garnishment on any account whatever. 
State Law reference- Garnishment, Texas Local Government Code §§ 51.076(b), 101.023. 
Sec. 139. - Notice of claims. 
    Except as provided by state law now or hereafter enacted, before the City of Wichita Falls shall become potentially liable for damages for personal injury of any kind, or damage to or destruction of property of any kind, the person injured or the owner of the property damaged or destroyed or someone in his behalf, shall give the city notice as prescribed in the Code of Ordinances. 
State Law reference- Tort claims, Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 101.101 et seq. 
Sec. 140. - City staff bonds. 
    The city council, in fixing the salary of any officer or employee, shall determine whether such officer or employee shall give a bond, and the amount thereof, which bond shall be given with surety approved by the city council. Premiums on such bonds may be paid by the city. 
Sec. 141. - Oath of office. 
    Every officer of the city shall, before entering upon the duties of office, take and subscribe to an oath of affirmation to be filed and kept in the office of the city clerk, that he will in all respects faithfully discharge the duties of his office. 
State Law reference- Oath, Texas Const., art. 16, § 1. 
Sec. 142. - Fines for ordinance violations. 
    The city may enforce its ordinances by fines not exceeding those authorized by the laws of the State of Texas, and may also provide by ordinance for the commutation of such fines by labor on any public work or place of the city; but no ordinance shall provide a lesser penalty than is prescribed for a like offense by the laws of the State. Provision may also be made by ordinance for the collection of fines imposed and executions issued in civil cases. 
State Law reference- Penalty, Texas Local Government Code § 54.001. 
Sec. 143. - Employment saving clause. 
    All persons holding administrative office at the time this Charter takes effect shall continue in office and in the performance of their duties until provisions shall have been made, in accordance with the provisions thereof, for the performance of such duties or the discontinuance of such office. 
    The powers conferred and the duties imposed by law upon any office, commission, board or department of the city abolished by this Charter shall, upon the taking effect thereof, be exercised and discharged by the office or department designated by the city council unless otherwise provided herein. 
Sec. 144. - Invalidity of specific sections. 
    The finding of the invalidity of any provision of this Charter shall not be deemed to invalidate the remaining provisions thereof. 
Sec. 145. - Repealer of prior charter. 
    For the purpose of nominating and electing members of the city council this Charter shall be in effect from and after its adoption, and in all other respects it shall be in effect from and after the twelfth day of April, 1920. Upon taking effect of any part of this Charter, the provisions of any ordinance or of the city charter previously adopted in conflict with such part be deemed repealed; and from and after the twelfth day of April, 1920, all provisions of the present city charter shall be deemed repealed. 
Sec. 146. - General grant of authority. 
    The city council shall have power by ordinance to prescribe rules and regulations for the dedication of additions and subdivisions of tracts of land within the City of Wichita Falls, and no such subdivisions or additions shall be dedicated except in accordance with such rules and regulations. 
    The city council may further prescribe such rules and regulations relative to additions and subdivisions without the City of Wichita Falls before and as a condition precedent to the bringing into the city of any such addition or subdivision. Said city council shall have power to establish a city plan relative to additions, streets, alleys, parks and the like, and require all such additions and subdivisions, either within or without the city, to be in accordance with such city plan before such dedication of any such subdivision shall ever be valid as to the tracts of land within the city, or before such additions and subdivisions without the city shall ever be admitted into the city, and said city council shall have the right to enforce said ordinances by injunction, mandamus or any other legal process appropriate thereto. 
Sec. 147. - Nuisances. 
    The city council shall have the right by ordinance to prescribe rules and regulations for the extermination of bag worms on trees or other injurious insects or pests injuring or likely to injure the trees or shrubs of said city, and shall have the right to require owners to spray their trees and shrubs or take other necessary precaution to exterminate bag worms and the like, or to prevent the extension of spreading of such pests, and to prescribe a penalty for failure by the owner so to do after due notice has been given of such requirements, and shall further have the right to prescribe rules and regulations for causing said work to be done by the city where the owner fails so to do, and to make the same a personal obligation of the owner, and prescribing methods for the collection of the same. 
    The city council shall also have the right to require all weeds to be cut on vacant or improved property, and to provide penalties for the failure or refusal of the owners to so cut said weeds and keep the same cut, and providing that the city may cause same to be cut where the owners fail so to do after reasonable notice, and making the same a personal obligation of the owners of any such lot or tract of land, and prescribing methods for the collection of same. 
    Said city council shall also have the right by any and all of the methods hereinabove provided to prescribe by ordinance, rules and regulations, penalties and the like for trimming of trees, shrubs, or the prevention of other nuisances of a similar nature. 
State Law reference- Nuisances, Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq. 
Sec. 148. - Solid waste. 
    The city council shall further have the right by ordinance to adopt and prescribe rules and regulations for the handling and disposition of all garbage, trash, and rubbish within the City of Wichita Falls, and shall further have the right to prescribe that the city alone shall remove all such garbage, trash, and rubbish, and shall have the right to fix charges and compensation to be charged by the city for the removal of the same, providing rules and regulations for the collection thereof, making the same a personal obligation of the person for whom the same is hauled and disposed of, and providing penalties against all other persons hauling such garbage, trash or rubbish, and providing for a full and adequate system of covering the City of Wichita Falls or such portions thereof as the city council may determine for the removal and disposition of all such garbage, trash and rubbish. 
CONTINUANCE OF PRESENT ORDINANCES AND LAWS 

Sec. 149. - Savings clause. 
    Nothing in this Charter shall be taken to in anywise effect or repeal any ordinance, order or law heretofore legally passed by the city council of the City of Wichita Falls, nor in anywise effect any franchise heretofore legally granted, nor any other act of the mayor, council or other office of the City of Wichita Falls, legally done and performed under which any rights have vested and all ordinances, orders, laws, grants and franchises shall be continued in full force and effect, except that this clause shall not be taken as limiting the effect of this Charter in regard to the regulations of public utilities or corporations doing business in the City of Wichita Falls. 
    It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the City of Wichita Falls is a party for any undertaking or security to be executed in behalf of said city, and all such actions, suits, appeals or proceedings shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been given and the city shall be liable as if such obligation had been duly given and executed. 
Sec. 150. - Incorporation of state law. 
    All questions arising in administering said city government and not provided for in this Charter shall be governed by the state laws in such cases made and provided. 
Sec. 151. - Judicial notice. 
    This Charter shall be determined a public act and judicial notice shall be taken hereof in all courts and pleadings without the same having been pleaded or read in evidence. 
Sec. 152. - Reserved. 
    (Repealed by Charter Amend. of 4-2-1983) 
Sec. 153. - Police department staffing levels. 
    Staffing levels of the Wichita Falls Police Department shall be a minimum of one hundred sixty-five (165) commissioned police officers by October 1, 1991; a minimum of one hundred seventy-five (175) commissioned police officers by October 1, 1992; and a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) commissioned police officers by October 1, 1993. 
Sec. 154. - Minimum wages for listed positions of Wichita Falls police officers. 
    Effective October 1, 1999, minimum wages for the following listed positions of Wichita Falls police officers shall be as follows: 
Police Officer $3,109[.00] per month after one year of service Police Sergeant $3,606[.00] per month Police Lieutenant $3,884[.00] per month Police Captain $4,395[.00] per month  
The City shall not reduce or diminish any economic benefit or emolument being received by Wichita Falls police officers as a direct or indirect result of the implementation of this minimum wage requirement. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
    This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number Adopted 
Date Referendum 
Date Section Section 
this Charter 14-2006 2-21-2006 5-13-2006 2 11 21 21a 24-28 33, 34 38 41 50 32-2009 5-19-2009 5-9-5009 3 12  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Wichita Falls, Texas" and may be cited as the "Wichita Falls Code." 
(Code 1966, § 1-1; Code 2001, § 1-1) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to have ordinances printed and compiled, § 37. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to adopt a civil and criminal code of ordinances, Texas Local Government Code § 53.001 et seq. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
    Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance, unless the contrary is clearly indicated. 
    Boards, committees, commissions, officers, employees and departments. Any reference to city boards, committees, commissions, officers, employees or departments shall be construed to mean the boards, committees, commissions, officers, employees or departments, respectively, of the City of Wichita Falls, Texas. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Wichita Falls, Texas, as printed in part I of this volume. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Wichita Falls in the County of Wichita and State of Texas. 
    City council. Whenever the term "city council" is used, it means the city council of the City of Wichita Falls, Texas. 
    Code. The term "Code" means this Code of Ordinances, City of Wichita Falls, Texas. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall be counted unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Government Code § 311.014. 
    County. The term "county" means the County of Wichita, Texas. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a section or provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other city officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty, unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males. 
    Highway. The term "highway" includes any street, alley, highway, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    May. The term "may" is permissive. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" extends and is applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals. 
    Preceding and following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Shall. The term "shall" shall always be mandatory and never permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when a person cannot write. 
    State. The term "state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
    Statutory reference to Codes Annotated. The reference to the Texas Codes Annotated means and refers to the latest edition or supplement of the Texas Code Annotated. 
State Law reference- Statutory references, Texas Government Code § 312.008. 
    Street. The term "street" includes any highway, alley, street, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
    Texas Ann. Civ. St. The abbreviation "Texas Ann. Civ. St." means the latest edition or supplement to Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. 
State Law reference- Statutory references, Texas Government Code § 312.008. 
    Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1966, § 1-3; Code 2001, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, Texas Government Code § 311.001 et seq.; application of titles 1, 2 and 3 of Texas Penal Code, Texas Penal Code § 1.03. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1966, § 1-2; Code 2001, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
    All references in this Code to chapters, articles, divisions or sections are to the chapters, articles, divisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 2001, § 1-4) 
State Law reference- Construction of statutory references, Texas Government Code § 311.007. 
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
    The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
(Code 2001, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - References and editor's notes. 
    References and editor's notes following certain sections of this Code are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and not controlling or meant to have any legal effect. 
(Code 2001, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The sections appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the Code of Ordinances, City of Wichita Falls, Texas, 2001, and of ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not new enactments. 
(Code 2001, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - Prior offenses, penalties and rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
(Code 2001, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Unless otherwise described in this Code, nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(2)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(3)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(4)  Making any appropriation or adopting the budget. 
(5)  Levying or imposing taxes not contained in this Code. 
(6)  Establishing or prescribing grades of streets in the city. 
(7)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements. 
(8)  Regarding subdivision regulations. 
(9)  Extending or contracting the boundaries of the city. 
(10)  Prescribing the number, classification, benefits or compensation of any city officers or employees or any personnel policies and procedures. 
(11)  Regarding zoning or land use regulations or rezoning property or amending the zoning map. 
(12)  Calling an election. 
(13)  Which is temporary although general in effect. 
(14)  Which is special although permanent in effect. 
(15)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(b)  All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the City Clerk's office. 
(Code 2001, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 2001, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
    All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(Code 1966, § 1-4; Code 2001, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing sections or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 2001, § 1-12) 
Sec. 1-13. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1966, § 1-6; Code 2001, § 1-13) 
Sec. 1-14. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
    Whenever in this Code or in any city ordinance or in any rule, regulation or order promulgated by any city officer or agency under authority duly vested in such officer or agency any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance, rule, regulation or order that governs or regulates fire, safety, zoning or public health or sanitation, other than the illegal dumping of refuse, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00. In cases involving the illegal dumping of refuse, the fine will not exceed $4,000.00. The violation of any other provision of this Code or any other ordinance, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00, unless specifically stated otherwise in this Code. If the maximum penalty provided by this Code for any offense is greater than the maximum penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state, the maximum penalty for such violation provided by the state statute shall be the maximum penalty under this Code, unless state law expressly authorizes municipalities to have such fines. Except where otherwise provided in this Code, each day an offense shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1966, § 1-5; Code 2001, § 1-14; Ord. No. 35-2015, § 2, 8-4-2015) 
Charter reference- Authority to provide for fine not exceeding fines authorized in state law for violation of ordinances, § 142. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prescribe penalties for violation of Code, Texas Local Government Code § 54.001; jurisdiction of municipal courts, Texas Government Code § 29.003. 
Sec. 1-15. - Culpable mental state. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violations of this Code or of any ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that does not exceed the amount authorized by Texas Penal Code § 12.23, does not require a culpable mental state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that exceeds the amount authorized by Texas Penal Code § 12.23 shall require a culpable mental state of criminal negligence. 
(Code 2001, § 1-15; Ord. No. 69-2007, § 2, 8-7-2007) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Administrative code, § 60. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, adopted May 21, 2019, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 2-26-2-32, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1966, §§ 2-01(b)-2-01(d), 2-01(f), 2-1, 2-2, 2-10, Code 2001, §§ 2-26-2-30, 2-56, 2-57; Ord. No. 50-2016, 11-22-2016. 
Charter reference- City council, §§ 9-11. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-26. - Composition; districts. 
(a)  The city council shall be composed of a mayor and six councilors as provided in Charter section 10. 
(b)  The council establishes five single-member districts, being numbered one through five, inclusive, and as identified on the map which is on file in the City Clerk's office and the accompanying field notes on file in the City Clerk's office and expressly incorporated by reference in this section. Any person seeking election to any particular numbered district shall be a bona fide resident of the city and the district which he seeks to represent. Any person seeking election to the position of mayor or the one at-large council seat shall be a bona fide resident within the corporate city limits. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-27. - Vacancy. 
    If, during the term of office, a councilor from one of the five numbered council districts ceases to be a bona fide resident of the council district from which that individual has been elected, that office shall become vacant, and the vacancy shall be filled as specified in Charter section 23. If, during the term of office, the mayor or the one councilor elected at large ceases to be a bona fide resident within the corporate city limits, that office shall be vacant, and the vacancy filled as specified in Charter section 23. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-28. - Election; term of office. 
(a)  The mayor and one councilor shall be elected from the city at large. The other five councilors shall be elected from the five single-member districts. Any candidate for councilor from a district must receive a plurality of the votes cast for the district in which the councilor resides. The mayor and the councilor at large must each receive a plurality of the votes cast in the entire city. 
(b)  The mayor and each councilor, upon election, shall serve a term of two years, except as provided in Charter section 12, and shall continue to serve until a successor is duly elected and sworn into office. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-29. - Elections. 
    To implement the system of single-member representation and ensure an orderly transition in the city council: 
(1)  District one, district two and the position of councilor at-large will stand for regular election in odd-numbered years. 
(2)  District three, district four, district five and the mayor's position will stand for regular election in even-numbered years. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-30. - Compensation. 
(a)  In accordance with Charter section 38, the mayor shall be paid a salary of $500.00 per month, and each councilor shall be paid a salary of $300.00 per month, subject to [subsection] (c) or to disciplinary action voted upon by the city council. 
(b)  The mayor and each councilor may choose not to receive a salary by tendering a written designation of such decision to the city clerk. Such a designation may be reversed via a written declaration tendered to the city clerk, but such decision will not apply retroactively. 
(c)  If any member of council is delinquent in the payment of any taxes or other liabilities due to the city, the city manager shall withhold said councilor's monthly compensation until such delinquency is paid in full, unless said debt is subject to a federal bankruptcy stay or the property tax delinquency is protected by a tax deferred application accepted by the Wichita Appraisal District. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-31. - Designated meetings. 
    In accordance with Charter section 34, the regular meeting times of the city council shall be the first Tuesday and third Tuesday of each month, at 8:30 a.m. Regular meetings shall be held in the council chamber in the municipal auditorium. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-32. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings of the city council may be called pursuant to Charter section 34. The only notice to city councilors that shall be necessary to be given of any special meeting of the city council shall be by telephone to each of the members of the city council. All special meetings shall be held in the council chamber in the municipal auditorium. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Secs. 2-33-2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COUNCIL RULES OF PROCEDURE AND POLICIES 

Sec. 2-51. - Authority. 
    Pursuant to section 34 of the City Charter of the City of Wichita Falls, Texas, the city council may enact rules of procedure for all meetings of the city council, which shall be in effect upon their adoption by the city council and until such times as they are amended or new rules adopted. The following rules are enumerated under and by authority of said provision. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-52. - Applicability. 
    The rules of procedure adopted by the city council are applicable not only to the city council but also to all boards, commissions, and committees of the City of Wichita Falls. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-53. - Amendment. 
    These rules may be amended or new rules adopted, by a majority vote of four members of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-54. - Construction of authority. 
    The construction of authority in all matters associated with the meetings and activities of the city council, including the agenda, shall be: 
(1)  The U.S. Constitution and statutes of the United States of America; 
(2)  The Texas Constitution and statutes of the State of Texas; 
(3)  The City Charter; 
(4)  The Code of Ordinances of the City of Wichita Falls, Texas; and 
(5)  These rules. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-55. - Purpose of parliamentary procedure. 
    The purpose of these rules of parliamentary procedure is to establish orderly conduct of the meetings. The ultimate purpose of these rules of parliamentary procedure is to encourage and facilitate decision-making by the city council. In a democracy, the majority opinion carries the day. These rules enable the majority to express their opinion and fashion a result, while permitting the minority to also express itself (but not dominate) and fully participate in the process. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-56. - Meetings shall be public. 
    Except as otherwise allowed by law, all meetings of the city council shall be public, and notices thereof shall be posted as provided under the Texas Government Code, Chapter 551, Open Meetings Act. Except in the case of an emergency meeting, notice of all meetings shall be given at least 72 hours before the time set for any meeting. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-57. - Conduct of meetings. 
    Meetings of the city council shall be conducted in accordance with the rules adopted by the city council as set forth herein, and as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-58. - Agenda. 
(a)  The city manager and the city clerk shall prepare an agenda and cause the same to be posted at least 72 hours prior to the meeting. Agendas shall be delivered to the city council on or before 6:00 p.m. of the day of the posting, or within such other times as established by the city council from time to time. In the event of an emergency meeting of the city council, this provision shall be suspended when not inconsistent with the provisions of federal or state law, or the City Charter. 
(b)  In order to facilitate the agenda process, the city manager is responsible for placing items on the agenda. A written request from the mayor or any three members of the council shall cause the city manager to place an item on the agenda for council consideration. The council members requesting the item shall be identified in the agenda item commentary for the requested item. Staff assistance, if required, should be requested through the city manager. If a council requested agenda topic does not allow for staff to adequately prepare information for council's consideration, the item shall be postponed by the city manager until the next regular meeting, or until such time as mutually agreed. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-59. - Consent agenda. 
(a)  There is hereby established, as a part of every agenda for regular and/or special called meetings of the city council, a portion of said agenda that shall be labeled "consent agenda." The consent agenda shall contain routine, non-controversial items that require council action but need little or no council deliberation. 
(b)  All items set out in the consent agenda shall be deemed passed upon passage of an affirmative motion, by a unanimous vote of all of the members of the city council then seated, that the consent agenda be adopted. A motion to approve the consent agenda will not be debated. No further action shall be deemed necessary, and all such items appearing on the consent agenda, upon passage of such motion, shall be deemed adopted as if voted upon separately and as if the caption and/or body of any ordinance therein set out shall have been read in full. 
(c)  Any member of the city council may request that an item be removed from the consent agenda and considered separately. Such request shall be honored as if it had been passed by majority vote. The item will be removed from the consent agenda and placed upon the regular agenda for debate. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-60. - Regular meetings. 
    A regular meeting is one during which the city council takes official action. They are held on the first and third Tuesday of each month, unless the meeting is rescheduled or cancelled. All regular meetings shall begin at 8:30 a.m. The city council by a majority vote at a regular meeting, may change the days or times of meetings as circumstances necessitate. Meetings shall be held at city hall unless another convenient place within the city is designated by the meeting agenda. (Charter section 34) 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-61. - Work session meetings. 
    Work session meetings are special meetings called for the purpose of conducting a detailed and thorough exploration of matters that may properly come before the city council. A work session is a meeting to discuss or explore matters of interest to the city, review and discuss agenda items, and/or meet with city boards, commissions, committee members, or city staff. These meetings are informational and no formal action shall be taken unless the posted agenda indicates otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-62. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings may be called by the mayor and shall be called by the city clerk upon written request of three city councilors or the city manager. The city clerk shall post notice thereof as provided by law. (Charter section 34) 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-63. - Emergency meetings. 
    In case of an emergency or urgent public necessity, as defined by state law and confirmed by the city attorney, which shall be expressed in the meeting notice, an emergency meeting may be called by the mayor, the city manager, or by three members of the city council. It shall be sufficient if members receive, and public notice is posted at least two hours before the meeting is convened. Notice shall be provided also to the media in accordance with the Texas Government Code, § 551.047. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-64. - Executive sessions (closed meetings). 
(a)  Executive sessions are closed to the public. They are only permitted for the purpose of discussing matters enumerated in Chapter 551, Open Meetings Act of the Texas Government Code. Notice of topics to be discussed during executive sessions shall be made known to the public in accordance with the requirements of the Open Meetings Act. 
(b)  The city council may retire into an executive session as stated on a posted agenda during a regular or special meeting, or if a motion is duly made and seconded and affirmed by a majority of the council. However, before said session begins, the mayor shall announce that the executive session is commencing. The order in which an executive session may appear on the agenda is subject to the discretion of the city council. No voting or action shall be taken by the city council during an executive session. No other subject but that posted on the agenda is to be considered. Adjournment of the executive session and any vote needed shall be made during an open public meeting. 
(c)  Items discussed in executive session are to remain private and confidential. Disclosing any information (including disclosure of documents presented in executive session) is contrary to a council member's fiduciary obligation to the city and a violation of the rules of order. Except as provided by law, no council member, staff member or legal counsel may discuss or reveal the proceedings of an executive session to persons not present during the executive session. In the event an elected official is absent from the executive session, the mayor, the city manager or the city attorney may brief the elected official who was absent from the meeting on the discussion. 
(d)  Except for information protected by law from disclosure, the council members may authorize the release of confidential information discussed in executive session by an affirmative vote of four members. 
(e)  Additionally, the certified agenda or recording of the executive session is confidential, and no persons may disclose to a member of the public the certified agenda or recording of the executive session, except as provided by law. Section 551.146 of the Texas Government Code makes such an act a class B misdemeanor and opens the person who reveals such information personally liable for any damages resulting from such action. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-65. - Recessed meetings. 
    No meeting shall be recessed for a longer period of time than until the next regular meeting except when required information has not been received, or, in the case of workshops or special meetings, to a date certain by motion duly passed. If a meeting is recessed to a later time exceeding 24 hours, the recessed meeting shall be posted in accordance with § 551.041 of the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-66. - Notice of meetings. 
    The agenda for all meetings shall be posted by the city clerk on the city's official bulletin board and on the city's website. Notice of all meetings shall be given by the city clerk pursuant to the requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Law. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-67. - Quorum. 
    A quorum at any meeting of the city council will be established by the presence of four or more members of the city council (Charter section 34). Council members shall provide adequate advanced notice to the mayor or city manager of possible absence from a meeting. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-68. - Minutes of meetings. 
    The city clerk shall keep an account of all proceedings of the city council and they shall be open to properly indexed and public inspection in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas. (Code section 2-40) 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-69. - Order of business. 
    The regular city council meeting will be generally conducted in the following order, unless otherwise specified. An executive session may be held at any time during a meeting pursuant to applicable state law. 
(1)  Agenda format. The agenda shall provide for the following topics or subjects to be considered by the city council in the following order: 
a.  Call to order. This section shall note the time and place of the meeting. 
b.  Invocation. This section shall note the opening prayer. 
c.  Pledge of Allegiance. This section shall note the observance of our national pledge. 
d.  Presentations. Proclamations and employee of the month. 
e.  Approval of minutes. This section is for the city council to approve, amend, or disapprove the minutes from previous meetings. 
f.  Receive minutes from boards and commissions. This section is for the city council to receive the minutes from board and commission meetings. 
g.  Consent agenda. This section shall provide for all items on the consent agenda. 
h.  Ordinances. This section shall provide for all ordinance action items to be considered by the council not provided for elsewhere on the agenda. 
i.  Public hearings. This section shall provide for council consideration of any public hearings related to such hearings if action is required. Public hearings shall be conducted in the following manner: 
1.  Reading of the caption of the ordinance (if applicable). 
2.  The mayor opens the public hearing. 
3.  Staff presents report. 
4.  City council members may ask staff questions. 
5.  The applicant then has the opportunity to present comments, testimony, and/or oral arguments. 
6.  City council members may ask questions of the applicant. 
7.  The mayor shall inquire if there is anyone present who desires to speak on the matter which is to be heard or to present evidence regarding the matter. 
8.  Each speaker shall be limited to five minutes (unless otherwise set by the chair) with a cumulative limit of 30 minutes for each side (those for a proposal and those against a proposal). Proponents shall speak first followed by opponents. At the end of the hearing the proponents shall be given an additional five minutes for rebuttal. 
9.  Mayor closes public hearing. 
10.  The city council deliberates and takes action as needed. 
11.  The chair announces the final decision of the city council as applicable. 
j.  Resolutions. This section shall provide for all resolution action items to be considered by the council not provided for elsewhere on the agenda. 
(2)  Agenda items. Any person who seeks action from the city council and wishes to address the council on items on the regular agenda shall do so at the time the agenda item is brought up for action. All persons shall state their name and address before addressing the council. No one shall be allowed to speak more than once on any one subject until every person wishing to speak has spoken. 
(3)  Whenever a member of the public is recognized to address the council on an ordinance, resolution, or public hearing item, the individual will be given five minutes to make comments. The mayor may allow a one-minute extension. A majority vote of the city council is required for any subsequent time extensions. In order to expedite matters and to avoid repetitious presentations, whenever a group of people wish to address the city council on the same subject matter, those persons are encouraged to designate a spokesperson to address the city council. The mayor may extend the time allocation for a designated spokesperson if the persons for whom he or she speaks agree to yield their time to the spokesperson. 
(4)  Non-agenda items. Any person who wishes to address the council on matters not on the agenda may appear under the "comments from the public" part of the agenda. This rule does not apply to anyone appearing at a public hearing in response to an official notice or to persons who wish to address the council on a matter which appears on the regular agenda. All persons shall state their name and address before addressing the council. No one shall be allowed to speak more than once on any one subject until every person wishing to speak has spoken. 
a.  Other council matters. This section includes any reports by city staff and items of concern from members of the city council. 
b.  Comments from the public. This section shall provide members of the public an opportunity to address the city council on items of concern that are not on the city council agenda. People wishing to address the council should sign up prior to the meeting commencing. Comments shall be limited to three minutes. As comments from the public are not posted agenda items, the Texas Open Meetings Act prohibits city council members and staff from discussing or responding to these comments during council meetings. It is not required that the city council agenda contain a "comments from the public" section. 
c.  Executive sessions. Executive (closed) sessions will be held in accordance with the Texas Government Code. (A posted executive session can be held at any time during the regular council meeting.) 
d.  Appointments to boards and commissions. 
e.  Adjournment. This section provides for the closure of the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-70. - Consideration of ordinances, resolutions and motions. 
(a)  Printed form. All ordinances and resolutions shall be presented to the council. 
(b)  City attorney to approve. All ordinances and resolutions shall be approved as to form and legality by the city attorney. 
(c)  Recording of votes. The ayes and noes shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances and resolutions and entered upon the official record of the city council. 
(d)  Voting required. No member, including the mayor, shall be excused from voting except on matters involving the consideration of his own official conduct or where his or her financial interests are involved, and in these instances he or she shall abstain. Any member prohibited from voting by financial interest shall announce at the commencement of consideration of the matter that he or she is abstaining from voting on the matter and shall not enter into discussion or debate on any such matter. The member shall step then down from the dais during the discussion and voting on the matter. After a member has stated the reason for his request, the excuse from voting shall be made without debate. Any member who has abstained under this section shall not attend any executive session where the matter from which he or she is abstaining, is discussed. If any member shall refuse to vote, except for those reasons stated above, such refusal shall be noted in the minutes of the meeting. (Charter section 34) 
(e)  Approval of every ordinance, resolution, or motion shall require on final passage the affirmative vote of four city council members present, except that the City Charter and certain state statutes impose other voting requirements on various questions. In addition, these rules set forth certain instances in which the number of votes required is greater than a majority of all members. As a matter of convenience, questions on which the voting requirement is varied by City Charter, state statutes and these rules are listed below: 
(1)  Changing paving assessment plans-Two-thirds vote of all members. A change that substantially affects the nature or quality of an improvement funded by an assessment requires a two-thirds vote of all members of the city council. (Texas Transportation Code § 313.053(b).) "Two-thirds vote of all members" would require an affirmative vote of five council members. 
(2)  Expulsion of members-Two-thirds vote of all members. Expulsion of a member of the city council requires an affirmative vote of two-thirds of all members of the city council. "Two-thirds vote of all members" would require an affirmative vote of five council members. 
(3)  Changes in zoning ordinance-Three-fourths vote of all members. A change in zoning district classification or boundary that has been recommended for denial by the city planning commission or that has been protested by the owners of 20 percent or more of either the land in the area of request or land within 200 feet of the boundary of the area of request must have the approval of three-fourths of all members of the city council. (Texas Local Government Code § 211.006(d).) "Three-fourths votes of all members" would require an affirmative vote of six council members. 
(4)  Charter amendments. Ordinances submitting proposed Charter Amendments must be adopted by a two-thirds [vote] of all members of the city council. (Article XI, Section 3, Texas Constitution and § 9.004 of the Texas Local Government Code.) "Two-thirds vote of all members" would require an affirmative vote of five council members. 
(5)  Tax rate. The vote on the ordinance, resolution, or order setting the tax rate must be separate from the vote adopting the budget. For a taxing unit other than a school district, the vote on the ordinance, resolution, or order setting a tax rate that exceeds the effective tax rate must be a record vote, and at least 60 percent of the members of the governing body must vote in favor of the ordinance, resolution, or order. "Sixty percent of the members of the governing body" would require an affirmative vote of five council members. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-71. - General procedures. 
(a)  General rules of parliamentary procedure as defined in this document and consistent with the City Charter and any applicable city ordinance, statute or other legal requirement, shall govern the proceedings of the city council. To the extent not inconsistent with these rules, the city council shall use Robert's Rules of Order as a general guideline for additional rules of parliamentary procedure without being a procedural requirement. However, failure to abide by, or adhere to, these rules shall not nullify or negate any action by the city council. These rules of parliamentary procedure are intended solely as a guideline and tool, and are not intended to limit the inherent power and general legal authority of the city council, or of its mayor, to govern the conduct of city council meetings. 
(b)  Chair of meeting. The mayor shall preside over all meetings of the city council as the chair and enforce these rules and procedures during a meeting. In the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall assume the chair responsibility at the meeting. In the absence of the pro tem, the city council will choose a chair for the meeting. 
(c)  Authority of the chair. The chair shall make decisions on questions of procedure, subject to review by the city council as a whole. 
(d)  City council deliberations. The chair has the responsibility to control the discussion and the order of speakers. Council members will generally be called upon in the order of the request to speak. Generally, a council member may not be recognized to speak subsequently until each council member has had an opportunity to obtain the floor. A council member holding the floor may address a question to another council member and that council member may, should they so choose, respond to the question while the floor is still held by the council member asking the question. 
(e)  Limits to deliberations. Council members will limit their comments to the subject matter or motion currently being considered. Council members will govern themselves as to the length of their comments, and the mayor shall act as the arbiter in determining how long an individual council member may speak on an item, and shall apply the standard consistently and fairly. The intent of this policy is not to limit debate, but rather to assist council members in their efforts to communicate effectively and concisely. 
(f)  Repetitious comments prohibited. A speaker or council member shall not present the same or substantially the same items or arguments to the city council repeatedly or be repetitious in presenting oral comments. A speaker or council member shall not present an argument on a matter previously considered by the city council at the same session. 
(g)  Obtaining the floor. Any member of the city council wishing to speak shall first obtain the floor by making a request for the floor to the chair. The chair shall recognize any council member who appropriately seeks the floor. 
(h)  Motions. Motions submitted for a vote shall contain only one question. If two or more points are involved, any member may require a division, if the question reasonably allows for a division. Motions may be made and seconded by any member of the city council except the chair. The most common motions are as follows: 
(1)  Amending a motion. If a council member wants to change a basic motion, he or she would have to make a motion to amend it. A motion to amend might be: "I move that we amend the motion to include the changes we discussed to the ordinance." A motion to amend seeks to retain the basic motion on the floor (a motion made and seconded), but to modify it in some way. It requires the agreement of the person making the original motion, and this agreement shall constitute the second required to amend the basic motion. No motion to amend shall be allowed after a motion has been called for a vote. No motion or proposition of a subject different from that under consideration shall be admitted under color of amendment. A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but one to amend an amendment to an amendment shall not be in order. Any council member may move to amend a pending motion. No more than two amendments may be made to a pending motion. The last amendment shall be voted on first. 
(2)  Motion to reconsider. A motion to reconsider any action of the city council may be made, seconded, and voted on not later than the next succeeding voting agenda meeting of the city council. If reconsideration of the council action has not been posted on the council agenda for the meeting at which the motion to reconsider is made, however, actual reconsideration of the item must be delayed until the next voting agenda meeting after the posting requirements of the Open Meetings Act are met. A motion to reconsider an action of the city council may only be made by a member who voted with the prevailing side. It can be seconded by any member. No question shall be twice reconsidered except by unanimous vote of the city council, except that action relating to any contract may be reconsidered at any time before the final execution thereof. 
(3)  The previous question. When the previous question is moved and seconded, it shall be put as follows: "Shall the main question be now put?" There shall be no further amendment or debate, but pending amendments shall be put in their order before the main question. If the motion for the previous question is lost, the main question remains before the city council. An affirmative vote of two-thirds of the city council members present shall be required to approve the previous question. (To demand the previous question is equivalent in effect to moving "that debate now cease, and the city council immediately proceed to vote on the pending motion." In practice, this is done with the phrase "call for the question," or by simply saying "question.") 
(4)  Motion to table. This motion, if passed, requires discussion of the agenda item to be halted immediately, and the agenda item to be placed on hold. The motion may contain a specific time to bring the item up again, or it may not specify a time. If no time is specified, the item should be placed on the agenda at the following regularly scheduled council meeting. 
(5)  Motion to allow public comment. This motion, if passed, requires the chair to allow public comment even though a public hearing may not be required under the law. 
(i)  Withdrawal of motions. A motion may be withdrawn, or modified, by its mover without asking permission until the motion has been stated by the chair. If the mover modifies the motion, the seconder may withdraw the second. After the question has been stated, the mover shall neither withdraw it nor modify it without the consent of the city council. 
(j)  Appropriations of money. Before formal approval by the city council of motions providing for appropriation of money, information must be presented to the city council showing the purpose of the appropriation and the account to which it is to be credited. In addition, before finally acting on an appropriation, the city council shall obtain a report from the city manager as to the availability of funds and the city manager's recommendations as to the desirability of the appropriation. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-72. - Discussion and debate. 
    The basic rule of motions is that they are subject to discussion and debate. Accordingly, the motion is eligible for full discussion by and before the city council. Discussion and debate can continue as long as the members wish to discuss it, or until the chair decides to end discussion and call a vote on the motion. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-73. - Procedures for motions. 
    The following is the general procedure for making motions: 
(1)  A council member who wishes to make a motion shall first obtain the floor. 
(2)  A council member who wishes to second a motion shall do so through a request to the chair. 
(3)  The item is presented by staff or others, followed by questions and discussion by council members. 
(4)  Before a motion can be discussed, it shall be seconded. If a motion does not receive a second after a reasonable time, a council member may call for a "point of order," which mandates that the motion receives an immediate second, or it dies. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-74. - Continuance of discussion or hearings. 
    Any item being discussed or any public hearing at a city council meeting may by motion be continued or tabled to any subsequent meeting. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-75. - Communications with applicants or petitioners. 
    Any council member's communication (written, e-mail, verbal, social media) with an applicant or petitioner outside of a public meeting regarding contracts or rezoning that will come to city council for a decision must be disclosed in writing and provided to the city clerk prior to city council discussion or deliberation of the action. Examples include but are not limited to discussion with a property owner regarding his or her rezoning request, or discussion with a vendor prior to bid award. Council members shall disclose the identity of the person with whom they had the communication, the substance of the communication, and the date on which the communication occurred. The communication must be disclosed even if the council member did not respond to the communication. Disclosure shall be made prior to the city council meeting at which the matter will be considered. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-76. - Creation of task forces, boards and commissions. 
(a)  Task forces. The mayor may, as the need arises, authorize the appointment of "ad hoc" task forces. Any committee so created shall cease to exist upon the accomplishment of the special purpose for which it was created or when abolished by the mayor. 
(b)  Citizen boards, commissions, and committees. The mayor or council may create other boards, commissions and committees to assist in the conduct of the operation of the city government with such duties as the mayor or council may specify not inconsistent with the City Charter or Code. Memberships and selection of members shall be as provided by the mayor or majority vote of the council if not specified by the City Charter or Code. Any board, commission, or committee so created shall cease to exist upon the accomplishment of the special purpose for which it was created, or when abolished by the mayor or a majority vote of the council. No committee so appointed shall have powers other than advisory to the council or to the city manager, except as otherwise specified by the Charter, Code, or statute. 
(c)  Council members as liaison to boards and commissions. The mayor shall assign one or more council members to serve as liaisons to boards, commissions, and other entities. No more than three council members, including the mayor, may attend a meeting of any board or commission unless the meeting is a joint city council meeting that complies with the Texas Open Meetings laws. The liaison or liaisons to a board or commission have priority over any other council members who wish to attend. Other than liaisons who have priority; attendance by a council member at any board or commission meeting is on a first come, first served basis. 
(d)  If a council member who is a liaison to a board or commission knows he or she will not be in attendance at a meeting, he or she should notify the mayor as soon as possible so that other council members will have an opportunity to attend. 
(e)  Vote to modify action. The council, by a vote of four members, may modify any action taken by the mayor under this section. 
(f)  Attendance at public functions. If the mayor is unable to attend a public function, the mayor pro tem may attend. If both the mayor and the mayor pro tem are unable to attend, the mayor pro tem shall request another member of the council to attend. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-77. - Rules suspension or amendment. 
(a)  Suspension of rules. Any provision of these rules not governed by the City Charter or Code may be temporarily suspended by a majority vote of the council. The vote on any such suspension shall be taken by yeas and noes and entered upon the records. 
(b)  Amendment of rules. These rules may be amended, or new rules adopted, by a majority vote of all members of the council. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-78. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word in this resolution or application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance, and the city council of the City of Wichita Falls, Texas, hereby declares it would have enacted such remaining portions despite any such invalidity. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-79. - Decorum. 
(a)  During city council meetings, council members shall preserve order and decorum, shall not interrupt or delay proceedings, and shall obey the rules of the city council. Council members shall demonstrate respect and courtesy to one another, to city staff and to members of the public appearing before the council. Council members shall seek to phrase and communicate all writings, publications and speeches in a professional and constructive manner. 
(b)  Members of the city council will not condone any unethical or illegal activity from any council member or members of the staff. All members of the council shall uphold the intent of this policy and govern their actions accordingly. 
(1)  Mayoral responsibilities. 
a.  Chair. The mayor shall serve as the chair of all meetings. The mayor pro tem shall preside in the absence of the mayor. 
b.  Preserve order and decorum. The chair is responsible for preserving order and decorum and shall keep the meetings orderly by recognizing each member for discussion, encouraging civil debate among members, and keeping discussion limited to the agenda item being considered. 
c.  Encourage participation. The chair will encourage all council members to participate in council discussion and give each member an opportunity to speak before any member can speak again on the same subject. 
d.  Official spokesperson. The mayor is the official spokesperson for the council on all matters unless absent, at which time the mayor pro tem or appropriate designee will assume the role. The views presented by the mayor, or the mayor pro tem in his/her absence, should provide equitable representation of all council members. 
(2)  Council responsibilities. 
a.  Be prepared. Each council member is responsible for being prepared to discuss the agenda. 
b.  Council orientation. Each council member who has been newly elected to a non-contiguous term is required to attend a council member orientation session presented by the city manager, complete mandatory Open Meetings and Public Information Act training, and is encouraged to attend at least one Texas Municipal League-sponsored conference each year to stay informed on issues facing municipalities, as funding allows. 
c.  Attendance. Attendance at work sessions and meetings is essential to the effective execution of a council member's duties. It is the responsibility of council members to be informed about action taken by the city council in their absence. In the case of an absence from a work session, the council member is responsible for obtaining this information by viewing the recording of the work session prior to the city council meeting during which the items are to be voted upon. 
d.  Decorum. When addressing an agenda item, the council member shall first be recognized by the chair, shall confine comments to the question under debate, shall avoid reference to personalities, shall refrain from impugning the integrity or motives of any other council member or staff member during debate or vote, and shall refrain from publicly implying or insinuating wrong-doing by another council member or staff member without clear evidence of such behavior. 
e.  Appeal. Any council member may appeal a procedural ruling by the chair to the council as a whole. If the appeal is seconded, the person making the appeal may make a brief statement and the chair may respond. An appeal may generally be debated by the members, but each member may speak only once. The affirmative vote of a majority of the council members present and voting shall be necessary to approve the motion to appeal. 
f.  Enforcement of policy. Any council member may ask the chair to enforce the policy established by the council. Should the chair fail to do so, a majority vote of the council members present shall require the chair to enforce the policy. 
g.  Wait to be recognized. A member of the council who wishes to be recognized shall request to speak, and shall not proceed with remarks until recognized and named by the chair of the meeting. Remarks shall be confined to the question before the council. 
h.  No private discussions. While any other person who has been recognized by the chair is speaking, other members shall not hold private discourse or in any manner interrupt the speaker. In all discussions, disrespectful language and behavior shall be avoided. 
i.  Duty to vote. All council members must vote either in the affirmative or in the negative. A present member who does not vote will be officially recorded as a negative vote. When a council member recuses oneself due to an actual or perceived conflict of interest and files the required affidavit, that council member is not counted as present for quorum purposes and is not deemed to be "voting" for purposes of determining whether there has been a "majority vote of those voting and present." 
j.  Third party representation. A council member may not represent any third party before any city board or commission. 
k.  Personal communication devices. All personal communication devices should be placed in a silent mode during any city council meetings. Personal communication devices shall not be used for communicating city-related business between councilors during a city council meeting. If an individual is using his or her personal communication device during a meeting and a member finds it disruptive, he or she should inform the mayor. 
l.  Dress code. It is the policy of city council to create a dignified and professional environment for city council meetings. Therefore, all council members shall dress in a professional manner while attending a city council meeting or work session, or while representing the city in an official capacity as a member of the city council. Clothing that is distracting or contains profanity shall not be allowed to be worn by a member of council at a city council meeting. 
(3)  Citizens' participation. The following rules shall be in force for all persons in attendance at all meetings of council: 
a.  Rules of decorum. Persons attending city council meetings should observe the same rules of propriety, decorum and good conduct as they would show in a courtroom, a place of worship, or at any other serious or solemn occasion during which matters of importance are being considered. Visitors will refrain from engaging in chatter, private conversations, and from making other distracting noises while the city council is in session. Phones and other electronic devices should be set to off or silent mode. Visitors should not applaud, boo, clap, or otherwise audibly express approval or disapproval of the speech of another person in a manner likely to disturb the meeting. 
b.  Address chair. Persons may not engage in discussions with the city council or staff during council deliberations unless specifically asked a question by a council member. Persons who have been asked a question by a council member must be recognized by the chair before being allowed to speak. The chair may end any question and answer session between council members and a member of the public in order to facilitate the order of business. 
c.  Printed materials. Persons may present printed material to the city clerk to distribute to the city council during a meeting. 
d.  No disruptions. Persons attending city council meetings shall remain seated or may stand in the back of the room and come and go so long as it does not disrupt the meeting. Persons in attendance shall not carry signs or placards. No person attending any city council meeting shall delay the proceedings or refuse to obey the orders of the chair. 
e.  Removal. Disturbances, transgressions of the rules or disorderly conduct in the city council chamber or other city council meeting room may cause the transgressor to be removed from the meeting. The chair of the meeting shall exercise control over persons who disrupt the meeting in the following order of action: 
1.  Call the person to order, advising that person of the infraction; 
2.  Advise the person that the infraction must cease immediately or the person will be ordered to leave the meeting; 
3.  Order the person to leave the meeting. A police officer may remove an individual or individuals for disrupting a meeting as authorized by Texas Penal Code § 42.05. 
f.  Room limitations. Persons are encouraged to attend council meetings; however, the number admitted shall be limited to the fire safety capacity of the council chamber as determined by the fire marshal or designee. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-80. - Staff relations. 
(a)  Presentations. Staff presentations will be concise and will provide factual background information on the item as well as a recommendation for the city council. Written presentations shall, to the extent possible, be provided to the city council before the meeting. 
(b)  Ask questions in advance. To ensure proper presentation of agenda items by staff, questions arising from council members after receiving their information packet should be, whenever possible, presented to the city manager for staff consideration prior to the city council meeting. This allows staff the time to address council members' concerns and provide all council members with additional information as necessary. 
(c)  Presentation requirements. The city manager shall designate the appropriate staff member to address each agenda item and shall see that each presentation is prepared and presented to inform and educate the city council on the issues that require city council action. The presentation should be professional, timely, and allow for discussion of options for resolving the issue. As a summary, the staff member making the presentation shall make it clear if no city council action is required, or shall present the staff recommendation as a part of the presentation, and/or present the specific options for city council consideration. Other than asking clarification questions, city council members should allow the staff member to complete his or her presentation before discussing or debating the topic. 
(d)  Use of staff time. The city manager is directly responsible for providing information to the city council concerning any inquiry by a specific council member that is significant in nature and would be beneficial to all council members. If the city manager or the staff's time is being dominated or misdirected by a council member, it is the city manager's responsibility to inform the mayor. 
(e)  Ethical behavior required. The city manager will exhibit the highest professional and ethical behavior. The city manager is responsible for the professional and ethical behavior and discipline of his/her staff. The city manager is also responsible for ensuring that the staff receives the training and information necessary to address the issues facing municipal government. 
(f)  Respect and courtesy. All staff members shall show one another, each council member, and the public respect and courtesy at all times. They are also responsible for making objective, professional presentations to ensure public understanding and confidence in the process. 
(g)  Conflicts. Any conflicts arising between the city staff and the city council will not be allowed to affect the normal course of business, but will be addressed by the mayor and the city manager outside of a public meeting. 
(h)  Council orientation. The city manager, after an election, will ensure that the staff has prepared information needed for the orientation of new council members and will also inform them of the Texas Municipal League's new council member orientation training opportunities. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-81. - Statements by public officials regarding litigation. 
(a)  When the City of Wichita Falls is involved in litigation or a legal dispute, council members shall refrain from commenting on settlements, appeals, or other issues related to the subject until the matter is resolved. 
(b)  The city manager, city attorney or designated public information officer, shall be authorized to provide any public responses or comments as needed on matters involving potential claims against the city or anticipated or on-going litigation. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-82. - City council requested information. 
(a)  City council members seeking information or documents, or other data, from staff shall make those requests through the city manager, city attorney, or city clerk. 
(b)  Information, documentation or data requested by a council member from staff shall be provided to all members of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-83. - Council agendas and meetings. 
(a)  City staff will make all meeting notices, agendas, minutes, and supporting documentation available to the city council and to the public via the city's official website. If supporting documentation is not available to the city council in advance of a workshop meeting, at city council's discretion the council will be given two workshop sessions to discuss the item before it moves to a business meeting for action. 
(b)  City council meetings will be live streamed and archived in their entirety and made available to the public via the city's official website. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-84. - Media. 
(a)  Since government is only successful when the citizens are kept informed and educated about the issues facing their municipality, it is necessary that the media play a role in the governmental process. It is through an informed public that progress is ensured and good government remains sensitive to its constituents. These guidelines are designed to help ensure fair relationships with all media reporters. The city council and the city manager recognize that the media provides an important link between the city council and the public. It is desired to establish a professional working relationship to help maintain a well-informed and educated citizenry. 
(b)  Media shall be welcome to attend all public meetings of the city council. 
(c)  Media may be asked to occupy a designated area in some circumstances but may generally locate in places open to the public. 
(d)  Media may not disturb the decorum or professionalism of city council meetings or work sessions. 
(e)  Media may contact the mayor and city council members directly. 
(f)  The mayor is the primary spokesperson for the city on matters regarding policy decisions or any city council information pertaining to issues on the agenda. To ensure fair treatment of an issue, any clarifications requested by the media on the issue should be addressed after the meeting. When opposing positions have been debated, regardless of the outcome, the public is better informed when all sides have adequate coverage by the media. This lets the public know the item was seriously debated and options discussed before a vote was taken, and helps build confidence in their government. In respect to each city council member and the citizens of the city, the views presented by each city council member should be given equitable representation. Although council members may express differing ideas, equitable representation helps promote unity of purpose by allowing the public to be informed of each council member's position during his/her term of office and not solely during an election campaign. 
(g)  City council members may not speak to media or the public on behalf of the body; they may speak only as an individual member. 
(h)  To preserve the decorum and professionalism of city council meetings, the media are requested to refrain from talking with other people in the audience and to conduct any interview with the public outside the meeting room while the city council is in session. Media interviews will not take place in city council chambers during a meeting. 
(i)  Media wishing to speak to city staff are asked to comply with the media policy developed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-85. - Council may discipline its own members. 
(a)  In the event a council member violates the Charter, these rules, or any other ordinance of the city, or acts in a manner that causes embarrassment or disgrace to the City of Wichita Falls, the city council on an affirmative vote of five members, may discipline the offending member. (Charter section 34) 
(b)  Progressive discipline. The City of Wichita Falls City Council's progressive discipline policy and procedures are designed to provide a structured corrective action process to improve and prevent a recurrence of undesirable behavior and performance issues. Outlined below are the steps of the council's progressive discipline policy and procedures. The city council reserves the right to combine or skip steps depending on the facts of each situation and the nature of the offense. Some of the factors that will be considered are whether the offense is repeated despite coaching, counseling or training, and the impact the conduct and performance issues have on the organization. 
(c)  Discipline of a council member may only take place after an executive session is held to discuss the offense. The offending member shall be present at the executive session to answer any questions asked by members of the city council or make other statements as he or she may desire to make in his or her defense. If the offending member refuses to attend the executive session, the remaining members of the city council may proceed in his or her absence. The outcome of the executive session may be as follows and shall be made publicly in open session in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act: 
(1)  No action. The city council chooses to take no action. 
(2)  Issue a statement finding the complaint is unfounded, totally without merit, brought for the purpose of harassment, or brought in bad faith. 
(3)  Issue a letter of notification when the violation is unintentional. A letter of notification shall advise the offending member of any steps to be taken to avoid future violations. 
(4)  Private censure. The city council may choose to privately censure the offending member, leaving their comments to the offending member left in the confines of the executive session. 
(5)  Letter of admonition. Issue a letter of admonition when the violation is minor or may have been unintentional, but calls for a more substantial response than a letter of notification. 
(6)  Public censure. The city council may choose to publicly censure the offending member through a resolution and entered into the public record. 
(7)  Suspension. The city council may choose to suspend the offending member from meetings, including executive sessions. 
(8)  Forfeiture of salary. 
a.  The city council may choose to suspend the monthly salary of the offending member for a designated period of time commensurate with the seriousness of the offense. 
b.  The mayor or any council member absent from a regular or regularly called meeting of the city council, except on account of his own illness, or illness in his immediate family, or absence from the city where excused by the city council prior to such absence, shall forfeit two percent of his entire annual compensation for each such absence. (Charter section 38) 
(9)  Expulsion. The city council may, with "consent of five-sevenths of all the members, expel a council member." (Charter section 34) 
(d)  All records of council discipline shall be kept by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Secs. 2-86-2-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SOCIAL MEDIA 

Sec. 2-106. - Social media. 
    The term "social media" refers to forms of electronic communication through which users create online communities to share information, ideas, personal messages and other content. Some examples include, but are not limited to, Internet-based platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and YouTube. Many local governments use social media as a tool to communicate with citizens. Rather than waiting until a regularly scheduled council meeting to receive citizen input, city officials are able to instantly interact with them via social media. Although this technology greatly increases communication outreach and efficiency, some restrictions are required in order to comport with federal and state law. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-107. - Commenting on city accounts. 
(a)  The City of Wichita Falls uses social media to send and receive messages about city information, services and related programs with community stakeholders, including employees, vendors, citizens, media and other members of the public. 
(b)  Elected officials should understand the city's current guidelines for public participation, which are subject to change as new technology and tools emerge. 
(c)  Public comments may be removed from city-administered social media accounts if they contain any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Vulgar, physically threatening or harassing language. 
(2)  Content that promotes, fosters, or perpetuates discrimination on the basis of race, religion, gender, marital status, familial status, national origin, age, mental or physical disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, source of income or other protected status under applicable law. 
(3)  Inappropriate sexual content or similar links. 
(4)  Private or otherwise confidential information. 
(5)  Content that promotes illegal activity or encouragement of actions that may compromise public safety. 
(6)  Content that violates a legal ownership interest of any other party. 
(7)  Comments not topically related to the original article or post. 
(8)  Comments in support of or opposition to political candidates, campaigns or ballot measures during an election season. 
(9)  Promoting or advertising a commercial transaction, organization or event that is not sponsored or in direct relationship with the city. 
(10)  Organized political activity. 
(11)  Information that may compromise the safety or security of the public or public systems. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-108. - Use of personal accounts. 
(a)  As a policy-making body, city council members are given more latitude than city employees to publicly express thoughts and opinions on local issues. However, as an elected official, council members should be aware of additional risks related to their general participation on social media. 
(b)  Open Meetings Act. Communications between a quorum of council members about public business, no matter the forum or time, can constitute a "meeting" to which the Texas Open Meetings Act applies. If the Act applies to a discussion, an agenda must be posted 72 hours in advance, and the public must be allowed to attend. Therefore, city council members should consider the following when using personal social media accounts: 
(1)  Remove elected titles from profiles used to identify a personal social media account, and clearly state how constituents should communicate regarding public matters. 
(2)  Include an introductory statement in the profile or about section of the account that defines the purpose and topical scope of the page: "This account is intended for personal use only. The views, postings, positions or opinions expressed on this site are my own and do not represent those of the City of Wichita Falls. If you are a citizen of Wichita Falls and would like to discuss city business, please go to [official page] or contact me at [official email]." 
(3)  Redirect information to official government sources and avoid making posts related to council member's official duties or governmental bodies. 
(4)  Redirect political dialogue requests to an alternative means of communication (i.e., email, phone or other preferred social media account). 
(5)  Avoid commenting on local issues where other council members are also participating in discussion. 
(6)  Avoid making posts and/or comments on behalf of the city and/or the city council. 
(7)  Avoid making posts and/or comments in an official capacity as an elected official. 
(8)  Avoid making posts and/or comments regarding city business. 
(c)  Public Information Act. State law clarifies the definition of "public information" as information that is written, produced, collected, assembled, or maintained in connection with the transaction of official business, which includes email, Internet posting, text message, instant message, and other electronic communication. Therefore, city council members should consider the following: 
(1)  Hide, rather than delete, clearly inappropriate public comments on their personal or official social media account, if possible. In some cases, these comments may still be subject to verification or public disclosure in the future. When in doubt, do not delete it. 
(2)  Avoid responding to inappropriate comments or personal attacks on social media. If the commenter persists, redirect them to an alternate method of communication (i.e., email). 
(3)  Be aware that a personal social media account, depending on its content, may still be subject to the Public Information Act. 
(d)  First Amendment. More constituents are posting comments on elected officials' personal pages to voice concerns on public issues. Once an elected official's social media page is opened for political discussion, it may be transformed into a limited public forum for speech and debate, instantly granting every user a First Amendment right to comment. 
    Therefore, city council members should consider the following: 
(1)  Limit open-ended political and city business discussions from personal social media accounts and redirect dialogue requests to an alternate channel. 
(2)  When in doubt, don't block users, especially those with whom a council member has previously engaged. Consult with legal counsel before blocking any users and document all actions and reasons for blocking. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-109. - Use of official accounts. 
    If city council members choose to create a social media account to engage with constituents, a best practice is to keep this account distinct and separate from other personal accounts that elected official maintains. City council members increasingly use social media for reelection purposes as well. However, mixing campaign and constituent communications from the same account could put councilors at risk for violating laws that prohibit using government resources for political purposes. 
    Therefore, city council members should consider the following: 
(1)  Make it official. The account profile, description and photo should clearly indicate an elected official's position as a member of the Wichita Falls City Council and his or her intent to use the account as a way of communicating with constituents. 
(2)  An elected official's account may be a limited public forum and must be open to the public. Engagement with the public on social media as an elected official establishes that platform as a limited public forum, which affords users the right to comment on published content. It also means that any speech restrictions or censorship is subject to strict scrutiny, and First Amendment activities generally may not be prohibited. Postings by elected officials in their capacities as city council members and comments on such postings, constitute a public record and should not be deleted. 
(3)  Prohibited content is defined by city policy. For consistency, elected officials should consider managing prohibited content on their accounts in the same way city-administered accounts are managed. 
(4)  Campaign separately. Council members in office should not use city administered or funded social media accounts for electioneering. It is equivalent to campaigning from the dais during a public meeting, which may violate state law. 
(5)  Involve legal counsel. If elected officials are unsure about publishing certain content, or feel justified in the removal of content, involve legal counsel before making a decision. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-110. - General guidelines. 
(a)  Be transparent. Honesty will be quickly noticed in the social media environment. If an elected official's private sector work could present a conflict of interest, he or she should be the first to acknowledge it. Elected officials should be clear about why they support, or don't support, certain policies or programs. 
(b)  Be judicious. Elected officials should make sure their efforts to be transparent do not violate any applicable legal guidelines for external communication. Consult with legal counsel before sharing conversations that are meant to be private or internal to the city or any other public entities. What is published is widely accessible, not easily retractable, and will be around for a long time, so consider the content carefully. Also, be aware that the social media account and anything published on that social media account may be subject to the Public Information Act. 
(c)  Be knowledgeable and factual. Elected officials should write in first-person and consider linking to their information sources. If publishing to a website outside of the city, consider using a clarifier such as: "these comments and opinions reflect my position as one member of the Wichita Falls City Council." If elected officials have any questions about complying with brand, trademark, copyright, fair use, confidentiality, or financial disclosure laws, seek an opinion from legal counsel. 
(d)  Be perceptive. In online social networks, the lines between public and private, personal and professional are often blurred. By identifying themselves as elected officials, council members are creating perceptions about their expertise and the city. Council members should be sure that all content associated with them is consistent with the city's values and professional standards. 
(e)  Be excited. The city is making important contributions to the community, state and nation, as well as to public dialogue on a broad range of issues. The city's activities are focused on providing services and innovation that benefits citizens and stakeholders. Share what Wichita Falls is learning and doing, and open up social media channels to learn from others. 
(f)  Be valuable . There is a lot of written content in the social media environment. The best way to reach an audience is to write about things that they value. Social communication from city leaders should help citizens, partners and families. It should be thought-provoking and build a sense of community. If it helps people improve knowledge or skills, build their businesses, do their jobs, solve problems, or understand the city better, then it adds value. 
(g)  Be responsible. What a city council member writes is ultimately their responsibility. If city council members are about to publish something that makes them even the slightest bit uncomfortable, they should not publish. If council members are still unsure, they might want to check with the public information officer or legal counsel. Ultimately, what council members publish is theirs, but so is the responsibility and potential consequence. 
(h)  Mistakes happen. City council members should acknowledge when they make a mistake. They should be upfront and quick to correct the mistake. If council members are posting to a blog, they can choose to modify an earlier post. Make it clear that modifications have been made. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-111. - Other. 
(a)  The City of Wichita Falls logo is copyrighted. It may only be used for official city business and may not be used on campaign materials or for personal business. Use of the city's official logo is governed by Policy No. 41, "Logo Use Policy." 
(b)  The mayor, as the ceremonial head of the city, is the issuer of proclamations, certificates, awards, city coins, etc. on behalf of the City of Wichita Falls. City council members wishing to bestow such honors shall request the mayor to issue and present. 
(c)  The mayor may sign letters and petitions making requests or stating positions on behalf of the city so long as they do not conflict with a city council decision or directive. 
(d)  Dedication plaques placed on city buildings shall include the names of the mayors and city council members who served from the time funding was budgeted for the project through completion. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-112. - Records retention. 
(a)  Because of a city council member's position as an elected official, activity on their social media accounts may create public records. Any content (messages, posts, photographs, videos, etc.) created or received using a social media account may be considered a record. Therefore, council members should consider the following: 
(1)  The city does not archive or manage council member social media accounts. Council members are solely responsible for the retention and archival of content published to their individual accounts. 
(2)  When in doubt, council members should not delete content without consulting with legal counsel first. 
(b)  Social media content administered by city employees, and intended for public access and comments, will follow a minimum retention period of two years, as established by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. This includes council member comments posted on city accounts. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-113. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this policy, unless otherwise stated, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  Comment. A message posted by site visitors, either in response to an existing topic or introducing a new topic. In general, the content of comments is controlled solely by the user, but often can be deleted, accepted or rejected prior to publishing by the site or page administrator. 
(2)  Connections. Any deliberate links between a user and a social media channel or page, whether it is initiated by the individual or by the site moderator. Terms used by various sites to describe a connection include friend, fan, follower or subscriber. 
(3)  Limited forum. A public forum created by the government voluntarily for expressive activity that may be restricted as to subject matter or class of speaker. Forum restrictions must be able to withstand strict judicial scrutiny of its effect on First Amendment rights. 
(4)  Post. In relation to social media accounts or online activity, anything published in an online forum or social media account. 
(5)  Social media. Internet based third-party platforms that facilitate interaction and engagement among individuals in a network or virtual community. Social media offers a participatory environment and includes user-generated content such as videos, photos, blogs, and wikis. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-114. - Violation of policy. 
    This policy is not meant to circumvent or bypass any of the other processes, policies or laws that are applicable to the city council. Social media activity and conduct by council members should not only comply with these policy terms, but all other processes, policies and laws that may apply as well. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-115. - Policy updates. 
    The city council reserves the right to update these terms of use at any time. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Secs. 2-116-2-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COUNCIL CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-136. - Purpose. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible only to the people of the city; that no officer shall permit any interest, financial or otherwise, direct or indirect, or engagement in any business, transaction or professional activity to conflict with the proper discharge of such person's duties in the public interest; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the city council at all times shall be maintained as a nonpartisan body. To implement such a policy, the city council deems it advisable to enact a code of ethics for officials, as defined in this article, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, to serve not only as a guide for official conduct of the city's public servants, but also as a basis for discipline for those who refuse to abide by its terms, the overriding interest being that such officers of the city shall at all times strive to avoid even the appearance of impropriety. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-137. - Title; application. 
(a)  This section shall be known as the code of ethics. 
(b)  This code of ethics shall apply to all officials as defined in this article, including members of the city council. 
(c)  This code of ethics does not apply to employees, including those individuals employed on a full-time, part-time or internship basis (including those who may serve on a city board, committee or commission) nor to independent contractors of the city. The standards of conduct for employees are governed by the City of Wichita Falls Personnel Policies and the City Charter. 
(d)  This code of ethics applies to the conduct or actions of public officers, as defined in this article which occurs in whole or in part after the date of adoption of this article. 
(e)  This code of ethics applies to officials only while such persons hold such position or office. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-138. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Benefit means anything reasonably regarded as pecuniary or economic gain or pecuniary or economic advantage, including benefit to any other person in whose welfare the beneficiary has a direct and substantial interest. 
    Business entity means any person, entity, corporation (whether for-profit or nonprofit), general or limited partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venture, unincorporated association or firm, institution, trust, foundation, holding company, joint-stock company, receivership, or other entity recognized by law, whether or not organized for profit, which has an economic interest, or seeking such, in conducting business with the city. Business entity also includes any business entity that represents a party conducting or seeking to conduct business with the city. 
    City means the City of Wichita Falls, Texas. 
    City council means the governing body of the city. 
    Confidential information means any information to which an official has access in such person's official capacity which may not be disclosed to the public except pursuant to state and/or federal law and which is not otherwise a matter of public record or public knowledge. Confidential information includes the following information, however transmitted: (i) any information from a meeting closed to the public pursuant to the Texas Open Meetings Act or other law regardless of whether disclosure violates the Texas Open Meetings Act or Texas Public Information Act; (ii) any information protected by attorney client, attorney work product, or other applicable legal privilege; and (iii) any information deemed confidential by law. 
    Contract means any lease, claim, account or demand against or agreement with any entity or person, whether express or implied, executed or executory, oral or written. 
    Corporation means any corporation that has a board of directors appointed in whole or in part by the city council that is operating under the direct authority of or subject to the direct control of the city council. 
    Employee means any person employed by the city, including those individuals on a part-time or internship basis, but does not include independent contractors. 
    Gift means anything of value, regardless of form, offered or given in the absence of adequate and lawful consideration. It does not include the receipt or acceptance of campaign contributions which are regulated by federal, state, and/or local laws or ordinances. 
    Knowingly means a person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with respect to the nature of the person's conduct or to circumstances surrounding the conduct when the person is aware of the nature of the conduct or that the circumstances exist. A person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with respect to a result of the person's conduct whether the person is aware that the conduct is reasonably certain to cause the result. 
    Officer or official means any member of the city council, city employee appointed by the city council, and any appointed member of a city board, commission or committee established by ordinance, charter, state law or otherwise, on a temporary or permanent basis, operating either under the direct or indirect authority or subject to either the direct or indirect control of the city council. This includes all boards and commissions under the direct authority of the city or city council and also the following: 
(1)  4A Wichita Falls Economic Development Corporation; 
(2)  4B Sales Tax Corporation; 
(3)  Airport Board of Adjustment; 
(4)  Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals; 
(5)  Employee Benefits Trust Board; 
(6)  Firefighters' and Police Officers' Civil Service Commission; 
(7)  Metropolitan Planning Organization; 
(8)  Planning and Zoning Commission; 
(9)  All Tax Increment Financing Boards; 
(10)  Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
    Relative means any person related to an officer within the second degree by consanguinity or affinity. This relationship includes the spouse, parents, children, stepchildren, father and mother-in-law, or son and daughter-in-law, grandparents, grandchildren, sisters and brothers of the officer. 
    Special privileges means a right, advantage or favor of or for a particular person, occasion or purpose not otherwise available to others. 
    Substantial interest means (i) the ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock or shares of a business entity; (ii) the ownership of five percent or more, or $15,000.00 or more of the fair market value of a business entity; or (iii) funds received from the business entity exceed five percent of the person's gross income for the previous year, and action on the matter involving the business entity will have a special economic effect on the business entity that is distinguishable from the effect on the public. 
It is expressly provided herein that an investment or ownership in a publicly held company, in an amount less than $15,000.00 does not constitute a substantial interest. Substantial interest in real property means the person has an interest in the real property that is equitable or legal ownership with a fair market value of $2,500.00 or more; and it is reasonably foreseeable that an action on a matter involving the real property will have a special economic effect on the value of the real property distinguishable from its effect on the public. (Ownership includes any partnership, joint or corporate ownership or any equitable or beneficial interest as a beneficiary of a trust.) An officer is considered to have a substantial interest under this code of ethics if a person related to the officer in the second degree of consanguinity or affinity has a substantial interest under this code of ethics. 
    Vendor is any person who enters or seeks to enter into a contract with the city. The term includes: 
(1)  An agent of a vendor; 
(2)  An officer or employee of a state agency when that individual is acting in a private capacity to enter into a contract; and 
(3)  Texas Correctional Industries (but no other state agency). 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-139. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  No member of the city council or a relative thereof shall: 
(1)  Have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the city, nor shall they have a financial interest in a written subcontract with a contractor who is working for the city on a city project. 
(2)  Have a financial interest, directly or indirectly, in the sale to the city of any land, or rights or interest in any land, materials, supplies or service. The "financial interest" contemplated under this section requires that such person receive an actual financial benefit from the transaction with the city. An actual financial benefit from the transaction shall include: 
a.  An ownership in the entity transacting business with the city where the ownership interest is more than five percent. 
b.  Compensation as an employee, officer or director of the entity transacting business with the city where such compensation is affected by the entity's transaction with the city. 
(3)  Fail to disclose relationships with vendors who conduct business with the city. A city officer must file a "conflicts disclosure statement" with the city clerk in three specific situations: 
a.  If the officer or officer's family member has an employment or other business relationship with a vendor that results in the officer or officer's family member receiving taxable income of more than $2,500.00 in the preceding 12 months. An officer who receives investment income, regardless of amount, is not required to file a disclosure statement. Investment income includes dividends, capital gains or interest income gained from a personal or business checking or savings account or other similar account, a personal or business investment, or a personal or business loan. (Texas Local Government Code § 176.) 
b.  If the officer or officer's family member accepts one or more gifts from a vendor with an aggregate value of more than $100.00 in the preceding 12 months. (A "gift" includes transportation, lodging, and entertainment, even as a guest.) (Texas Local Government Code § 176.) 
c.  If the officer has a family relationship with the vendor. (Texas Local Government Code § 176.) 
(4)  Participate in a vote or decision on any matter in which the officer has a substantial interest. 
(5)  Represent or appear on behalf of private interests of others before the city council, or any agency, board, commission, corporation, or committee of the city, nor shall represent any private interests of others in any action or proceeding involving the city, nor voluntarily participate on behalf of others in any litigation to which the city is, or might be, an adverse party. The restrictions of subsection (c) do not prohibit an officer, or relative of an officer, who is the president, vice president or officer of a homeowners' association from appearing before the city council, or any agency, board, commission, or committee of the city to represent such homeowners' association, except that no such officer or relative of such officer shall appear before the agency, board, commission or committee of the city of which such officer is a member. 
(6)  Accept any gift from any person that might reasonably tend to influence such officer in the discharge of such person's official duties. The prohibition against gifts shall not apply to: 
a.  A lawful campaign contribution; 
b.  An honorarium in consideration for services unless the officer would not have been asked to provide the services but for the officer's position; 
c.  Meals, lodging, transportation in connection with services rendered by the officer at a conference, seminar or similar event that is more than merely perfunctory; 
d.  Complimentary copies of trade publications and other related materials; 
e.  Attendance at hospitality functions at local, regional, state or national association meetings and/or conferences; 
f.  Any gift which would have been offered or given to the person if such person was not an officer or employee of the city; 
g.  An occasional item with a value less than $50.00; 
h.  Tee shirts, caps and other similar promotional material; 
i.  Meals, transportation and lodging in connection with a seminar or conference at which the officer is providing services; 
j.  Gifts on account of kinship or a personal, or professional, or business relationship independent of the officer's status; 
k.  Complimentary attendance at political or charitable fund raising events; and 
l.  Meals, lodging, transportation, or entertainment furnished in connection with public events, appearances or ceremonies related to official city business, if furnished by the sponsor of such public events. 
(7)  Use such person's official position to secure special privileges or benefits for such person or others. 
(8)  Grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen, individual, business organization or group beyond that which is normally available to every other citizen, individual, business organization or group. 
(9)  Disclose confidential information. 
(10)  Engage in any outside activities which will conflict with or will be incompatible with such person's official position or duties as an officer of the city. 
(11)  Use city supplies, personnel, property, equipment or facilities (whether tangible or intangible) for any purpose other than the conduct of official city business, unless otherwise provided for by law, ordinance or city policy. 
(12)  Act as a surety on any official bond required for any officer or employee of the city, or for a business that has a contract, work or business with the city. 
(b)  Any willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office, and any member of the city council, officer, or employee found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit his office or position. Any violation of this section with the knowledge, expressed or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with the city, shall render the contract involved voidable by the city manager or city council. (Charter section 132) 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-140. - Additional standards. 
(a)  No member of the city council who is on the board of a nonprofit organization may vote on any funding request by that nonprofit organization, unless the nonprofit organization has a board of directors or trustees appointed in whole or in part by the city council. 
(b)  With the exception of those proceedings allowed under this article, no member of the city council shall personally appear in such person's own behalf before the city council, or any city board, commission, corporation or committee but may designate and be represented by a person of such person's choice in any such personal matter. 
(c)  No member of the city council, the City Planning and Zoning Commission, Board of Adjustment, Airport Board of Adjustment, or Construction Board of Adjustment, shall participate in, or vote on, any land use matter in which such officer has a substantial interest in any real property within 200 feet of the real property, the subject of the land use matter. For purposes of this subsection 2-140(c) "land use matter" shall mean zoning, plat approval, site plan or other development approvals or permits, variances or exceptions. The term "land use matter" does not include studies or similar matters that are for the benefit of the city and which are not unique to real property within 200 feet of the real property, the subject of the land use matter, in which the officer has a substantial interest. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-141. - Political patronage. 
(a)  No person in the administrative services of the city shall directly or indirectly solicit or receive, or be in any manner concerned in soliciting or receiving any assessment, subscription or contribution for any political party or purpose whatever. No person shall orally or by letter solicit or be in any manner concerned in soliciting any assessment, subscription or contribution for any political party or purpose from any person holding a position in administrative service of the city. (Charter section 133) 
(b)  No person shall use or promise to use his influence or official authority to secure any appointment, or prospective appointment, to any city position as a reward or return for personal or partisan political service. No person shall take a part in preparing any political assessment, subscription or contribution with the intent that it shall be sent or presented to or collect from any person in the service of the city and no person shall knowingly send or present, direct or indirectly, in person or otherwise, any political assessment, subscription or contribution to, or request its payment by any person in such service. (Charter section 133.) Any person who shall willfully or through culpable negligence violate this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall on conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00. No such person shall be appointed to any position in the service of the city and if he be an officer or employee of the city he shall immediately forfeit his office or employment. (Charter section 133) 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-142. - Political partisanship. 
(a)  No person about to be appointed to any position in the service of the city shall sign or execute a resignation, dated or undated, in advance of such appointment. No person in the service of the city shall discharge, suspend, lay off, reduce in grade or in any manner change the official rank or compensation of any person in such service, or promise or threaten to do so, for withholding or neglecting to make any contribution of money or service, or any other valuable thing, for any political purpose. (Charter section 134) 
(b)  No person in the service of the city shall use his official authority or influence to coerce the political action of any person or body, or to interfere with any nomination or election to public office. (Charter section 134) 
(c)  No person holding an appointive office or place under the provisions of this [article] shall act as an officer of a political organization or take any active part in a political campaign, or service as a member of a committee of any such organization, or circulate or seek signatures to any petition provided for by this [article], or by the primary or election laws of the state, other than an initiative or referendum petition, or act as a worker at the polls in favor of or opposed to any candidate for nomination or election to a public office, whether federal, state, county or municipal. (Charter section 134.) Any person who shall willfully or through culpable negligence violate this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall on conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00. No such person shall be appointed to any position in the service of the city and if he be an officer or employee of the city he shall immediately forfeit his office or employment. (Charter section 134) 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-143. - Dual office holding. 
(a)  No member of the city council shall, during the term for which he is elected, be appointed to any city, county, or state office or employment for which he would be paid compensation or which would create the possibility and/or appearance of conflicts of interest, which would be determined by the city council. (Charter section 136) 
(b)  Any appointive officer or employee of the city (except policemen and firemen), shall forfeit his office or employment if he shall be elected to any public office, if his holding of the elective office could create the possibility and/or appearance of conflicts of interest, or if it might materially interfere with his loyalty, efficiency and effectiveness as an officer or employee of the city, which would be determined by the city manager. (Charter section 136) 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-144. - Disclosure of substantial interest. 
    Any officer, who has a substantial interest in any matter pending before the body, board, commission, corporation or committee of which the officer is a member, before a vote or decision on such matter, shall file an affidavit stating the nature and extent of the substantial interest, and shall abstain from further participation in such matter. The affidavit shall be on a form provided by the city and must be filed with record keeper for such body, board, commission, corporation or committee. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-145. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Items discussed in executive session are to remain private and confidential. Disclosing any information (including disclosure of documents presented in executive session) is contrary to a council member's fiduciary obligation to the city and a violation of the rules of order. Except as provided by law, no officer, staff member or legal counsel may discuss or reveal the proceedings of an executive session to persons not present during the executive session. In the event an elected official is absent from the executive session the mayor, the city manager or the city attorney may brief the elected official who was absent from the meeting on the discussion. 
(b)  Attorney client communication, both verbal and written, are confidential. Except as provided by law, no officer, staff member, or legal counsel may discuss or reveal in any manner, information protected by the attorney client privilege. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-146. - False statement made verbally, in writing or on social media or via texts or emails regarding a city issue or use of city funds. 
(a)  False or misleading statement. The mayor and city council members shall not make false or misleading verbal, written, or electronic statements to the public regarding a city issue or use of city funds. A false statement is when it is not true, regardless of whether or not the speaker knows that it is false. A misleading statement is when it gives a false impression, is uninformative, unclear, or deceptive. This does not include statements or opinions made as to purely personal or private matters. 
(b)  Notice of correction. Should the city manager and city attorney issue to an offending city councilor an "official notice of correction," then that councilor shall refrain from making, either verbally or written, such false or misleading statements again. Additionally, once the offending councilor has been issued an "official notice of correction," he or she shall remove the false statement wherever it was posted or issue a retraction or clarification. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-147. - Complaints against officers. 
(a)  All complaints or allegations of a violation of this code of ethics against an officer shall be made in writing on a form provided by the city, sworn to before a notary public, and filed of record with the city clerk. Such complaint shall describe in detail the act or acts complained of and the specific section(s) of this code of ethics alleged to have been violated. A general complaint lacking in detail shall not be sufficient to invoke the investigation procedures contained herein; and anonymous complaints shall not be considered. The city clerk shall provide a copy of the complaint to the affected officer and the city council, and immediately refer the complaint to the city attorney, who shall initially review the complaint to determine if the complaint contains sufficient detail and alleges a violation of the code of ethics. The affected officer may file a written response to the complaint within seven business days after the complaint is filed with the city clerk, who shall forward the response, if any, to the city attorney. 
(b)  The city attorney shall submit a written report to the city council as soon as possible but not later than 15 business days after the receipt of the complaint, unless an extension is granted by a majority of the non-implicated city council members. The city attorney may contact the complainant, interview witnesses and examine any documents necessary for the report. Such report shall be comprehensive and explain in detail all facts, findings, and conclusions in support of the city attorney's opinion as to whether or not a violation of this code of ethics occurred. When the city attorney receives a vague complaint or one lacking in detail, the city attorney shall contact the complainant to request a written clarification. The complainant has seven business days to provide the city attorney with the written clarification. If the complainant fails to provide the city attorney with written clarification, or if after written clarification is provided, it is the opinion of the city attorney that the complaint is insufficient in detail and/or fails to allege a prima facie violation of the code of ethics, a written report to that effect shall be submitted to the city council. If a clarification is received, the city attorney shall have 15 days from the date of receipt of the clarification to submit a report to the city council. If the city attorney determines that a criminal violation may exist, the city attorney shall refer the matter to the appropriate law enforcement agency. 
(c)  If it is determined by the city attorney that the facts as alleged could constitute a violation of this code of ethics, then the city attorney shall, within 15 business days after receipt of the complaint, notify the mayor and city council members of the existence and nature of the complaint. The city council shall cause a meeting to convene, whether regular or special, within 20 business days after being so notified by the city attorney to further consider said complaint in executive session with mayor or any three members of the city council (excluding the mayor) causing such a meeting to be convened. In any event, the city attorney shall immediately proceed to fully investigate the alleged improprieties. For purposes of this investigation, the city attorney shall have all of the powers of investigation as are given to the city council by reason of the City Charter and shall report back to the city council as soon as possible but in no event more than 15 business days from the date of notification of the city council unless an extension is granted by the city council. Said report shall be comprehensive and explain in detail all facts, findings and conclusions in support of the city attorney's opinion as to whether a violation of this code of ethics occurred. 
(d)  The city council shall consider the complaint and the city attorney's report at an executive session of the city council. The affected officer may request that the complaint be considered in a public meeting. At such meeting, the city attorney shall present a written report to the city council describing in detail the nature of the complaint and the city attorney's findings and conclusions as to a possible violation of this code of ethics. The affected officer shall have the right to a full and complete hearing before the city council with the opportunity to call and cross-examine witnesses and present evidence in such person's behalf. The non-implicated city council members in attendance shall conduct a hearing and review the complaint. The city council may reject the complaint or take action authorized under this policy. 
(e)  No action or decision with regard to the complaint shall be made except in a meeting which is open to the public. 
(f)  The city council may appoint outside legal counsel, or may direct the city attorney to appoint outside legal counsel, or the city attorney in the city attorney's discretion, may appoint outside legal counsel, to perform the duties and responsibilities of the city attorney under subsection (b), (c) and (d) of this section. 
(g)  A complaint or allegation of a violation of this article may only be made against an officer while such person holds such position or office. A complaint made against an officer pursuant to this section shall be processed and resolved even if such person resigns from, or ceases to hold such position or office, prior to resolution of the complaint. 
(h)  In the event that a complaint is made against the city attorney for an alleged violation of these codes of ethics, the procedures of this section will be followed, except that the investigation and reporting responsibilities of the city attorney will be performed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-148. - Disciplinary action. 
    Violations of the council code of ethics may result in the city council taking disciplinary action pursuant to section 2-85. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-149. - Interpretation of content. 
    Any officer may request and the city attorney shall issue, a verbal or written opinion (as deemed appropriate) concerning the meaning or effect of any section, word, or requirement of this code of ethics as it affects such person. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
Sec. 2-150. - Review. 
    The city council may amend this policy as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 17-2019, § 1, 5-21-2019) 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - RESERVED 

Secs. 2-151-2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-2016, adopted Mar. 1, 2016, deleted Div. 2, §§ 2-126-2-131, which pertained to arts commission and derived from Code 2001, §§ 2-126-2-131; and Ord. No. 69-2008, § 1, adopted Oct. 21, 2008. 

Secs. 2-161-2-171. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 65-2018, adopted Dec. 18, 2018, deleted Div. 3, §§ 2-172-2-179, which pertained to veterans advisory council and derived from Ord. No. 56-2013, § 1, 10-1-2013. 

Secs. 2-172-2-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 30-2008, § 2, adopted May 20, 2008, repealed Div. 4, §§ 2-201-2-205 in its entirety. Former Div. 4, §§ 2-201-2-205 pertained to commission on highway transportation needs and derived from Code 1966, §§ 2-160.2-2-160.5.1. 

Secs. 2-201-2-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESERVED 

Secs. 2-231-2-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RESERVED 

Secs. 2-266-2-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - WATER RESOURCES COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-301. - Established; composition. 
(a)  There is established a permanent Water Resources Commission. The commission shall be composed of one representative of each of the following: 
(1)  Industry. 
(2)  Education. 
(3)  Commercial business representative. 
(4)  SAFB/government representative. 
(5)  Water resources engineer. 
(6)  Citizenry at large. 
(b)  In addition, the city council will appoint one of its members to serve as liaison to the commission, and the city manager will appoint a staff person to support and administer the commission proceedings. 
(Code 1966, § 2-144; Code 2001, § 2-301; Ord. No. 96-2006, § 1, 12-19-2006; Ord. No. 07-2009, § 1, 1-6-2009) 
Sec. 2-302. - Appointment of members; meetings; terms of office. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint members to the Water Resources Commission from the interested and qualified applicants. 
(b)  A chairperson for the commission shall be selected by the appointed members from among the group. 
(c)  The commission shall meet not less than quarterly, and minutes from each meeting with observations and recommendations shall be submitted to the city council at a regularly scheduled council meeting. 
(d)  The members of the commission shall be city residents and shall serve for terms of two years, but each member shall continue to serve until his successor is appointed. The term for the industry and education members shall expire on December 31 in each even-numbered year. The term for the members representing the home-building industry, landscaping/irrigation profession and the citizenry at large shall expire on December 31 in each odd-numbered year. A person shall not be appointed for more than three consecutive full terms. The term of office as chairperson will expire at the end of the calendar year annually, and the chairperson shall be eligible for reelection. 
(Code 1966, § 2-145; Code 2001, § 2-302) 
Sec. 2-303. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Water Resources Commission is to advise the city council and staff in the implementation of the water conservation plan and to assure the council that water resources are being managed judiciously in accordance with the plan. The commission shall participate in the periodic update of the water conservation plan. 
(Code 1966, § 2-146; Code 2001, § 2-303) 
Secs. 2-304-2-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - YOUTH ACTIVITIES ADVISORY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-331. - Created; purpose. 
    There is created a commission to be known as the Youth Activities Advisory Council. The purpose of the council shall be to develop, promote and coordinate activities for youth in the city and to advise the city council on matters pertaining to youth. 
(Code 1966, § 2-174; Code 2001, § 2-331) 
Sec. 2-332. - Duration. 
    The Youth Activities Advisory Council shall continue in operation perpetually, unless it is terminated by the city council. 
(Code 1966, § 2-183; Code 2001, § 2-332) 
Sec. 2-333. - Composition; term of members. 
(a)  The members of the Youth Activities Advisory Council shall be approved by the city council. 
(b)  The Youth Activities Advisory Council shall be composed of 12 members, each of whom shall be a city resident and a student at a high school within the city and who shall serve without pay. Such membership shall be for a period of one year. All terms will begin on June 1 and will end on May 31 of the following year. All vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the city council and shall be for the remainder of the term of the vacating member. 
(c)  Any member of the Youth Activities Advisory Council may be removed at any time by a five-sevenths vote of the city council for good reason. 
(Code 1966, § 2-175; Code 2001, § 2-333) 
Sec. 2-334. - Ex officio members. 
    To assist the Youth Activities Advisory Council, there shall also be two ex officio nonvoting members, one of whom shall be a member of the city council. The second shall be the Youth Activities Advisory Council administrator. Both ex officio members shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve without pay. 
(Code 1966, § 2-176; Code 2001, § 2-334) 
Sec. 2-335. - Officers. 
    The Youth Activities Advisory Council shall select from among its members a chairperson and such other officers as may be deemed desirable or necessary and who shall serve at the will of the council. 
(Code 1966, § 2-177; Code 2001, § 2-335) 
Sec. 2-336. - Quorum; voting. 
    Five members of the Youth Activities Advisory Council shall constitute a quorum. All matters shall be decided by a majority vote of the members present. If a tie vote occurs on any matter coming before the council, then, and only then, the chairperson shall cast a vote. 
(Code 1966, § 2-178; Code 2001, § 2-336) 
Sec. 2-337. - Bylaws and rules. 
    The Youth Activities Advisory Council may propose such bylaws and rules governing its functions as it deems best, subject to the approval of the city council. Such rules and bylaws shall not be in conflict with the Constitution or statutes of the United States or the state or with the city Charter and ordinances. 
(Code 1966, § 2-180; Code 2001, § 2-337) 
Sec. 2-338. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings of the Youth Activities Advisory Council may be called from time to time by the chairperson, the city council ex officio members, or the Youth Activities Advisory Council administrator. 
(Code 1966, § 2-181; Code 2001, § 2-338) 
Sec. 2-339. - Powers and duties. 
    The Youth Activities Advisory Council is an official commission of the city, with the power to recommend to the city council actions that require official city support. The Youth Activities Advisory Council shall serve as an advisory body for any ordinances related to the city's youth. The council will develop programs to identify the needs of the city's youth and to develop a systematic approach to correcting problems as they are identified. 
(Code 1966, § 2-179; Code 2001, § 2-339) 
Sec. 2-340. - Funding. 
    The city council shall establish annually the amount of funds which shall be made available for the promotion and support of youth activities in the city. Prior to September 1 of each year, the council shall submit to the city council a list of program or project funding for the next year, along with full descriptions of such. Upon approval by the city council of projects or programs to be funded, expenditures will be authorized upon proper invoice. Recommendations for funding should be so developed as to take full advantage of funds made available through other public or private sources. 
(Code 1966, § 2-182; Code 2001, § 2-340) 
Secs. 2-341-2-365. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - HOSPITAL BOARD 

Sec. 2-366. - Established. 
    There is established a Hospital Board to be known as the Board of Directors of the United Regional Health Care System. 
(Code 1966, § 18-12; Code 2001, § 2-366) 
Sec. 2-367. - Appointment of members. 
(a)  The board consists of seven directors. A director may serve successive terms. 
(b)  The Commissioners' Court shall appoint four directors in its resolution creating the board, and the municipal governing body shall appoint three directors in its resolution of creating the board. 
(c)  Directors are appointed for staggered terms of two years. However, in making the initial appointments to the board the Commissioners' Court shall designate two of its appointees to serve two-year terms and two to serve one-year terms, and the governing body shall designate two of its appointees to serve two-year terms and one to serve a one-year term. 
(d)  The entity that makes an original appointment shall appoint a successor director on the expiration of a director's term or to fill, for the unexpired part of a term, a vacancy caused by death or resignation. 
(Code 2001, § 2-367) 
State Law reference- Appointment of board, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 265. 
Sec. 2-368. - Officers. 
(a)  The board shall elect a director as chairperson. The chairperson shall preside at board meetings and perform other duties and functions prescribed by the board. The chairperson may vote in the same manner as any other director. 
(b)  The board shall elect a secretary, who is not required to be a director. The secretary is the official custodian of the minutes, books, records, and seal of the board and shall perform other duties and functions prescribed by the board. 
(c)  The board may elect any other officer that the board considers necessary or advisable. 
(Code 2001, § 2-368) 
State Law reference- Officers, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 265. 
Sec. 2-369. - Authority. 
(a)  The board shall act through resolutions adopted by the board. The affirmative vote of four directors is required to adopt a resolution. 
(b)  The board is a joint agent of the county and the municipality for hospital purposes and shall act solely for the joint benefit of the country and the municipality. However, the board shall act independently in the exercise of powers, duties, and functions under this division. 
(c)  The board may appoint or employ any agent, employee, or official that the board considers necessary or advisable to carry out any power, duty, or function of the board. 
(Code 2001, § 2-369) 
State Law reference- Authority of board, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 265. 
Secs. 2-370-2-379. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 55-2016, adopted December 20, 2016, repealed Division 10, which pertained to multi-purpose events center advisory board and derived from Code 2001, §§ 2-380-2-383; Ord. No. 71-2006, § 1, 9-5-2006. 

Sec. 2-380. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 55-2016, adopted December 20, 2016, repealed § 2-380, which pertained to the creation of the multi-purpose events center advisory board and derived from Code 2001, § 2-380; Ord. No. 71-2006, § 1, 9-5-2006. 
Sec. 2-381. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 55-2016, adopted December 20, 2016, repealed § 2-381, which pertained to the representation of the multi-purpose events center advisory board and derived from Code 2001, § 2-381; Ord. No. 71-2006, § 1, 9-5-2006. 
Sec. 2-382. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 55-2016, adopted December 20, 2016, repealed § 2-382, which pertained to the term of office; meetings of the multi-purpose events center advisory board and derived from Code 2001, § 2-382; Ord. No. 71-2006, § 1, 9-5-2006. 
Sec. 2-383. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 55-2016, adopted December 20, 2016, repealed § 2-383, which pertained to the duties of the multi-purpose events center advisory board and derived from Code 2001, § 2-383; Ord. No. 71-2006, § 1, 9-5-2006. 
Secs. 2-384-2-389. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-390. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created an Emergency Medical Services Advisory Board. 
(Code 2001, § 2-390; Ord. No. 98-2007, § 1, 11-6-2007) 
Sec. 2-391. - Representation. 
    The Emergency Medical Services Advisory Board shall be composed of nine members, more particularly identified as follows: 
(1)  City manager, or his designee. 
(2)  Fire chief, or his designee. 
(3)  City manager of the City of Burkburnett, or his designee. 
(4)  City administrator of the City of Iowa Park, or his designee. 
(5)  Wichita County Judge, or his designee. 
(6)  One appointment by the mayor and city council who is licensed to practice medicine in the state. 
(7)  One appointment by the mayor and city council with no specific qualifications. 
(8)  One appointment by the county commissioners with no specific qualifications. 
(9)  One appointment to be shared by the governing bodies of the cities of Burkburnett and Iowa Park with no specific qualifications. 
(Code 2001, § 2-391; Ord. No. 98-2007, § 1, 11-6-2007) 
Sec. 2-392. - Term of office; meetings. 
(a)  A chairperson for the Emergency Medical Services Advisory Board shall be selected by the appointed members from among the group. The term of office as chairperson will expire at the end of the calendar year annually, and the chairperson shall be eligible for reelection. 
(b)  The board shall meet not less than annually, and minutes from each meeting with observations and recommendations shall be submitted to the city council at a regularly scheduled council meeting. 
(c)  The members of the board shall be residents of the entities by whom they were appointed. The appointed members shall serve for terms of two years; however, the initial terms shall be staggered so that the appointment made by the county commissioners and the appointment shared by Burkburnett and Iowa Park (section 2-391(8) and (9)) shall be initially appointed for a term ending December 31, 2008, and the appointments by the city (section 2-391(6) and (7)) shall initially be made for terms ending December 31, 2009. Thereafter, all members' terms shall end on December 31. Each member shall continue to serve until his successor is appointed. A member may be removed for any reason by the entity that made the appointment. 
(Code 2001, § 2-392; Ord. No. 98-2007, § 1, 11-6-2007) 
Sec. 2-393. - Duties. 
(a)  All members of the Emergency Medical Services Advisory Board shall have the same powers as any other member, including the right to vote, on all matters before the board. 
(b)  No person shall serve on the board if such person is an officer, director, employee, or is otherwise affiliated with, directly or indirectly, any ambulance operator whose activities are regulated by chapter 42. 
(c)  The Emergency Medical Services Advisory Board shall meet at least once annually to monitor the following sections of the joint ambulance services contract between Wichita County and the cities of Wichita Falls, Burkburnett and Iowa Park: 
(1)  Personnel. 
(2)  Vehicles. 
(3)  Financial information. 
(4)  Service level. 
(d)  In addition to the minimum annual meeting, the board shall meet on an as-needed basis to review any citizen complaint received by any of the entities related to the provision of emergency medical services under the ambulance services contract. Any complaint must be written, signed and sent to the attention of any of the governing bodies of the entities to convene a meeting of the board. It shall be the responsibility of the recipient to direct the complaint to the Emergency Medical Services Advisory Board. 
(e)  The Emergency Medical Services Advisory Board's authority to review the service under this division shall in no way affect the independent contractor relationship between the entities and any contractor under this division, and the review thereof is to make inquiry as to whether or not adequate emergency medical services are being provided to the citizens of the city, but not for the purposes of controlling the duties or functions of the operation or specific means or manner of supplying such service by the contractor. 
(Code 2001, § 2-393; Ord. No. 98-2007, § 1, 11-6-2007) 
Secs. 2-394-2-420. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of council to establish administrative departments, §§ 7(q), 60; administrative service, §§ 56-64; city manager's responsibility for administration of city affairs, § 58. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-421. - Departments created. 
    The following administrative departments are created and shall be responsible to the city manager unless otherwise provided in this Code or by the Charter: 
(1)  Administrative Services. 
(2)  City Clerk. 
(3)  Finance. 
(4)  Fire. 
(5)  Health. 
(6)  Law. 
(7)  Parks and Recreation. 
(8)  Community Development. 
(9)  Police. 
(10)  Public Works. 
(11)  Aviation, Traffic and Transportation. 
(12)  Multi-Purpose Events Center. 
(Code 1966, § 2-3(a); Code 2001, § 2-421) 
Charter reference- Health Department, § 60; Law Department, § 64; Finance Department, § 65. 
Sec. 2-422. - Control of administrative work by city manager. 
    All of the administrative work of the city government shall be under the control of the city manager, excepting such functions as are by the city Charter or in accordance with appropriate ordinances assigned otherwise. 
(Code 1966, § 2-3(c); Code 2001, § 2-422) 
Charter reference- City manager, §§ 56-59. 
Secs. 2-423-2-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 2-451. - Bond. 
    The city council shall require the city manager, before entering upon the duties of office, to execute a good and sufficient surety company bond in such amount as may be set by the city council, payable to the city, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of office. The premium of such bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 2-35; Code 2001, § 2-451 
Sec. 2-452. - Acting city manager. 
    In case of the temporary absence or disability of the city manager for a period of time which is less than 15 days, the city manager may designate some qualified person to perform the duties of the office. The person so designated shall have authority and it shall be his duty to perform the duties of the city manager during such absence or disability of the city manager. The acting city manager shall be removable peremptorily at the will of the city council. 
(Code 1966, § 2-34; Code 2001, § 2-452) 
Charter reference- Absence or disability of city manager, § 57. 
Sec. 2-453. - Duties prescribed by Charter. 
    The duties of the city manager shall be those prescribed by the Charter. 
(Code 1966, § 2-33; Code 2001, § 2-453) 
Charter reference- City manager generally, §§ 56-59, 62. 
Sec. 2-454. - Authority to approve and execute city contracts. 
    The city manager is authorized to execute city contracts in an amount not to exceed $50,000.00 and change orders to city contracts in an amount not to exceed the maximum allowable amount under state law. 
(Code 1966, § 2-11(a); Code 2001, § 2-454) 
State Law reference- Change orders, Texas Local Government Code § 252.048. 
Sec. 2-455. - Authority to prescribe rules and regulations. 
    The city manager may prescribe such general rules and regulations as he may deem necessary or expedient for the general conduct of the administrative department. The director of each city department shall in like manner prescribe such rules and regulations as he may deem necessary and expedient for the proper conduct of his department, not inconsistent with the general rules and regulations prescribed by the city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 2-36; Code 2001, § 2-455) 
Sec. 2-456. - Transfer of work loads between departments authorized. 
(a)  In order to expedite the work of any city department or to adequately administer an increase in the duties which may devolve on any department or to cope with periodic or seasonal changes, the city manager is empowered to transfer employees temporarily from one department to perform similar duties in another department. Likewise, each department director shall have power to transfer employees from one bureau or division to another within his department. 
(b)  The city manager may direct any department or bureau to perform work for any other department or bureau. 
(Code 1966, § 2-37; Code 2001, § 2-456) 
Sec. 2-457. - Authority to assign or rent office space. 
    All space in buildings which belong to the city shall be assigned by the city manager to the use and occupancy of the various city departments and offices, and the city manager is authorized to rent such space as is not needed by the city to other persons. 
(Code 1966, § 2-38; Code 2001, § 2-457) 
Secs. 2-458-2-485. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference- City clerk appointed by city council, § 36; city clerk to be chief executive accounting officer, § 66; warrants to be issued by city clerk, § 106; city clerk to audit accounts of city officials who have resigned, died or been removed from office, § 107. 

Sec. 2-486. - Qualifications. 
    The city clerk shall be an experienced office executive. 
(Code 1966, § 2-39; Code 2001, § 2-486) 
Sec. 2-487. - Duties. 
(a)  The duties of the city clerk shall be those prescribed by the Charter, as especially set forth in sections 20, 21, 24, 26-28, and 36, and all other portions thereof, and such other duties as may be prescribed by the city council. 
(b)  The city clerk shall prepare the regular form deeds to be signed by the mayor conveying cemetery lots to the proper purchasers and shall keep an accurate record of all lots owned and unsold with the approved selling price of each. The city clerk shall charge a fee as prescribed by separate ordinance for the sales of cemetery lots and the recording of transfers of cemetery lots. 
(c)  The city clerk shall keep on file, properly indexed for ready reference, all ordinance records, minute records, contracts, leases and agreements. 
(Code 1966, § 2-40; Code 2001, § 2-487) 
Charter reference- Duties of the city clerk, §§ 36, 50, 130. 
Sec. 2-488. - Salary and bond. 
    The salary of the city clerk shall be fixed by the city council. The city clerk shall, before entering upon the duties of office, execute a good and sufficient surety company bond in such amounts as may be set by the city council, payable to the city and conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of office. The premium of such bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 2-41; Code 2001, § 2-488) 
Charter reference- Bonds, § 140. 
Sec. 2-489. - Acting city clerk. 
    In the absence or disability of the city clerk, the city manager shall designate some qualified person to perform the duties of the office. The person so designated shall have authority and it shall be his duty to perform the duties of the city clerk during such absence or disability of the city clerk. The acting city clerk shall be removable peremptorily at the will of the city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 2-42; Code 2001, § 2-489) 
Secs. 2-490-2-515. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DIRECTOR OF FINANCE 

Sec. 2-516. - Appointment. 
    The director of finance shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 2-44(a); Code 2001, § 2-516) 
Sec. 2-517. - Duties. 
(a)  The director of finance shall perform such duties as are prescribed by the Charter and city ordinances and the laws of the state and such other duties as may be prescribed by the city manager. 
(b)  The director of finance shall have authority to sell such personal city property as, in the opinion of the city manager, shall not be needed for further public use. 
(c)  The director of finance shall be in charge of information systems, purchasing, finance and accounting. 
(Code 1966, § 2-44(a), (b); Code 2001, § 2-517) 
Charter reference- Duties, §§ 65, 66. 
Sec. 2-518. - Salary and bond. 
    The salary of the director of finance shall be fixed by the city council. The director of finance shall, before entering upon his duties, execute a good and sufficient bond in such amount as may be set by the city council, payable to the city and conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of office. Such bond shall be in all respects approved by the city council. 
(Code 1966, § 2-45; Code 2001, § 2-518) 
Charter reference- Authority of city manager to appoint a director of finance, § 65; bonds for certain employees, § 140. 
Secs. 2-519-2-545. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DEPARTMENTS OF POLICE AND FIRE 

Sec. 2-546. - Established. 
    There are established departments of police and fire under the city's administrative code. 
(Code 1966, § 2-51; Code 2001, § 2-546) 
Sec. 2-547. - Appointment of chief of police. 
    The Police Department shall be under the direction of a chief of police who shall be appointed by the city manager and subject to his supervision as provided in Charter section 61. 
(Code 1966, § 2-51; Code 2001, § 2-547) 
Charter reference- Appointment of directors by city manager, § 61. 
Sec. 2-548. - Appointment of fire chief. 
    The Fire Department shall be under the direction of a fire chief who shall be appointed by the city manager and subject to his supervision as provided in Charter section 61. 
(Code 1966, § 2-51; Code 2001, § 2-547) 
Charter reference- Appointment of directors by city manager, § 61. 
Secs. 2-549-2-575. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DEPARTMENT OF LAW[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference- Creation of a Department of Law, §§ 7(q), 60; appointment of city attorney, § 61; qualifications and duties of city attorney, § 64. 

Sec. 2-576. - Composition. 
    The Department of Law shall consist of the city attorney and such assistant city attorneys and other subordinates appointed by him as shall be authorized by the city council. 
(Code 1966, § 2-60; Code 2001, § 2-576) 
Sec. 2-577. - Duties. 
    Duties of the Law Department shall be those prescribed by the Charter and such other duties as have been fixed by ordinance and as shall be required by the city council. 
(Code 1966, § 2-61; Code 2001, § 2-577) 
Secs. 2-578-2-605. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to establish departments, § 7(q). 

Sec. 2-606. - Established. 
    There is established a Department of Parks and Recreation in the city. 
(Code 1966, § 2-67; Code 2001, § 2-606) 
Sec. 2-607. - Organization. 
    The Department of Parks and Recreation shall consist of a director appointed by the city manager and such other assistants, clerks and employees as may be prescribed from time to time by the city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 2-68; Code 2001, § 2-607) 
Sec. 2-608. - Duties of director. 
    The director of parks and recreation shall be charged with the duties of caring for and maintaining all parks and cemeteries belonging to the city. He shall also be in charge of all public recreation and entertainment carried on under the supervision and control of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 2-69; Code 2001, § 2-608) 
Sec. 2-609. - Bond and salary of director. 
(a)  The director of parks and recreation, before entering upon the duties of office, shall execute a good and sufficient surety company bond in such amount as may be set by the city council, payable to the city, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of office. The premium of such bond shall be paid by the city. 
(b)  The salary of the director shall be fixed by the city council. 
(Code 1966, § 2-70; Code 2001, § 2-609) 
Secs. 2-610-2-635. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 

Sec. 2-636. - Created; composition. 
    The Department of Public Works created by this section shall consist of the director of the department, appointed by the city manager, and such other assistants, clerks and employees as may be prescribed from time to time by the city manager. 
(Code 1966, §§ 2-76, 2-87; Code 2001, § 2-636) 
Sec. 2-637. - Bond of director. 
    Before entering upon the duties of office, the director of public works shall execute a good and sufficient surety company bond in such amount as may be fixed by the city council, payable to the city, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of office. The premium of such bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 2-77; Code 2001, § 2-637) 
Sec. 2-638. - Director's qualifications and general duties. 
    The director of the Department of Public Works shall be a registered professional civil engineer, proficient in his profession and with five years' practical experience. He shall hold office at the pleasure of the city manager. He shall be custodian of and responsible for all maps, plans, profiles, field notes and other records and memoranda belonging to the city pertaining to his office and the works thereof, all of which he shall keep in proper order and condition, with full indexes thereof. He shall turn the maps, plans, profiles, field notes and other records and memoranda over to his successor, who shall give him duplicate receipts therefor, one of which he shall file with the city clerk. All maps, plans, profiles, field notes, estimates and other memoranda of professional work done by him or under his direction or control, during his term of office, shall be the city's property. 
(Code 1966, § 2-88(a); Code 2001, § 2-638) 
Sec. 2-639. - Specific duties of director. 
(a)  The director of public works shall have charge of the water supply, lakes, water purification and wastewater treatment, water distribution system, sanitary sewer system, and all property and appliances incident thereto and connected with the operation of the Department of Public Works or any extension thereof. The director shall perform such other duties as have been imposed upon him or may be imposed upon him by city ordinances. 
(b)  The director of public works shall be ex officio superintendent of streets, solid waste removal and public works. The director shall have charge of the planning, opening, construction, paving, maintenance and repair of all streets, boulevards, alleys, sidewalks and public ways. The director shall also perform such other duties relating to the department as may be required of him by the city manager or by city ordinances. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the director of public works, subject to the approval of the city manager, to furnish to any other city department such services, labor and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of such department. The expense of such service, labor and materials shall be charged by the department so furnished at actual cost. 
(Code 1966, §§ 2-78, 2-88(b), (c); Code 2001, § 2-639) 
Sec. 2-640. - Identification of employees. 
(a)  Inspectors, foremen and employees of the Department of Public Works, whose duty it may be to enter upon private premises to make inspections, read meters or examine pipes, fixtures, or attachments, used in connection with the water system, will be provided with credentials to identify them as authorized agents of the department. 
(b)  No person other than an authorized officer or employee of the Department of Public Works shall have or exhibit any credentials of the department. It shall be the duty of each and every officer and employee of the department upon resignation or dismissal to forthwith surrender and deliver to his supervisor or department head all credentials, tools and other property belonging to the department. 
(Code 1966, § 2-79; Code 2001, § 2-640) 
Sec. 2-641. - Right of entry of employees; refusal of admittance. 
(a)  All officers, inspectors, foremen and other authorized employees of the Department of Public Works shall, upon presentation of credentials, have free access at all reasonable hours to any premises supplied with city water for the purpose of making repairs, for the purpose of inspections, or for the purpose of reading the water meters. 
(b)  If any such authorized employee is refused admittance to any premises or being admitted shall be hindered or prevented in making such inspection, repairs, or reading meters, the Department of Public Works shall cause the water to be turned off from such premises after giving 24 hours' written notice to such owner or occupant of the premises. 
(Code 1966, § 2-80; Code 2001, § 2-641) 
State Law reference- Inspection warrants, Texas Ann. C.C.P. art. 18.05. 
Sec. 2-642. - Authority to make rules and regulations; violations. 
(a)  The Department of Public Works shall make and enforce such reasonable rules and regulations from time to time as may be deemed necessary for the efficient operation of the department. 
(b)  Any person violating such rules and regulations may have his water and service disconnected. 
(Code 1966, § 2-81; Code 2001, § 2-642) 
Secs. 2-643-2-670. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 2-671. - Created; director. 
    There is created a Department of Community Development, which shall be under the supervision of the director of community development. The director shall be appointed by the city manager and shall be directed by and responsible to the city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 2-89; Code 2001, § 2-671) 
Sec. 2-672. - Divisions. 
    Divisions of the Department of Community Development shall be as follows: 
(1)  Planning. 
(2)  Building inspections. 
(3)  Code enforcement. 
(4)  Housing. 
(5)  Property management. 
(Code 2001, § 2-672) 
Sec. 2-673. - Duties of director. 
(a)  The director of community development shall be charged with the supervision of the Department of Community Development. The director shall be in charge of divisions and their responsibilities as follows: 
(1)  A Planning Division that is charged with the administration of codes and ordinances related to development and other codes, ordinances, processes and actions as assigned by the director. There shall be established a person under the direction of the director known as the city planning administrator, and any reference in this Code or other code to planning director shall be held to mean the city planning administrator. 
(2)  A building inspections division that is charged with the administration of various codes and regulations associated with the building industry and other actions or processes as determined necessary by the director. There shall be established a person under the direction of the director known as the building code administrator, and any reference in this Code or other code to building official shall be held to mean the building code administrator. 
(3)  A housing division responsible for the provision of housing, housing opportunities and processes or actions regarding the development of opportunities and programs associated with various grants or other such sources following applicable federal or state regulations or as determined by the director. There shall be established a person under the direction of the director known as the housing administrator, and any reference in this Code or other code to another title for this person shall be held to mean the housing administrator. 
(4)  A code enforcement division responsible for the enforcement of various codes and ordinances involving violations thereof. There shall be established a person under the direction of the director known as the code enforcement supervisor, and any reference in this Code or other code to another title for this person shall be held to mean the code enforcement supervisor. 
(5)  A property management division charged with the sale of city property, the acquisition of property, acting as trustee of properties, lake lot administration and other associated responsibilities as may be determined by the director. There shall be established a person under the direction of the director known as the property administrator, and any reference in this Code or other code to another title for this person shall be held to mean the property administrator. 
(b)  The director may organize responsibilities and duties of these divisions, create or consolidate activities of divisions, and may thereby increase or decrease the number and responsibilities of divisions. The director shall provide the necessary and appropriate staff to carry out processes and actions in support of city-sponsored programs and boards and commissions as directed by the city manager. The director shall develop programs, activities and processes related to economic and area development and redevelopment. The director may serve on boards and commissions of for-profit, not-for-profit and nonprofit organizations as necessary. The director shall perform other duties as defined by the city manager or as required by ordinance. 
(Code 1966, § 2-90; Code 2001, § 2-673) 
Secs. 2-674-2-700. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 

Sec. 2-701. - Created. 
    There is created a department of administrative services, which shall be under the supervision of the city manager, who shall delegate the responsibilities of the department as necessary. These responsibilities include control over personnel, risk management, building maintenance, the municipal golf course, public information, municipal court, employee benefits administration, and other such functions as may be assigned. 
(Code 1966, § 2-95; Code 2001, § 2-701) 
Secs. 2-702-2-730. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - DEPARTMENT OF AVIATION, TRAFFIC AND TRANSPORTATION 

Sec. 2-731. - Created; director. 
    There is created a Department of Aviation, Traffic and Transportation which shall be under the supervision of the director of aviation, traffic and transportation. Such director shall be appointed by the city manager and shall be directed by and responsible to the city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 2-97; Code 2001, § 2-731) 
Sec. 2-732. - Duties of director; divisions. 
(a)  The director of the Department of Aviation, Traffic and Transportation shall be charged with the supervision of the Department of Aviation, Traffic and Transportation. 
(b)  The director of the Department of Aviation, Traffic and Transportation shall be charged with the supervision of aviation, traffic, the central garage and operation of the public transportation system. 
(c)  The Department of Aviation, Traffic and Transportation shall have the following divisions: 
(1)  Traffic. 
(2)  Aviation. 
(3)  Central garage. 
(4)  Public transportation. 
(Code 1966, § 2-98; Code 2001, § 2-732) 
Secs. 2-733-2-760. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Charter reference- Department of health, created, § 60. 

Sec. 2-761. - Created. 
    There is created in Charter section 60 a Department of Health, which shall be under the supervision of the director of health. Such director shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 2-98.1; Code 2001, § 2-761) 
Sec. 2-762. - Duties of director. 
    The director of health shall have supervision of the administration of public health, laboratory/water pollution and environmental health services. 
(Code 1966, § 2-98.2; Code 2001, § 2-762) 
Secs. 2-763-2-780. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - DEPARTMENT OF MULTI-PURPOSE EVENTS CENTER 

Sec. 2-781. - Created. 
    There shall be created a Department of Multi-Purpose Events Center, which shall be under the supervision of an executive director. Such director shall be appointed by the city manager. 
Sec. 2-782. - Duties of director. 
    The director shall have supervision of the convention and visitor's bureau and of the rental and management of the Memorial Auditorium, Ray Climer Exhibit Hall, Bridwell Agricultural Center, and Kay Yeager Coliseum. 
Secs. 2-783-2-815. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS AND PROGRAMS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-816. - Employee Benefit Trust Fund. 
(a)  Created. That certain agreement and declaration of trust, a copy of which is on file in the City Clerk's office and made a part of this section, establishing an employee benefit trust for the city is approved. The members of the Trust Committee, appointed as provided in subsection (b) of this section, are authorized to execute the agreement for the city. 
(b)  Appointment of trustees. The city manager, director of finance, city attorney, and personnel officer (human resources manager) are appointed as trustees and shall be known as the Trust Committee. 
(c)  Trust Committee authorized to utilize city resources. Each trustee, and the Trust Committee as a whole is authorized to utilize city resources in conducting the business of the employee benefit trust. The Trust Committee may establish reasonable fees to be paid to the city for the use of such resources. 
(Code 1966, § 2-101; Code 2001, § 2-816) 
Sec. 2-817. - Public holidays designated. 
(a)  Public holidays of the city shall mean the following days only: 
(1)  January 1, or New Year's Day. 
(2)  Third Monday in February, or Presidents Day. 
(3)  Last Monday in May, or Memorial Day. 
(4)  July 4, or Independence Day. 
(5)  First Monday in September, or Labor Day. 
(6)  Fourth Thursday in November, or Thanksgiving Day, and the following Friday. 
(7)  December 24, or Christmas Eve. 
(8)  December 25, or Christmas Day. 
(9)  Two floating holidays. 
(b)  When any one of the days listed in subsection (a) of this section falls on Sunday, the Monday following such day shall be declared a holiday. When any one of such days falls on Saturday, the Friday preceding such day shall be declared a holiday. 
(Code 1966, § 2-100; Code 2001, § 2-817) 
Sec. 2-818. - Retirement age for employees. 
    Retirement for police and fire civil service employees shall be on the last day of the month following the month in which the employee reaches 65 years of age. In the police and fire service, there is factual basis for believing that substantially all employees above the age of 65 years would be unable to perform safely and efficiently the duties of their particular jobs; thus, retirement at age 65 years is a bona fide occupational qualification for these employees. 
(Code 1966, § 2-99(a); Code 2001, § 2-818) 
Secs. 2-819-2-845. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Municipal Retirement System generally, Texas Government Code § 843.001 et seq. 

Sec. 2-846. - Election to participate. 
    On behalf of the city, the city council exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments, including certain employees of the Fire Department not eligible to participate in the city Firefighters' Relief and Retirement Fund, participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in Texas Government Code § 843.001 et seq. All of the benefits and obligations of such system are accepted. 
(Code 1966, § 2-106; Code 2001, § 2-846) 
Sec. 2-847. - Employees included. 
(a)  All city employees participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System, with the exception of civil service firefighters. 
(b)  Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department shall be included within and subject to the provisions of the Texas Municipal Retirement System beginning upon the date such person becomes an employee, as defined in such system. 
(Code 1966, § 2-107; Code 2001, § 2-847) 
Sec. 2-848. - Provisions on file. 
    All provisions regarding contributions and the benefits under the Texas Municipal Retirement System are on file in the City Clerk's office. 
(Code 1966, § 2-108; Code 2001, § 2-848) 
Secs. 2-849-2-875. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CIVIL SERVICE FOR FIREFIGHTERS AND POLICE OFFICERS 

Sec. 2-876. - Adopted. 
    In accordance with Texas Local Government Code § 143.001 et seq., which was adopted by the qualified city voters, there is established a civil service system for firefighters and police officers, and pursuant thereto there is established a Firefighter's and Police Officer's Civil Service Commission which shall consist of three members sympathetic to the principles of the merit system. 
(Code 1966, § 11-20; Code 2001, § 2-876) 
Secs. 2-877-2-905. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEVELOPMENT FEES 

Sec. 2-906. - Building permits and inspections. 
    A minimum fee established by separate ordinance shall be charged for issuing any class of permit required by the building code. In addition to the minimum fee, there shall be charged an inspection fee established by separate ordinance. 
(Code 1966, § 23-17(1); Code 2001, § 2-906; Ord. No. 79-2003, § 1, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 40-2008, § 1, 8-5-2008; Ord. No. 30-2009, § 2, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 53-2010, § 3, 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 2-907. - Electrical permits. 
    A minimum fee established by separate ordinance shall be charged for issuing any class of electrical permit required by the electrical code. In addition to the minimum fee, there shall be charged an inspection fee established by separate ordinance. 
(Code 1966, § 23-17(2); Code 2001, § 2-907; Ord. No. 79-2003, § 1, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 40-2008, § 1, 8-5-2008; Ord. No. 53-2010, §§ 3, 4, 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 2-908. - Plumbing permits. 
    A minimum fee established by separate ordinance shall be charged for issuing any class of permit required by the city plumbing code. In addition to the minimum fee, there shall be charged an inspection fee established by separate ordinance. 
(Code 1966, § 23-17(3); Code 2001, § 2-908; Ord. No. 79-2003, § 1, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 40-2008, § 1, 8-5-2008; Ord. No. 53-2010, § 3, 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 2-909. - Mechanical permits. 
    A minimum fee established by separate ordinance shall be charged for issuing any class of permit required by the city mechanical code. In addition to the minimum fee, there shall be charged an inspection fee established by separate ordinance. 
(Code 1966, § 23-17(4); Code 2001, § 2-909; Ord. No. 79-2003, § 1, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 40-2008, § 1, 8-5-2008; Ord. No. 53-2010, § 3, 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 2-910. - Final and preliminary platting. 
    Fees for final and preliminary platting shall be established by separate ordinance. 
(Code 1966, § 23-17(5); Code 2001, § 2-910) 
Sec. 2-911. - Miscellaneous development fees. 
    Miscellaneous development fees shall be established by separate ordinance. 
(Code 1966, § 23-17(6)-(13); Code 2001, § 2-911; Ord. No. 2-2004, § 1, 1-6-2004; Ord. No. 71-2009, § 1, 10-6-2009) 
Sec. 2-912. - Contractor work permit. 
(a)  In lieu of the permits and fees established by separate ordinance, the building code administrator shall be authorized to issue and charge for a contractor work permit. Such contractor work permit, when so issued, shall authorize the repair, replacement or installation of appliances or fixtures regulated by the plumbing, electrical or mechanical code, and as specified by the building code administrator. Contractor work permits shall only be issued to licensed master plumbers, licensed master or industrial electricians or licensed air conditioning contractors as required by the applicable city codes. 
(b)  A fee established by separate ordinance shall be charged for each contractor work permit, which shall authorize and include ten separate permits for work at individual work sites or locations. 
(c)  Any work authorized by such contractor work permit shall not be commenced until an individual permit has been completed in full by the contractor for each location of work and is posted or otherwise available at the job site of such proposed work. A contractor who is found doing work without this permit completely filled out and on the job site shall be treated as working without a permit and subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee, in addition to the required permit fees. 
(d)  If, at any time, any license, bond or insurance, as required by the city or state, is revoked or expires, all permits issued pursuant to a contractor work permit shall become null and void until such time as the license, bond or insurance has been acquired and/or reinstated. 
(e)  A contractor work permit will also be issued for patching and/or repair of residential and commercial roofs. This permit can be used as follows: 
(1)  Residential. Not to exceed over 200 square feet and in no case to exceed over 25 percent of the whole roof. If a flat and a pitched roof are on the same residence, each shall be considered separately. 
(2)  Commercial. Not to exceed over 500 square feet and in no case to exceed over 25 percent of the whole roof. 
This work permit is to be used solely for patch or repair work only. If any decking is to be replaced, regardless of the amount, a regular permit must be issued before work is commenced. A permit is not required when tear-off is not required. 
(Code 1966, § 23-17(14); Code 2001, § 2-912; Ord. No. 56-2001, §§ 1, 2, 6-5-2001; Ord. No. 79-2003, § 1, 9-2-2003) 
Secs. 2-913-2-970. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PUBLIC RECORDS[13] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference- Local Government Records Act, Texas Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-971-2-995. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MICROFILMING AND ELECTRONIC STORAGE[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference- Microfilming of records, Texas Local Government Code § 204.001 et seq. 

Sec. 2-996. - Process established. 
    Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code §§ 204.001 et seq., and 205.001 et seq., all public records of the city may be accurately and permanently copied or reproduced on film or in electronic storage. 
(Code 1966, § 2-9(a); Code 2001, § 2-996) 
Sec. 2-997. - Acceptance of records by state courts or administrative agencies. 
    When any of the city's records mentioned in this division have been microfilmed or stored electronically, such records shall be considered original and accepted by any court or administrative agency of the state. 
(Code 1966, § 2-9(g); Code 2001, § 2-1001) 
Secs. 2-998-2-1031. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference- Records management, Texas Local Government Code § 203.001 et seq. 

Sec. 2-1032. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City record means any document, paper, letter, book, map, photograph, sound or video recording, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic medium, or other information-recording medium, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law, including an ordinance, or in the transaction of public business. The term "city record" does not include the following: 
(1)  Extra identical copies of documents created only for convenience of reference or research by city officers or employees; 
(2)  Notes, journals, diaries, and similar documents created by a city officer or employee for the officer's or employee's personal convenience; 
(3)  Blank forms; 
(4)  Stocks of publications; 
(5)  Library and museum materials acquired solely for the purposes of reference or display; 
(6)  Copies of documents in any media furnished to members of the public to which they are entitled under Texas Government Code § 552.001 et seq., or other state law; or 
(7)  Any records, correspondence, notes, memoranda, or documents, other than a final written agreement described by Texas Government Code § 2009.054(c), associated with a matter conducted under an alternative dispute resolution procedure in which personnel of a state department or institution, local government, special district, or other political subdivision of the state participated as a party, facilitated as an impartial third party, or facilitated as the administrator of a dispute resolution system or organization. 
    Department head means the officer who, by ordinance, order, or administrative policy, is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records. 
    Essential record means any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
    Permanent record means any city record for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
    Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
    Records liaison officers mean the persons designated under section 2-1038. 
    Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term "records management" includes the development of records control schedules; the management of filing and information retrieval system; the protection of essential and permanent records; the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records; control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence; and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
    Records management officer means the person holding the position of city clerk. 
    Records management plan means the plan developed under section 2-1036. 
    Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
    Unscheduled record means a record that has not yet been listed on a records control schedule. 
(Code 1966, §§ 2-241, 2-242; Code 2001, § 2-1031) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Local Government Code § 201.003. 
Sec. 2-1033. - Compliance required. 
    The city records shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with this division or procedures authorized by this division, and in no other manner. 
(Code 1966, § 2-241; Code 2001, § 2-1032) 
Sec. 2-1034. - Records declared city property. 
    All city records, as defined in section 2-1032, are declared to be the property of the city. No city official or employee has, by virtue of his position, any personal or property right to such records even though the official or employee may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Code 1966, § 2-243; Code 2001, § 2-1033) 
Sec. 2-1035. - Policy. 
    It is declared to be the city's policy to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act, Texas Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq., and accepted records management practice. 
(Code 1966, § 2-244; Code 2001, § 2-1034) 
Sec. 2-1036. - Records management plan. 
(a)  The records management officer and the Records Management Committee shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the city council. The plan must contain procedures designed to improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential city records and to properly preserve those records of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to effectively carry out his duties prescribed by state law and this division. 
(b)  Once approved by the city council, the records management plan shall be binding on all city offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, boards, committees, or similar city entities, and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this division and the records management plan adopted under this division may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the city's records management program. 
(Code 1966, § 2-246; Code 2001, § 2-1036) 
State Law reference- Records management program, Texas Local Government Code § 203.026. 
Sec. 2-1037. - Duties of records management officer. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this division, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation. 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition systems, standards, and procedures. 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each city officer and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense. 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the city's historically valuable records. 
(5)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city. 
(6)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies. 
(7)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and archives commission to determine if the records management program and the city records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations. 
(8)  Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state law and administrative rules relating to local government records. 
(9)  Instruct records liaison officers in procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program. 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officers in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this division. 
(11)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of the city records is carried out in accordance with the procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law. 
(Code 1966, § 2-247; Code 2001, § 2-1037) 
State Law reference- Duties of records management officer, Texas Local Government Code § 203.023. 
Sec. 2-1038. - Designation of records liaison officers. 
    Each department head shall serve as records liaison officer for the implementation and maintenance of the records management program in his department. Records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all city records maintained by the department. 
(Code 1966, § 2-248; Code 2001, § 2-1038) 
Sec. 2-1039. - Duties and responsibilities of records liaison officers. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this division, each department head shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this division; 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his staff are responsible; 
(3)  Maintain the records in his care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the procedures of the city's records management program and the requirements of this division; 
(4)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules; 
(5)  In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the procedures of the records management program in his department; and 
(6)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(Code 1966, § 2-249; Code 2001, § 2-1039) 
Sec. 2-1040. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
    A city record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction authorization request. 
(Code 1966, § 2-250; Code 2001, § 2-1040) 
Secs. 2-1041-2-1090. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
State Law reference- Tort liability, Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 101.101 et seq. 

Sec. 2-1091. - Method of filing claims against the city. 
(a)  The city shall never be liable for damages of any kind for property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured or someone in his behalf or, if the injury results in death, the person who may have a cause of action under the law because of such death or injury shall, within 45 days after the date the damage or injury occurred, give sworn notice in writing to the city of the claim for damages, which notice shall state the following facts specifically and in detail: 
(1)  A detailed description of the incident and any damage or injury resulting from the incident, including: 
a.  The location where the alleged incident and any damages or injury occurred. 
b.  The date and time of the alleged incident and of the assessment of any damages or injury. 
c.  How the incident occurred and the manner by which any damage or injury also occurred. 
(2)  The nature and extent of the damage or injury sustained. 
(3)  The amount of money damages sustained, and the amount for which the claimant will settle the claim. 
(4)  The actual residence of the claimant by street and number, city and state, on the date the claim is presented, and the actual residence of such claimant for six months immediately preceding the occurrence of such damage or injury. 
(5)  The names and addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of the claimant, witnessed the occurrence which caused the damage or injury. 
(b)  All notices required by this section shall be given to the city by delivering a copy to the city clerk in the Memorial Auditorium building in the city, and such notices shall be effective only when actually received in the office of the City Clerk. 
(c)  The failure to notify the city of a claim within the time and in the manner specified in this section shall exonerate, excuse and exempt the city from any liability whatsoever because of such damages or injuries. 
(Code 1966, § 2-8; Code 2001, § 2-1091; Ord. No. 90-2006, § 1, 12-5-2006) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq. 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The definitions applicable to Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq., shall also be applicable to this chapter. 
(Code 2001, § 6-1) 
State Law reference- Applicable definitions, Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.04. 
Sec. 6-2. - License and permit fees. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq., each holder of a state permit issued pursuant to the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Code shall pay to the city a fee equal to one-half the fee paid to the state for such permit. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq., each holder of a state license issued pursuant to the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Code shall pay to the city a fee equal to one-half the fee paid the state for such license. 
(c)  All fees levied by this section shall be due and payable at the time at which the state license fee or permit fee is due. 
(Code 2001, § 6-2) 
State Law reference- Local permit fee authorized, Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 11.38; local license fee authorized, Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 61.36. 
Sec. 6-3. - Approval of certificate for permit or license. 
    Before the city clerk shall sign any certificate for an applicant for a permit or license under Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq., such certificate shall be submitted to the Community Development Department to ensure that the application complies with this chapter. A fee established by separate ordinance shall be charged by the city clerk for signing any such certificate to defray the costs to the city. 
(Code 1966, § 4-21) 
Sec. 6-4. - Consumption or possession in Memorial Auditorium. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages shall be consumed in the Memorial Auditorium building or on the grounds thereof. 
(b)  No person shall carry any beverage or drink of any kind into the auditorium portion of the Memorial Auditorium building. 
(Code 1966, § 4-7; Code 2001, § 6-4) 
Sec. 6-5. - Possession in public library or on library grounds. 
    The possession of alcoholic beverages in the public library or on the grounds of the public library is prohibited. Any police officer is authorized to seize and confiscate alcoholic beverages found on such property. 
(Code 1966, § 4-9(a); Code 2001, § 6-6) 
Sec. 6-6. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to sell or offer for sale within the city any beer or other malt beverage between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. of each and every day except Sunday. On Sunday, it shall be unlawful for anyone to sell or offer for sale within the city any beer or other malt beverage between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon. 
(b)  The extended hours prescribed in Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.03(c) are adopted in the city, and such extended hours are effective for the sale and the offer to sell mixed alcoholic beverages by a holder of a mixed beverages late hours permit. 
(c)  The extended hours prescribed in Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.05(c) are adopted in the city, and such extended hours are effective for the sale, offer to sell and delivery of beer by a holder of a retail dealer's on-premises late hours license. 
(d)  As prescribed by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.03(e) and by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.05(e), a violation of subsections (b) and (c) of this section is a violation of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
(Code 1966, § 4-10; Code 2001, § 6-7) 
State Law reference- Sale to intoxicated persons, Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 101.63; hours of sale and hours of consumption, Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.01 et seq.; authority to regulate hours for the sale of beer, Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.32. 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GAMES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 10-26-10-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BINGO[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Bingo, Texas Occupations Code § 2001.001 et seq. 

Sec. 10-51. - Share of prize fee. 
    There is imposed a share of prize fee on the conduct of bingo games within the city, as authorized by Texas Occupations Code § 2001.503(b). 
(Code 1966, § 28-9(a); Code 2001, § 10-51) 
State Law reference- Local share of bingo prize fee, Texas Occupations Code § 2001.503. 
Secs. 10-52-10-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MINIATURE GOLF AND OTHER SPORTS 

Sec. 10-81. - Operating hours. 
    No person operating a miniature golf course, putting green, driving course, croquet, go-cart or scrambler track, or other outdoor sport or amusement facility, exclusive of transient shows required to be licensed by section 10-141, as a business charging fees for the playing of such game or use of such facility, shall keep such place of business open or allow such game or sport to be played between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. All lights shall be extinguished by 11:00 p.m. each night. However, on all days in which daylight saving time is in effect in the city, such place of business may remain open until 12:00 midnight, and all lights shall be extinguished immediately after 12:00 midnight. The city manager may, in special circumstances, authorize such a business to stay open later than the stated hours. 
(Code 1966, § 25-49; Code 2001, § 10-81) 
Sec. 10-82. - Disturbing the peace. 
    The person operating any business described in section 10-81 shall not use in connection therewith any phonograph, radio, band, or any kind of device, machine or engine which emits or is permitted to emit noises, either music or otherwise, of such a character as is reasonably calculated to disturb the peace of adjacent inhabitants or the public. 
(Code 1966, § 25-51; Code 2001, § 10-82) 
Secs. 10-83-10-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SHOWS, CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of circuses, carnivals and zoos, Texas Occupations Code § 2152.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-111. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Transient show means any transitory or temporary show which has no intention of locating permanently, and includes, but is not limited to, carnivals, circuses, fairs, and amusement riding devices. 
(Code 1966, § 25-62; Code 2001, § 10-111) 
Sec. 10-112. - Applicability. 
    This article shall not apply to street fairs composed of local people for purely charitable purposes and without profit, transitory shows or performances given by a regularly established theater or show house in the city or the multipurpose event center. 
(Code 1966, § 25-63; Code 2001, § 10-112) 
Sec. 10-113. - Inspections required. 
    Any transient show shall be subject to inspection by representatives of the building inspections division of the city and of the fire marshal's office, for the purpose of determining that such show conforms to the applicable city codes and ordinances. 
(Code 1966, § 25-68; Code 2001, § 10-113) 
Secs. 10-114-10-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-141. - Required to operate. 
    It shall be unlawful to hold, sponsor, operate or run a transient show within the city unless a license is first obtained from the city. This license shall be required whether such show is held on private or public property. Each person aiding or abetting in the holding of such transient show or its subsidiary shows, concessions, amusements and businesses shall be equally guilty of a violation of this article when such transient show operates or runs without such license. 
(Code 1966, § 25-64; Code 2001, § 10-141) 
Sec. 10-142. - Application; issuance. 
(a)  A license shall be issued by the city clerk by order of the city manager to hold such transient show when a proper application in writing is made for the license. Such application shall state in detail the following: 
(1)  The different component parts of the transient show, including all concessions, shows, amusements, businesses; 
(2)  The proposed location of the transient show; 
(3)  The time the show is to run; 
(4)  The number of persons regularly traveling with the show, if any; and 
(5)  The number of local persons connected with the show. 
(b)  The application shall give a complete and full plan of the proposed transient show. 
(Code 1966, § 25-65; Code 2001, § 10-142) 
Sec. 10-143. - Limitation on location. 
    No transient show shall be licensed to operate within 300 feet of any private residence, church or school. 
(Code 1966, § 25-69; Code 2001, § 10-143) 
Sec. 10-144. - Fees. 
    The applicant for a transient show license, if the city manager shall determine that the license required by this article shall be issued, shall pay a license fee established by separate ordinance, together with an additional fee per day for so many days that such transient show is permitted to run, exclusive of the first day, and the city clerk shall issue the license specifying the length of time and the location. In addition to the license fee, the applicant shall pay such fees for electrical inspections as are required under the city electrical code and separate ordinance. 
(Code 1966, § 25-66; Code 2001, § 10-144) 
Sec. 10-145. - Effect of change of location. 
    If a transient show changes from one location to another location within the city, it shall be considered as another show and shall require a new license. 
(Code 1966, § 25-70; Code 2001, § 10-145) 
Sec. 10-146. - Operation after expiration. 
    It shall be unlawful for any transient show to operate in whole or in part after its license expires or after it is revoked for cause, and all persons assisting in such operation shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 25-71; Code 2001, § 10-146) 
Sec. 10-147. - Revocation for unlawful conduct. 
    If the proposed transient show consists in whole or in part of any unlawful games or enterprises of any kind, the license shall be refused. If such transient show is issued a license and the conduct of such show is in an unlawful manner, in whole or in part, or such show fails to conform to all applicable codes and ordinances, its license may be revoked by the city manager, and all fees paid shall be forfeited. 
(Code 1966, § 25-67; Code 2001, § 10-147) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Health and safety of animals, Texas Health and Safety Code § 821.001 et seq.; regulation of animals, Texas Health and Safety Code § 822.001 et seq.; rabies control, Texas Health and Safety Code § 826.001 et seq.; dog and cat sterilization, Texas Health and Safety Code § 828.001 et seq.; animal control officer training, Texas Health and Safety Code § 829.001 et seq.; cruelty to animals, Texas Penal Code §§ 42.09, 42.092; attack on assistance animals, Texas Penal Code § 42.091; dogfighting, Texas Penal Code § 42.10. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abuse means to mistreat through intent or neglect any animal, fowl, livestock, or wildlife in a manner that causes or is likely to cause stress or physical injury, as provided in Texas Penal Code § 42.11, or as otherwise stated in this chapter. 
    Animal means any live domestic creature, other than livestock and fowl, unless indicated otherwise. When used in this chapter, the term "animal" includes, but is not limited to, dogs and cats. 
    Animal foster home means a location registered by the director for the purpose of housing domestic animals until adoption by a permanent owner. 
    Animal foster home caregiver means a person who harbors fostered animals. 
    Animal reclaim center (ARC) means the animal reclaim center (ARC) or other facility designated by the city council as the facility to be used for the impoundment of animals, fowl, livestock, and wildlife taken up by the city's animal control officers and their assistants. 
    At large means any animal, including fowl or livestock, not restrained by some physical means to the premises of its owner or harborer. However, an animal, fowl or livestock shall not be considered at large when held and controlled by some person by means of a leash or chain of proper strength and length to control the actions of the animal, fowl or livestock or while confined within a non-open-bed vehicle or secured by a rope, leash or chain in any open-bed vehicle. Further, an animal shall not be considered at large when participating in a show, competition or training program which is approved by the local rabies control authority and is conducted in an area which is approved by the local rabies control authority. Further, a licensed cat or a cat harbored as a member cat of a registered cat colony shall not be considered at large. 
    Authorized veterinary clinic means a clinic that has been pre-approved by the health district to offer for sale animal license tags to their clients. 
    Cat colony location means the location at which a feral cat caregiver provides food, water or shelter to feral cats in compliance with the cat colony guidelines herein. 
    Circus means a commercial variety show featuring animal acts for the public. 
    Commercial animal establishment means any pet shop, grooming shop, auction, riding school, stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal exhibition or kennel. 
    Cruelly treated includes tortured; seriously overworked; abandoned; deprived of necessary food, care, or shelter; cruelly confined; or caused to fight with another animal. 
    Curtilage means any land or building immediately adjacent to a dwelling that is directly and intimately connected with the habitation. 
    Director means the health director of the Wichita Falls-Wichita County Health District, or an agent or employee thereof. 
    Distance between structures means a straight line from the nearest point of the shed, stable, barn, pen, enclosure, fence or area in which the animal is contained, to the nearest point of such actual residence or building used for human habitation. 
    Ear tipping means the painless removal of a quarter-inch from the top of a feral cat's left ear by a licensed veterinarian while the cat is anesthetized for neutering; ear tipping is intended to identify a feral cat as having been evaluated, vaccinated and neutered. 
    Enclosure means an area sectioned off by a fence or wall. 
    Feral cat means any cat which lives primarily outdoors and must be trapped and sedated for veterinary examination. 
    Feral cat caregiver means a person who harbors feral cats in compliance with the cat colony guidelines contained herein. 
    Fostered animal means an animal residing in a foster home until its adoption into a permanent household. 
    Fowl includes chickens, turkeys, pheasants, quail, guineas, geese, ducks, peafowl and other domestic feathered creatures, except parakeets, canaries, or similar small-size birds, or any exotic birds, such as parrots, provided that they are continuously confined within the residence or business of the owner/harborer, and no domestic feathered creatures, regardless of age or sex. 
    Grooming shop means a commercial business establishment where animals are bathed, clipped, plucked or otherwise groomed. 
    Harbor means to provide any animal, fowl, livestock or wildlife with food, water or shelter. 
    Health district means the Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public Health District. 
    In season means during the stage of estrus or heat. 
    Kennel means any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises wherein five or more dogs and/or five or more cats or five or more dogs and cats in the aggregate, 16 weeks of age or older, are kept or maintained for profit. Veterinary hospitals and pet shops are excluded from this definition unless the pet shop keeps or maintains ten or more dogs and/or cats 16 weeks of age or older. 
    Livestock production area means any parcel of land in excess of 25 acres, within the city limits, used to raise livestock. 
    LRCA means local rabies control authority. 
    Member cat means a feral cat that is part of a registered feral cat colony. 
    Microchip means an identifying integrated circuit device placed under the skin of an animal and containing information regarding that animal, including the identity and address of the owner, which can be read through the use of a scanner capable of reading information from identifying integrated circuit devices. 
    Neighboring land means a parcel of land which has a property line that falls within 25 feet of any property line of the property in question. The owners of neighboring land shall be determined by the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the neighboring land is located. 
    Neutered means any animal, male or female, rendered incapable of breeding or being bred by castration in the male or spaying or ovariectomy in the female. 
    Official notice means written notice personally delivered by an animal control officer or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known address of the recipient. 
    Owner means any person owning, keeping, maintaining, harboring or having the care, custody or control of one or more animals, fowl, livestock or wildlife. 
    Performing animals means any spectacle, display, act or event in which animals, fowl, livestock or wildlife perform. 
    Pet shop means any person, partnership, company or corporation, whether operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise, except for a licensed kennel, that buys, sells or boards any species of animal, including dogs or cats, and fowl. 
    Public nuisance means: 
(1)  Any animal, fowl or livestock that molests, chases or attacks passersby or passing vehicles; 
(2)  Any animal, fowl or livestock that molests, chases or attacks other animals; 
(3)  Any animal, fowl or livestock that trespasses on school grounds; 
(4)  Any animal, fowl or livestock that is repeatedly at large (e.g., three or more times per 12-month period); 
(5)  Any animal, fowl or livestock that damages private or public property; 
(6)  Any animal, fowl or livestock that barks, whines, howls, crows or makes other noise in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion; 
(7)  Any animal, fowl or livestock that is unconfined in season (e.g., dogs and cats); 
(8)  Any animal, fowl or livestock that is a vicious animal not confined as required by this chapter; 
(9)  Fecal matter, garbage or other organic wastes deposited, stored, discharged or exposed in such a way as to be a potential instrument or medium in disease transmission; 
(10)  A condition or place that is a breeding ground for flies; 
(11)  A collection of water in which mosquitoes are breeding; 
(12)  A place or condition harboring rats; 
(13)  An object, place, or condition that is a possible and probable medium of disease transmission to humans; 
(14)  Any animal, fowl or livestock which damages, soils, defiles, urinates or defecates on private property other than the owner's; or 
(15)  Any animal, fowl or livestock which damages or defiles public property. 
    Public zoo. See Zoological park. 
    Registered cat colony means one or more feral cats which live together under the supervision of a particular feral cat caregiver and in compliance with the registered cat colony management guidelines contained herein. 
    Residence means any place of human habitation at any time, day or night, including, but not limited to, any residence, church, school, convalescent center or nursing home. 
    Restrained means any animal, fowl, livestock or wildlife secured by a leash or lead or confined within the property limits of its owner. 
    Riding school and stable mean any place which has available for hire, boarding and/or riding instruction any horse, pony, donkey, mule or burro. 
    Vaccination means an injection of a rabies vaccine which is approved by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, veterinary biologics division, state veterinarian, and administered as required by state law. 
    Veterinarian means any person duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine by the State Board of Veterinary Examiners. 
    Veterinary hospital means any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery and/or diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals, fowl, livestock or wildlife. 
    Vicious animal means any animal, fowl, livestock or wildlife that, because of its behavior, would constitute a physical threat to human beings or other animals, fowl or livestock. A dog that has, without provocation, attacked or bitten a human being or attacked another animal (excepting vermin) or livestock shall be considered vicious. 
    Wild animal (wildlife) means any nondomestic creature (mammal, amphibian, reptile or fowl) which is of a species that is wild by nature and which can normally be found in the wild state and which is not naturally tame or gentle, but is of a wild nature or disposition; or which, because of its size, vicious nature and other characteristics, would constitute a danger to human life or property, if not kept or maintained in a safe and secure manner. Such creatures include, but are not limited to, all nonhuman primates and all forms of poisonous reptiles and nonpoisonous snakes which will exceed a length of six feet when mature. Excluded from this definition are hamsters, gerbils, ferrets, domesticated breeds of rabbits, guinea pigs, rats, mice, newts and salamanders. 
    Zoological park means any facility, other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying or exhibiting one or more species of animals, fowl, livestock and wildlife, operated by a person or under the auspices of a government agency or possessing an unrevoked municipal zoological park permit. 
(Code 2001, § 14-1; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-2. - Responsibility for enforcement; police powers. 
    The local rabies control authority, local health authority, the animal control officers and other authorized employees of the health district shall have all of the powers and authority of peace officers to the extent only, and no further, of enforcing state statutes and regulations, this chapter and other city ordinances relating to animals, fowl, livestock and wildlife. No person shall interfere in any manner or give false information to the above-stated employees in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 2001, § 14-2; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-3. - Entry of private premises. 
(a)  If persons keeping animals, fowl, livestock or wildlife within the city, after request of the health district or animal control officer, refuse to permit access to the areas or places of keeping of such animals, fowl, livestock or wildlife, the animal control officials shall seek the necessary court authorization to enter the premises. 
(b)  If the animal control officer determines that the life of the animal is in imminent danger, the animal control officer may enter the curtilage of the premises for the purpose of correcting the threat to the animal's life as long as damage to property can be averted. 
(Code 2001, § 14-3; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-4. - Additional enforcement methods. 
    If any person is found guilty of cruelty to any animal, wildlife, fowl or livestock under municipal, state or federal law, his permit to own, keep, harbor or have custody of such animal, fowl, wildlife or livestock shall be deemed automatically revoked, and no new permit or license may be issued. 
(Code 2001, § 14-4; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-5. - Keeping poisonous reptiles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to breed, raise, keep or have in his possession any poisonous reptile within the corporate city limits, except a poisonous reptile kept by an educational or scientific institution. These institutions will be subject to initial approval and periodic inspections by the director of health or under his direction. 
(Code 2001, § 14-5; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-6. - Disposal of animals and livestock. 
(a)  No property owner, tenant or possessor of any dead livestock shall fail to lawfully dispose of the dead livestock within 24 hours of its discovery by the responsible party. A reasonable disposal fee will be charged for each requested collection and disposal of each dead livestock and each requested collection of small animals, including dogs and cats. This fee shall be paid either directly to the city or to the collecting contractor for remittance to the city. 
(b)  Any owner wishing to relinquish an unwanted animal to an animal control officer or other authorized employees of the health district will be charged a transportation and disposal fee. This transportation fee does not apply to citizens holding a loose animal for the animal control officers to pick up. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or turn any animal loose within the city limits of the city. 
(Code 2001, § 14-6; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-7. - Noise. 
    No person shall harbor any animal, fowl, livestock or wildlife of any kind that makes an unreasonable disturbance to the peace of occupants of adjacent premises or vicinity thereof, including the making of unusual noises by howling, barking, bawling or otherwise. 
(Code 2001, § 14-7; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-8. - Removal of waste. 
    The owner, caretaker or possessor of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of excreta deposited by his animal on public walks, recreation areas, public property or private property. 
(Code 2001, § 14-8; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-9. - Shooting or catching wild birds. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or attempt to shoot or kill with an air rifle, bow and arrow, slingshot or firearm or other means any wild bird within the city limits, except for the protection of his private property so long as no laws are violated and except where hunting is permitted by law. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ensnare or catch or attempt to ensnare or catch, by any means whatsoever, any wild bird within the city unless such ensnaring or catching is first approved by the local health authority. 
(Code 2001, § 14-9; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-10 - Animal adoption policies. 
(a)  An individual seeking to adopt an animal through the city's animal services program must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Applicants may not have a history of complaints of cruelty or neglect or have reclaimed their current animals, if any, from animal services more than once in the previous 12-month period. 
(2)  All animals in the home must be spayed or neutered and current on vaccinations and city licenses prior to the applicant being approved for adoption. 
(3)  Once an applicant has been approved by animal services to adopt an animal, the applicant must make an appointment with the veterinarian of their choice to have the animal spayed or neutered. Proof of the paid appointment must be submitted to animal services prior to adoption of the animal. 
(b)  Once all of the requirements for adoption have been met, animal services staff will deliver the adopted animal to the chosen veterinary clinic the morning of the spay/neuter appointment. Animal services staff will microchip the animal prior to the animal leaving the building and enter that information into the PetPoint system. While the animal is at the veterinary clinic being spayed or neutered, they will also receive a rabies vaccination provided by the veterinarian and paid for by the approved applicant. The applicant may pick up the animal from the veterinary clinic after the animal has been spayed or neutered and all additional actions have been undertaken by animal services and the designated veterinarian. 
(1)  No later than ten days from the date of the animal being spayed or neutered, proof of the operation must be returned to animal services. 
(2)  Proof of rabies vaccination along with proof of the purchase of a city license must be returned no later than ten days after the animal has been adopted. 
(3)  If the animal is deemed too young to be spayed or neutered, the adopter shall schedule and prepay for a spay/neuter appointment at the veterinarian of their choice and bring in proof of the appointment and paid services to animal services no later than ten days following adoption. It shall be unlawful for a person who has adopted an animal from the city to fail to provide proof of spaying or neutering to animal services within 90 days after adoption. 
(4)  If under four months of age at time of adoption, the puppy or kitten must receive a rabies vaccination at approximately four months of age. Animal services staff will approximate age and timeline for rabies vaccine to be given. The adopter shall return the proof of vaccination to animal services no later than ten days from the date that the animal receives the vaccination. It shall be unlawful for a person who has adopted an animal from the city to fail to provide proof of rabies vaccination to animal services within 90 days after adoption. 
(c)  The Director of Health has the authority to waive or reduce adoption fees for special events or promotions. 
(d)  Pets and Vets Program. Adoption fees for any animal available at the City of Wichita Falls Animal Services Center will be waived for any U.S. Veteran who meets the following requirements: 
(1)  Veterans shall meet all other requirements for adoption, including the spay/neuter surgery at the veterinarian of their choice, and 
(2)  Veterans shall present one of the following documents that pertain to his military service: 
 Military ID, 
 Form DD214 Military Discharge Certificate, 
 Honorable Discharge Certificate, 
 Letter from the U.S. Military Center in St. Louis, Missouri, or 
 Letter from the Maryland Department of Veterans Affairs Services and Benefits Program. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, § 1, 3-18-2014; Ord. No. 23-2016, § 1, 6-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-11. - Barn Cat Adoption Program. 
    An individual seeking to adopt barn cats through the city's Animal Services Barn Cat Adoption Program must comply with the following requirements in addition to the requirements of section 14-10: 
(1)  Barn cats must be adopted in pairs. 
(2)  Applicants must agree to provide a safe, permanent outdoor home with one or more areas of weather-proof shelter plus daily food and water, and to provide for any ongoing veterinary costs associated with ownership prior to being permitted to adopt any barn cat. 
(3)  Applicants must provide an escape-proof room or enclosure for each cat for a minimum of a two-week period after adoption to allow the barn cat to acclimate to its new location. This enclosure can be a tack room, garage, coop or XXL dog crate. Applicants must relocate each barn cat to the enclosure immediately following picking up the animal from the veterinarian in accordance with the requirements of section 14-10 and keep the animal in the enclosure for the designated period. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, § 1, 3-18-2014) 
Secs. 14-12-14-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOG AND CAT VACCINATION AND LICENSING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Registration of dogs and cats, Texas Health and Safety Code § 826.031 et seq.; rabies control, Texas Health and Safety Code § 826.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-41. - Vaccination required. 
(a)  No person shall own, possess or harbor any dog or cat 16 weeks of age or older unless it has been vaccinated against rabies in accordance with this section and state law. 
(b)  Rabies vaccination shall be repeated in accordance with state law and regulations. 
(c)  Any unvaccinated dog or cat redeemed from the animal reclaim center must be vaccinated against rabies before leaving the center. 
(d)  A dog is required to wear a valid rabies vaccination tag on a collar or harness at all times. Failure to be wearing the tag is prima facie evidence that no vaccination has been given. 
(Code 2001, § 14-36; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
State Law reference- Vaccination required, Texas Health and Safety Code § 826.022. 
Secs. 14-42-14-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DOG OR CAT LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Registration of dogs and cats, Texas Health and Safety Code § 826.031 et seq. 

Sec. 14-71. - License required. 
    No person shall own, possess or harbor a dog or cat 16 weeks of age or over without obtaining a license for each animal. 
(Code 2001, § 14-66; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-72. - License defenses. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 14-71 that: 
(1)  The dog or cat has a valid rabies tag; 
(2)  The owner of the dog or cat resides outside the city; 
(3)  The dog or cat has been inside the territorial limits of the city for 30 days or less; and 
(4)  The dog or cat has not been impounded by the city. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 14-71 that the cat is a member cat. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 14-71 that the dog or cat is a fostered animal. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 14-71 that the dog is trained and actively used to assist the physically handicapped or is a governmental agency police dog. 
(e)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 14-71 that a dog or cat is maintained in a commercial animal establishment that has a current city kennel or commercial animal establishment permit, unless the dog or cat is impounded by the city. 
(Code 2001, § 14-67; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009; Ord. No. 19-2010, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 14-73. - Application, fee and certificate of rabies vaccination required for license. 
    A completed application form obtained from the vaccinating veterinarian or health district, the license fee and a valid certificate of rabies vaccination must be presented to obtain a license for a dog or cat. 
(Code 2001, § 14-68; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-74. - Right to inspect. 
    A condition for issuing and maintaining a dog or cat license is permission for the Animal Control Department, upon presentation of proper credentials, to inspect the dog or cat and premises of the dog or cat, when ordered by the director. The purpose of this inspection is to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 2001, § 14-69; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-75. - Certificate tag and fee for license. 
(a)  The fee for license shall be set by the health district and approved by the city council; the fee schedule will be posted in the zoonosis division of the health district. Animal license tags are not transferable from one animal to another and it shall be unlawful to alter a tag or to issue one without a current rabies vaccination. If a tag is lost, a duplicate tag may be issued by the health district and a replacement fee charged. The animal license shall run concurrently with the rabies vaccination. 
(b)  The health district will monetarily compensate authorized veterinary clinics that participate in selling animal licenses. Each authorized veterinary clinic shall submit the license applications and fees to the health district by the fifth of each month; from every license sold, the authorized veterinary clinic may retain an amount set by the health district for administrative services. 
(Code 2001, § 14-70; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-76. - Denial of license. 
(a)  No dog or cat license may be issued if the applicant falsifies information, or fails to comply with any section of this chapter. 
(b)  No dog or cat license shall be issued if the applicant has been convicted of inhumane or cruel treatment to animals or has three or more convictions for violating any section of this chapter. 
(Code 2001, § 14-71; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-77. - Issuance of license. 
    Upon approval of the application for a dog or cat license, a certificate and license tag will be issued. The tag of durable material, designed to be easily fastened or riveted to the animal's collar or harness, shall bear a number corresponding to the number on the certificate, showing the month and year of expiration. The director shall maintain a record of identifying numbers, which shall be available to the public. 
(Code 2001, § 14-72; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-78. - Wearing of tag. 
    Failure of a dog to wear the license tag at all times shall be prima facie evidence that no animal license has been issued, constitutes a violation of this section by the dog's owner, possessor or harborer, and subjects the dog to impoundment by animal control. 
(Code 2001, § 14-73; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-79. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  If the person holding the dog or cat license refuses or fails to comply with this chapter or any law governing the protection of animals, official notice shall be given of the intention to suspend the license. If, within seven days after official notice is given, evidence shows the person is not in compliance, the license shall be revoked. 
(b)  Upon receipt of official notice, a dog or cat license is automatically revoked for one of the following reasons: 
(1)  Impoundment by the city three or more times during a 12-month period. 
(2)  Three or more convictions of a person for violating any section of this chapter. 
(3)  Any combination of impoundments and convictions totaling three incidents. 
(c)  A notice as required in this section is properly served when it is delivered to the owner, caregiver or possessor of the animal, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner, caregiver or possessor of the animal. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(Code 2001, § 14-74; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-80. - Disposal of unlicensed animal. 
    If a dog or cat is unlicensed, because of non-issuance or revocation of the license after official notice, it must be humanely disposed of, or it will be seized and disposed of by the health district. 
(Code 2001, § 14-75; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-81. - Reapplication. 
    Any person having been denied a dog or cat license, or if the license has been revoked, shall wait at least 60 days before making reapplication. The application will not be accepted unless the Animal Control Department is satisfied that there will be compliance with this chapter. The fee for reapplication shall be set by the health district and approved by the city council. The fee schedule will be posted in the zoonosis division of the health district. 
(Code 2001, § 14-76; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Secs. 14-82-14-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-106. - Enforcement. 
    This article shall be enforced by the Animal Control Department, under the direction of the local rabies control authority. 
(Code 2001, § 14-106; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-107. - Permit exemptions. 
(a)  Veterinary facilities. Veterinary hospitals, clinics and related practices of veterinary medicine shall be exempt from this article. 
(b)  Certain other facilities. Stock shows, pet fairs including sanctioned animal shows, slaughterhouses, rodeo arenas, governmental agencies including public schools, laboratories, animal reclaim centers and research facilities approved by the health district may be exempt from this article. 
(Code 2001, § 14-107; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-108. - Fowl permit. 
(a)  A fowl permit shall be required for any person owning, possessing or harboring any fowl within the city limits. The owning, possessing or harboring of guineas, peafowl or roosters shall not be permitted, and no permit shall be issued for the keeping of such. An annual permit fee shall be set by the health district and approved by the city council. The fee schedule will be posted in the zoonosis division of the health district. 
(b)  No person shall keep any fowl within the city who does not possess an unrevoked permit from the Animal Control Department. 
(Code 2001, § 14-109; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-109. - Livestock permit. 
(a)  The livestock permit shall be required for any person keeping any livestock within the city limits when the keeping of livestock is allowed by this chapter. The annual fee for the permit shall be set by the health district and approved by the city council. The fee schedule will be posted in the zoonosis division of the health district. 
(b)  No person shall keep any livestock within the city who does not possess an unrevoked permit from the Animal Control Department. 
(Code 2001, § 14-110; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-110. - Inspection prerequisite to issuance of permit. 
    It shall be required that an animal control officer inspect the premises prior to issuing a permit required by this article. The health district has the right to inspect the premises, including animals, livestock and fowl, at any time during normal business hours. Inspection shall be repeated at least once every six months. 
(Code 2001, § 14-111; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-111. - Issuance; term; application for renewal of permits. 
(a)  After inspection, approval of the application, and receiving the fee, a permit required by this article shall be issued, which shall be displayed in a prominent place on the premises. Unless suspended or revoked, the permit shall remain in effect for one calendar year from the date of issuance. 
(b)  Application for renewal of a permit may be made from one month prior to one month after the permit expiration date, but the effective date of the permit shall be to coincide with the expiring permit date, and the fee will be for a full year from that date. 
(Code 2001, § 14-112; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-112. - Reclassification and fee adjustment of permits. 
    Any person who has a change of category under which a permit was issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to reclassification, and appropriate adjustment of the permit fee will be made. 
(Code 2001, § 14-113; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-113. - Denial of permit. 
(a)  No permit required by this article may be issued if the applicant has: 
(1)  Withheld or falsified information on the application; or 
(2)  Failed to comply with any section of this article. 
(b)  No permit required by this article shall be issued if the applicant has been: 
(1)  Convicted three or more times for violating any section or combination of sections of this chapter; or 
(2)  Been convicted of inhumane or cruel treatment to animals. 
(Code 2001, § 14-114; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-114. - Reapplication period upon denial of permit. 
    If a permit required by this article is denied, reapplication cannot be made for at least 60 days. Each reapplication shall be accompanied by a fee, in addition to the permit fee. The fee is not refundable. 
(Code 2001, § 14-115; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-115. - Suspension of permit. 
(a)  The health district may, upon official notice, suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article for the following reasons: 
(1)  Animals are being deprived of necessary food, care or shelter. 
(2)  Animals are being cruelly confined or treated. 
(3)  Unsanitary conditions exist to such an extent that these conditions create a possible medium for the transmission of disease to the animals kept there or to human beings. 
(4)  There is noncompliance with any section of this chapter. 
(b)  The animal control department has the right to take photographs and gather evidence on the premises to document any of the reasons for suspension. 
(c)  After suspension, no animal shall be accepted or placed in the facility more than five days after the suspension, unless the suspension has been lifted and the permit reinstated prior to that time. 
(Code 2001, § 14-116; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-116. - Lifting of suspension and reinstatement of permit. 
    If all violations and unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected within 21 days, the health district, after reinspection, may reinstate the suspended permit issued pursuant to this article. A reinspection shall be made as soon as practical, and not longer than five working days after receiving a written request for such inspection by the person to whom the permit was issued. 
(Code 2001, § 14-117; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-117. - Revocation of permit. 
    After 21 days from suspension of a permit issued pursuant to this article, if no written request for reinspection has been received or if satisfactory corrections have not been made, the health district shall give official notice that in five days the permit shall be revoked. The city is not liable to refund any part of the permit fee. 
(Code 2001, § 14-118; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-118. - Reinstatement of permit after revocation. 
(a)  No person who has had a permit issued pursuant to this article revoked may apply for a new permit for at least one year from the date of revocation. No permit shall be issued if the person has been convicted of abuse to animals. If the proper fee, the acceptable application and satisfactory assurance is given that previous violations will not recur and there will be compliance with all sections of this chapter, a new permit may be issued. 
(b)  If another owner applies for a permit at the same location where a permit was revoked less than one year after revocation, the person whose name appears on the revoked permit may in no way be associated with the new operation, including any financial interest, or the permit will be revoked and legal action may be taken against both parties. 
(Code 2001, § 14-119; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Secs. 14-119-14-149. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 14-150. - Permit required. 
    No person shall operate a commercial animal establishment without first obtaining the necessary permit in compliance with this article. 
(Code 2001, § 14-146; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-151. - Categories of permits, other than kennels. 
    An animal permit shall be required for persons owning the following types of facilities. The annual fee for these permits shall be set by the health district and approved by the city council. The fee schedule will be posted in the zoonosis division of the health district. 
(1)  Pet shop. 
(2)  Riding school or stable. 
(3)  Grooming shop. 
(4)  Zoological park. 
(5)  Circus. 
(6)  Performing animal exhibition. 
(7)  Recreational rides, including, but not limited to, horses, camels, donkeys, elephants and cows. 
(8)  Nonconforming use. 
(Code 2001, § 14-147; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009; Ord. No. 11-2014, § 2, 4-1-2014) 
Sec. 14-152. - Separate enterprises. 
    Each commercial animal establishment, even though owned by the same person or group, is considered a separate enterprise, and each must possess a permit. If the establishment moves to another location or if there is a change of ownership, another application and fee for the permit is required. 
(Code 2001, § 14-148; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-153. - Individual licensure of animals optional. 
    A person operating a commercial animal establishment for breeding of dogs and/or cats may elect to license each such animal individually, in addition to obtaining a kennel permit. However, if any unlicensed animal is impounded for being at large and/or other violations, an individual license shall be purchased before redemption, and will be required annually thereafter. 
(Code 2001, § 14-149; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-154. - Additional requirements. 
(a)  The following are requirements for pet shops in shopping centers or malls: 
(1)  The pet shop shall be in an enclosed area separated by walls from adjoining stores. 
(2)  The pet shop cannot be located closer than 50 feet to any eating or drinking establishment. 
(3)  Air conditioner ducts removing air from the pet shop must be directed outward and not directly into another shop or the mall. 
(4)  Any creature sold in the pet shop must be carried from the mall in a box, crate or appropriate container. 
(b)  The following requirements apply to all dogs, cats and/or ferrets offered for sale at flea markets: 
(1)  The seller must provide a valid rabies certificate for each dog, cat or ferret 16 weeks of age or older. 
(2)  All dogs, cats or ferrets must be restrained in a manner so as to prevent animal bite exposure to humans and/or other animals. 
(c)  It shall be illegal to sell or give away animals in parking lots, or temporary events or in places where the public generally gathers. An animal sold or given away as part of a fund raising event sponsored by a recognizable charitable organization shall be exempt provided the animal has been vaccinated in accordance with this chapter at the time the animal is transferred to the new owner. 
(Code 2001, § 14-150; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Secs. 14-155-14-176. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Kennels 

Sec. 14-177. - Permit required. 
    A kennel permit shall be required for persons harboring five or more dogs, five or more cats, or five or more dogs and cats in aggregate. A person permitted as a kennel operator may not accept any animal for boarding without first confirming that the animal has a current rabies vaccination. The operator may elect to license his dogs and/or cats individually in addition to obtaining the permit. However, if an unlicensed animal under this permit is impounded for being at large and/or other violations, an individual license shall be purchased before redemption. 
(Code 2001, § 14-176; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-178. - Fee. 
    The annual kennel permit fees shall be set by the health district and approved by the city council. The fee schedule will be posted in the zoonosis division of the health district. 
(Code 2001, § 14-177; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-179. - Minimum distance from residence. 
(a)  No person shall keep, possess or maintain within the city limits a kennel within 300 feet of any residence or habitation for human beings, other than the residence of the keeper, possessor or owner of such kennel. 
(b)  A kennel in existence and in operation on June 8, 1985, shall be allowed to remain in existence within 300 feet of any residence only so long as the place of business is continuously in operation from that date, whether or not under the same permit. 
(Code 2001, § 14-178; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Secs. 14-180-14-196. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PET FANCIERS 

Sec. 14-197. - Permit required. 
(a)  A pet fancier's permit shall be required for any person owning or harboring five or more animals, unless the animals are covered by another permit under this chapter, and regardless of whether the animals are individually licensed. 
(b)  A pet fancier's permit may be denied if the director makes a determination that the prospective pet fancier does not have adequate property or facilities to ensure: 
(1)  The animals do not disturb any neighbors; and 
(2)  Sanitation for the number of animals permitted is appropriately and safely addressed. 
(c)  The pet fancier must be the owner of the property where the animals will be harbored or have the written permission of the owner of the property in order to obtain a permit for that location. 
(d)  The annual fee for this permit shall be set by the health district and approved by the city council. The fee schedule will be posted in the zoonosis division of the health district. A pet fancier who neuters all of the animals will be afforded a price reduction for the permit. 
(Code 2001, § 14-206; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Secs. 14-198-14-217. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REGISTERED CAT COLONY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 14-218. - License or membership required for cats. 
    No person shall harbor any cat which is not either a licensed cat or a member of a registered cat colony. 
(Code 2001, § 14-207; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-219. - Application for permit to act as a feral cat caregiver to a registered cat colony. 
(a)  Application for a permit to act as a feral cat caregiver to a registered cat colony must be made to the director. 
(b)  Upon a determination by the director that the prospective feral cat caregiver and prospective cat colony location will meet the requirements in this division, the director may issue a permit to create and maintain a registered cat colony. Permits issued under this section are valid for a period of one year. After the expiration of the permit, the feral cat caregiver must apply for renewal of their permit and meet all requirements for issuance of a permit or disband the colony. 
(c)  The director may deny a permit for a registered cat colony if the director deems that the colony would be detrimental to the prospective member cats or the neighborhood in which the colony is to be located. 
(d)  The director is authorized to require an annual permit fee accompany each application for permit. 
(e)  Permits are specific to the individual permitted as the feral cat caregiver and the location permitted as the cat colony location. Individuals wishing to transfer a registered cat colony to another caregiver or another location must make application for a new permit. 
(Code 2001, § 14-208; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-220. - Required permissions for registered cat colony. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued for a cat colony location until the prospective feral cat caregiver presents to the director written permission for a registered cat colony to be located at the prospective cat colony location, signed by every owner of neighboring land to the property where the cat colony will be located. Such permission, once given by an owner of neighboring land, is good for three years or until the property is transferred to another party. New written permission must be obtained any time a permission expires due to age or transfer of property. 
(b)  The feral cat caregiver must be the owner of the cat colony location, or have the written permission of the owner of the location in order to obtain a permit for that location. 
(c)  In lieu of written permission from the owner of specific neighboring land, a prospective feral cat caregiver may document an inability to determine or contact the owner of that specific land. This documentation shall include a copy of the owner's contact information on file with the county appraisal district, and a sworn affidavit recording the manner and frequency of the attempts to locate or contact that owner by the prospective feral cat caregiver. The affidavit shall also swear that the prospective feral cat caregiver has no reason to believe that the owner in question is opposed to the presence of a registered cat colony at the prospective cat colony location. 
(Code 2001, § 14-209; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009; Ord. No. 26-2009, § 1, 4-21-2009) 
Sec. 14-221. - Creation of registered cat colony. 
    Every member cat will be trapped and inspected for illness or injury by a veterinarian within 120 days of the granting of the registered cat colony permit. Any adult cat determined to be in good health at the time of this initial trapping will be vaccinated, neutered, and subjected to ear tipping prior to its being returned to the registered cat colony. Any adult cat determined to be injured or in poor health at the time of this initial trapping will be provided with veterinary care sufficient to return it to good health, then vaccinated, neutered, and subjected to ear tipping prior to its being returned to the registered cat colony. In the alternative, any adult cat determined to be injured or in poor health at the time of this initial trapping may be fostered, adopted or euthanized. 
(Code 2001, § 14-210; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-222. - Maintenance of registered cat colony. 
(a)  Feral cat caregivers are expected to follow the most structured form of the feral cat colony management guidelines, TVARM (or "trap, vaccinate, alter, return and manage"). 
(b)  Member cats are to be provided with adequate food, water and shelter as defined by section 14-452. 
(c)  Kittens found to be at the cat colony location will be trapped and removed from the colony by the feral cat caregiver when the kittens are between six and 16 weeks of age. Removed kittens are to be either domesticated and fostered in a foster home for adoption into permanent homes or euthanized. 
(d)  The feral cat caregiver shall immediately trap and remove from the colony any non-member cats or sick or injured member cats found to be at the colony location. A trapped non-member cat shall be delivered into the custody of the Animal Control Department. A sick or injured member cat shall be either provided with veterinary care sufficient to return it to good health prior to its being returned to the registered cat colony, or fostered, adopted or euthanized. 
(e)  All member cats shall be revaccinated against rabies as required by state law and regulations. The feral cat caregiver shall trap every member cat as frequently as necessary to maintain each member cat's vaccination against rabies. 
(f)  The feral cat caregiver shall keep records for the registered cat colony, to include a photograph, documentation of sterilization, and rabies certificate, for each member cat. These records will be provided to the director or Animal Control Department upon request. 
(g)  At no time shall a registered cat colony consist of more than 20 cats. 
(Code 2001, § 14-211; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-223. - Revocation of permit to act as a feral cat caregiver to a registered cat colony. 
(a)  The director may revoke the permit to act as a feral cat caregiver to a registered cat colony if there is probable cause to believe that a registered cat colony is not in compliance with this division. The director shall send written notice of revocation to the feral cat caregiver. Upon written notice of revocation by the director, a feral cat caregiver shall have seven calendar days from the date of the issuance of the notice to file written appeal under section 14-519 or disband the colony by trapping and relocating, adopting out, or euthanizing the member cats. Should a feral cat caregiver fail to timely disband the colony or file written appeal under section 14-519, the director may authorize the Animal Control Department to trap and euthanize the member cats. 
(b)  A notice as required in this section is properly served when it is delivered by hand to the feral cat caregiver, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the feral cat caregiver. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the director. 
(Code 2001, § 14-212; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-224. - Other laws to apply. 
    Nothing in this division shall be construed as excusing a cat colony location or a feral cat caregiver from all other pertinent laws, including those prohibiting nuisances or disturbances. 
(Code 2001, § 14-213; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Secs. 14-225-14-241. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ANIMAL FOSTER HOME 

Sec. 14-242. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall house domestic animals for the purpose of foster care until adoption of those domestic animals by a permanent owner unless that person holds an animal foster home permit from the director. 
(b)  Application for a permit to act as an animal foster home caregiver must be made to the director. 
(c)  Upon a determination by the director that the prospective animal foster home caregiver and prospective animal foster home will meet the requirements in this division, the director may issue a permit to create and maintain an animal foster home. Permits issued under this section are valid for a period of one year. After the expiration of the permit, the animal foster home caregiver must reapply and qualify for a new permit or cease acting as an animal foster home. 
(d)  The director may deny a permit to create an animal foster home if the director deems that the creation of such an animal foster home would be detrimental to the prospective animal foster home caregiver, prospective fostered animals, or the neighborhood in which the animal foster home is to be located. 
(e)  Permits issued under this section are specific to both the individual permitted as the animal foster home caregiver and the location permitted as the animal foster home. Individuals wishing to transfer an animal foster home to another caregiver or another location must make application for a new permit. 
(f)  The director is authorized to require an annual permit fee accompany each application for permit. 
(Code 2001, § 14-214; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-243. - Required permissions for animal foster home. 
    The animal foster home caregiver must be the owner of the animal foster home, or have the written permission of the owner of the property, in order to obtain a permit for that location. 
(Code 2001, § 14-215; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-244. - Animal foster home requirements. 
(a)  Fostered animals are to be provided with adequate food, water and shelter as defined by section 14-452. 
(b)  The animal foster home must provide an area in which to segregate newly fostered animals until such time as those animals can be socialized with other animals living in the foster home. 
(c)  The animal foster home caregiver must consent to routine inspections of the premises by animal control officers during regular business hours. 
(d)  The animal foster home shall contain no more than seven animals at any one time, including any animals who permanently reside at the animal foster home. This number does not include fostered animals who are kittens under 16 weeks of age and puppies under 16 weeks of age. 
(e)  All cats and kittens over the age of 16 weeks who are fostered animals must be vaccinated against rabies. 
(f)  All dogs and puppies over the age of 16 weeks who are fostered animals must be vaccinated against rabies. 
(g)  Fostered animals may stay no more than six months in any one animal foster home. Sick or injured animals may be granted a longer stay in one animal foster home at the discretion of the director. 
(h)  The animal foster home caregiver shall keep records for the animal foster home, to include rabies certificate and length of stay for each fostered animal. These records will be provided to the director or animal control upon request. 
(Code 2001, § 14-216; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-245. - Revocation of animal foster home permit. 
(a)  The director may revoke the animal foster home permit if there is probable cause to believe that an animal foster home is not in compliance with this division. The director shall send written notice of revocation to the animal foster home caregiver. Upon written notice of revocation by the director, an animal foster home caregiver shall have seven calendar days to file an appeal under section 14-519 or disband the foster home by relocating, adopting out or euthanizing the fostered animals. Should an animal foster home caregiver fail to timely disband the foster home or file written appeal under section 14-519, the director may take appropriate legal action to confiscate the animals. 
(b)  A notice as required in this section is properly served when it is delivered by hand to the animal foster home caregiver, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the animal foster home caregiver. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the director. 
(Code 2001, § 14-217; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-246. - Other laws to apply. 
    Nothing in this division shall be construed as excusing an animal foster home or an animal foster home caregiver from all other pertinent laws, including those prohibiting nuisances or disturbances. 
(Code 2001, § 14-219; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Secs. 14-247-14-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - BREEDING, SALE, AND TRANSFER OF DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 14-271. - Litter permit. 
(a)  Any person whose female dog or cat has a litter must obtain a litter permit prior to or within ten business days of the litter's birth. The issuance of a permit authorizes the whelping of no more than 1 litter per female dog or cat in any 12-month period. Each permit applicant shall be required to take an educational course designated by animal services as part of the permit application process. 
(b)  If a person fails to obtain a permit after notice, then the department shall be authorized to impound the female dog or cat and the animal litter in addition to any other available remedies. 
(c)  The litter permit number shall be prominently displayed in all advertisements, notices, or displays of the litter for offers to give away any members of the litter. 
(d)  The owner may choose to prepay for a spay surgery at the veterinary clinic of their choice. The owner shall present a receipt of payment along with a scheduled appointment to the animal services center. The animal shall be spayed within 90 days and the owner shall bring proof within 105 days of the animal's sterilization to animal services. The litter permit fee will be waived with proof of payment for sterilization and scheduled appointment as they apply in accordance with this section only. 
(e)  This section does not apply to: 
(1)  Caretakers of feral cat colonies; or 
(2)  Rescuers affiliated with recognized rescue organizations registered with the department. 
(Ord. No. 11-2014, § 1, 4-1-2014) 
Sec. 14-272. - Stud permit. 
(a)  Any person who owns or harbors a male dog or cat and wishes to breed this animal with any female dog or cat must obtain a stud permit, and furnish a copy of said permit to the owner of the female animal prior to breeding. Each permit applicant shall be required to take an educational course designated by animal services as part of the permit application process. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he breeds a male animal without a permit or permits a male animal to be bred with a female animal they own without receiving notice of a valid stud permit for the male animal. 
(Ord. No. 11-2014, § 1, 4-1-2014) 
Sec. 14-273. - Seller's permit. 
(a)  Any person who sells or offers for sale one or more puppies or kittens must obtain a seller's permit prior to or within ten business days of the litter's birth. Each seller's permit shall be valid for one year, and the issuance of a permit authorizes the breeding and sale of no more than 1 litter per female dog or cat in any 12-month period. Each permit applicant shall be required to take an educational course designated by animal services as part of the permit application process. 
(b)  The seller's permit number shall be prominently displayed in all advertisements, notices, or displays for sale of the puppies or kittens. 
(c)  A seller's permit holder shall provide a purchaser a written statement which shall include a guarantee of good health for a period of not less than two weeks with a recommendation to have the animal examined by a licensed veterinarian. 
(d)  A person who obtains a pet shop license shall not be required to obtain a seller's permit under this section. 
(e)  If a person fails to obtain a permit after notice, then the department shall be authorized to impound the puppies or kittens in addition to any other available remedies. 
(f)  The owner may choose to prepay for a spay surgery at the veterinary clinic of their choice. The owner shall present a receipt of payment along with a scheduled appointment to the animal services center. The animal shall be spayed within 90 days and the owner shall bring proof within 105 days of the animal's sterilization to animal services. The seller's permit fee will be waived with proof of payment for sterilization and scheduled appointment as they apply in accordance with this section only. 
(Ord. No. 11-2014, § 1, 4-1-2014) 
Sec. 14-274. - Prohibiting the transfer of unweaned dogs or cats. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer or offer to transfer any puppy or kitten under the age of eight weeks unless the puppy or kitten is transferred to: 
(1)  Animal services; 
(2)  Any tax-exempt nonprofit organization founded for the purpose of providing humane sanctuary or shelter for abandoned or unwanted animals; or 
(3)  Any recognized rescue organization which is currently approved by animal services. 
(b)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution that the puppy or kitten was transferred with its mother. 
(Ord. No. 11-2014, § 1, 4-1-2014) 
Secs. 14-275-14-296. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ANIMAL CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-297. - Running at large. 
(a)  The running at large of animals, including fowl or livestock, within the city is prohibited. No owner, possessor or harborer shall allow the animal, fowl or livestock to run at large. All animals, including fowl or livestock, must be restrained by some physical means; however, an animal, fowl or livestock shall not be considered at large when held and controlled by some person by means of a rope, leash or chain or as defined under the term "at large" in section 14-1. 
(b)  The prohibition against an animal running at large shall not apply to a licensed cat or a cat harbored as a member cat of a registered cat colony. However, if the cat has been declared a public nuisance, as defined by section 14-1, it may be restricted to the owner's property by the health district. Failure to follow any of these restrictions constitutes a violation of this section. 
(Code 2001, § 14-236; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-298. - Public nuisance. 
    Any animal, fowl, livestock or wildlife which creates a public nuisance, as defined in section 14-1, is in violation of this chapter and is subject to impoundment and citation. 
(Code 2001, § 14-237; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Secs. 14-299-14-329. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VICIOUS DOGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Dangerous dogs, Texas Health and Safety Code § 822.001 et seq. 

Sec. 14-330. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Vicious dog means any dog: 
(1)  Without provocation, that bites or attacks a human being or domestic animal, either on public or private property, or that, in a vicious or terrorizing manner, approaches any person on the streets, sidewalks or other public places in an apparent attitude of attack; 
(2)  With a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals; or 
(3)  Owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dogfighting, or trained for dogfighting. 
(Code 2001, § 14-266; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-331. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No dog shall be deemed vicious if the bite, injury or damage was sustained by a person who at the time was committing a willful trespass upon the premises occupied by the owner or harborer of the dog or by a person who has tormented or abused the dog. 
(b)  Dogs under control of the Police Department or other proper governmental agency are exempt from this division. 
(Code 2001, § 14-267; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-332. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any section of this division shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-14, and the dog shall be impounded immediately in the animal reclaim center for a minimum of three days or until the violation has been corrected or other sections of this division have been met. An owner of an animal that without provocation bites or injures a person or animal shall be strictly liable for the harm caused by such animal. 
(Code 2001, § 14-268; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-333. - Vicious dog license required. 
    Any person owning a vicious dog must obtain a vicious dog license. Written application for such license shall be made to the Health Department and shall include the applicant's name and address, a description of the animal, proof of current rabies vaccination, and the payment of a fee set by the health district and approved by the city council; which shall be posted in the environmental health division of the health district. The expiration date of the license shall coincide with the current rabies tag. Before the license is issued, the owner shall have his driver's license number or state identification number permanently tattooed on the inner surface of one ear of the dog by a licensed veterinarian. The owner of a vicious dog must be at least 18 years old. Not later than 30 days after a person learns that the person is the owner of a vicious dog as defined in this division, the person shall obtain liability insurance coverage of at least $100,000.00 to cover damages resulting from an attack by the vicious dog causing bodily injury to a person and the person shall provide proof annually of the required liability insurance coverage to the health district. 
(Code 2001, § 14-269; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-334. - Declaration of vicious dog. 
    The owner or harborer may voluntarily declare that he has a vicious dog and apply for a vicious dog license, or the health district, acting on information it has received, may declare a dog vicious after adequate investigation. 
(Code 2001, § 14-270; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-335. - Investigation of complaints. 
    If the health district receives a complaint that a dog is vicious and the complainant will give a sworn statement with particulars concerning the complaint, a thorough investigation shall be made. If it is determined by the health district that an animal is vicious and presents a substantial danger to the public health, safety and welfare of the community, the animal may be impounded immediately and its owner promptly notified. The owner of such animal shall have the right to file a written appeal as outlined by Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 822, subch. D. If the release of the dog is allowed, impoundment and other fees shall be paid prior to release. 
(Code 2001, § 14-271; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-336. - Destruction. 
(a)  Any dog determined to be vicious by the health district may be destroyed if: 
(1)  Written appeal pursuant to Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 822, subch. D is not made by the animal's owner; or 
(2)  The owner of such animal fails or refuses to destroy the animal as requested by official notice or order of the director of health. 
(b)  A notice as required in this section is properly served when it is delivered to the owner, caregiver or possessor of the animal, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner, caregiver or possessor of the animal. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to refuse to relinquish a vicious animal for destruction within 45 days of notification as provided in this section. 
(Code 2001, § 14-272; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-337. - Seizure warrant. 
    If the harborer of a dog declared vicious refuses to release such animal to the animal control officer, it shall be the duty of the animal control supervisor to obtain a seizure warrant for seizure of the animal. 
(Code 2001, § 14-273; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-338. - Confinement. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner or harborer of a vicious dog to securely confine such animal. A vicious dog shall be confined in an enclosure with the walls or fence at least six feet high and otherwise designed to prevent escape by the dog. The enclosure must be securely locked. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a vicious dog to be outside the dwelling of the owner or outside the enclosure unless it is necessary for the owner to obtain veterinary care for the vicious dog or to sell or give away the vicious dog or to comply with directions of the health district. In such event, the vicious dog shall be securely restrained with a chain having a minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds and not exceeding three feet in length and shall be under direct control and supervision of the owner or harborer or humanely caged. Unless confined or restrained under conditions stated in this subsection, the vicious dog shall be considered at large and subject to the penalties of this division. 
(c)  A vicious dog may not be chained to any object outside the dwelling or locked enclosure either on or off the property of the owner. 
(d)  If a vicious dog is sold, given away, or changes ownership, the owner or harborer of the dog shall notify the local rabies control authority of the transfer in writing within five days after such transfer. The owner must notify in writing on or before the date of possession or custody as transferred the person who receives the animal from the owner that the animal is a vicious animal and the requirements of a vicious dog license. 
(Code 2001, § 14-274; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-339. - Sign. 
    The owner or harborer of a vicious dog shall display a sign on the premises warning that there is a vicious dog on the premises. The sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the public street or highway. 
(Code 2001, § 14-275; Ord. No. 61-2004, § 1, 8-2-2004) 
Sec. 14-340. - Inspections. 
    An inspection of the vicious dog and the premises of the vicious dog shall be made twice a year and at any other time deemed necessary by the health district. 
(Code 2001, § 14-276; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Secs. 14-341-14-368. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 14-369. - Facilities authorized. 
(a)  The City Council shall select and establish a suitable animal reclaim center (ARC) for impounding all animals, fowl, livestock and wildlife by the health district. 
(b)  The director or his designee is the designated caretaker of every animal as of the date of intake. 
(c)  Immediately upon intake the director or his designee, as the designated caretaker, is authorized to provide each appropriate aged animal with core immunizations and parasite treatment. 
(Code 2001, § 14-306; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009; Ord. No. 52-2018, § 1, 10-2-2018) 
Sec. 14-370. - Records required. 
    Animal control officers shall keep records giving the following: 
(1)  The description of all animals, fowl, livestock and wildlife impounded by the health district; 
(2)  The date of impounding; 
(3)  The date of reclaim; 
(4)  The date of euthanasia or transfer for adoption; 
(5)  The amount realized for the sale or reclaim of each such animal, fowl or livestock; and 
(6)  The name of the purchaser. 
(Code 2001, § 14-307; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-371. - Citation. 
    Any and all animals, fowl or livestock at large are subject to impoundment. In addition to or in lieu of impounding an animal, fowl or livestock at large, an animal control officer may issue to the known owner of such at-large animal, fowl or livestock a citation which will constitute a notice of violation. The citation shall be forwarded to the city attorney for prosecution. 
(Code 2001, § 14-308; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-372. - Right of entry on private property. 
    If an animal, fowl, livestock or wildlife is observed at large on private property, the animal control officer and duly appointed assistants may enter the property in accordance with applicable law for the purpose of emergency impoundment or seizure of the animal, fowl, livestock or wildlife; or issuance of a citation or both. 
(Code 2001, § 14-309; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-373. - Right of owner to reclaim; fee. 
(a)  The owner of any animal, fowl or livestock impounded in accordance with this division shall have the right to reclaim the animal, fowl or livestock upon showing satisfactory proof of ownership and paying to the city the appropriate impoundment fee set by the health district and approved by the city council; the fee schedule will be posted in the animal services division of the health district. 
(b)  An owner or his designee who reclaims an animal six months of age or older from impound after the animal has previously been impounded by the animal services division shall provide proof that the animal has been spayed or neutered prior to the release of the animal. If proof that the previously reclaimed animal is spayed or neutered is not provided, the owner shall pay a veterinary clinic for the cost of spaying or neutering the animal and present a receipt of payment along with a scheduled appointment to the animal services center prior to release of the animal. The animal shall be spayed or neutered within 30 days of release, and the owner shall bring proof of the animal's sterilization to animal services within 45 days of release. All reclaim and boarding fees will be waived with proof of payment for sterilization and scheduled appointment as they apply in accordance with this section only. 
(c)  Sterilization under this section may be postponed for a period greater than 30 days, but not more than 90 days, after release in cases of female animals in season, pregnant or for animals younger than six months of age. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a person redeeming an animal under this section to fail to provide proof of rabies vaccination within ten days of the release of the animal; or fail to provide proof that the animal was spayed or neutered within 45 days of the release of the animal if required to do so by this section. 
(Code 2001, § 14-310; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009; Ord. No. 11-2014, § 3, 4-1-2014) 
Sec. 14-374. - Proof of vaccination and license required for dogs and cats. 
    The owner of any impounded dog or cat 16 weeks of age or older shall, at the time of redemption, show proof of current rabies vaccination or, if unable to show such proof, shall be required to have the animal vaccinated before it can leave the animal reclaim center. The owner must also at this time purchase a city license if unable to show proof of a current license. 
(Code 2001, § 14-311; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-375. - Redemption of wildlife. 
    No wildlife shall be subject to redemption from impoundment without the approval of the local rabies control authority. 
(Code 2001, § 14-312; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-376. - Detention time. 
    It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep all tagged animals and cats wearing a microchip for a period of five working days from the date of impoundment and all untagged animals and cats without tags or microchips for a period of three working days from the date of impoundment. 
(Code 2001, § 14-313; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-377. - Livestock. 
(a)  Impoundment for running at large. The animal control officer shall take up and cause to be impounded any livestock found to be running at large within the city limits. 
(b)  Redemption; fee. The owner of any livestock impounded as provided in subsection (a) of this section may reclaim the livestock before sale by providing proof of ownership and paying all expenses, including roper's fee, boarding fee, impounding fee, the miscellaneous expenses and costs of advertising. 
(c)  Sale or disposal. The animal control supervisor shall proceed to sell any unclaimed livestock so impounded at public auction for cash, first giving three days' notice in the city's daily official newspaper describing the livestock impounded and stating that the livestock will be sold to defray costs, if not reclaimed before the date of the sale. If not reclaimed by such date, the animal control supervisor shall, on such date, sell such livestock at public auction. The animal control supervisor shall have the right to refuse all bids and arrange for other disposition. If any at-large livestock impounded by the health district is diseased or afflicted in any manner, such livestock may be euthanized after obtaining a statement from a veterinarian. 
(Code 2001, § 14-314; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-378. - Fowl. 
    No owner, possessor or harborer of chickens, turkeys or other fowl shall allow the fowl to run at large within the city limits. The fowl running at large shall be impounded by the health district. The owner of any fowl impounded may redeem such by paying the appropriate impounding and boarding fees during the three working days' impoundment period. Antwerp messenger or homing pigeons are excepted from this section. 
(Code 2001, § 14-315; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-379. - Trapping. 
(a)  Any animal control officer is authorized to employ the use of humane cage traps (e.g., Have-A-Heart, Tomahawk Brand) for the purpose of capturing animals, fowl or wildlife at large. 
(b)  Residents of the city wishing to trap unwanted animals may do so with the use of humane cage traps. 
(Code 2001, § 14-316; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-380. - Euthanasia. 
    Any animal, fowl, livestock or wildlife impounded or found at large within the city may be destroyed upon determination by the animal control supervisor, animal care coordinator or a local veterinarian that it has been injured or is sick and in such state that its recovery is seriously in doubt or that it is sick and endangers the health of other animals or persons. All euthanasia shall be done humanely, by injection of a lethal drug or necessary means as approved by state law. 
(Code 2001, § 14-317; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009; Ord. No. 32-2016, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 14-381. - Transfer of ownership after period of detention. 
(a)  Detention period. It shall be the duty of the Wichita Falls Health District (hereinafter "Health District") or the health district's designee to hold all impounded animals with a microchip, rabies vaccination tag or a Wichita Falls license tag attached to the collar for a detention period of five days, excluding Sundays and city designated holidays, after the date of impoundment. All impounded animals without a microchip, rabies vaccination tag or a Wichita Falls license tag attached to the collar will be held for a detention period of three days, excluding Sundays and city designated holidays, after the date of impoundment. 
(b)  Transfer of ownership. After the period of detention has ended, ownership of the animal will transfer to the Wichita Falls Health District or the health district's designee. Title to the animal is considered vested in the Wichita Falls Health District or the health district's designee for purposes of passing good title, free and clear of all claims. When ownership is transferred to the Wichita Falls Health District or the health district's designee, title and sole ownership of the animal transfers to the Wichita Falls Health District or the health district's designee. The animal becomes sole property of the Wichita Falls Health District or the health district's designee. The animal becomes subject to disposition by transfer of ownership, euthanasia or adoption as the Wichita Falls Health District or the health district's designee deems appropriate once ownership is transferred. 
(c)  Eligibility for transfer of ownership, euthanasia or adoption. Once ownership of an animal transfers to the Wichita Falls Health District or the health district's designee, the animal will be eligible for transfer of ownership, euthanasia, or adoption and subject to disposition as Wichita Falls Health District or the health district's designee sees fit. 
(d)  Quarantined animals. This section does not apply to quarantined animals that are suspected of having rabies or that have been quarantined because the animal bit or scratched a person. Ownership of quarantined animals will be transferred to the Wichita County Health District after the fifth business day after the date that quarantine has ended if they have not been redeemed or reclaimed by the original owner. 
(e)  Animals seized by court order. This section does not apply to animals that have been impounded pursuant to seizure warrants because the animal is vicious and caused injury to a person or has been cruelly treated or abandoned. Title shall transfer to the Wichita Falls Health District or the health authority's designee three days, excluding Sundays and city designated holidays, after the date of the hearing on the seizure warrant if the animals have not been redeemed per a court order allowing the animal's owner to maintain ownership and good title to the animal. If the rightful owner has not reclaimed the animal obtained pursuant to a seizure warrant within three days, excluding Sundays and city designated holidays, after the date of the hearing to determine whether the animal has been cruelly treated or abandoned, ownership of the animal will transfer to the Wichita Falls Health District or the health authority's designee. 
(f)  Immediate transfer of ownership. This section does not preclude a person from transferring ownership to the Wichita Falls Health District or the health district's designee per written instrument. Any animals to which an owner has transferred ownership to the Wichita Falls Health District or the health district's designee via written instrument will be eligible for transfer of ownership, euthanasia, or adoption immediately and subject to disposition as the Wichita Falls Health District or the health district's designee sees fit. 
(g)  Redemption after impoundment. The person entitled to the possession of any animal delivered to the Wichita Falls Health District or the health district's designee shall be entitled to have the animal delivered to him or her upon presentation of satisfactory evidence of ownership, as evidenced by the following: 
1.  A license issued pursuant to this chapter; 
2.  A microchip indicating ownership of the animal; 
3.  Receipt for purchase or adoption of the animal; 
4.  Records from a veterinarian showing vaccinations administered within the previous 12 months; 
5.  Receipts for payment to a veterinarian or commercial pet service facility for services rendered to the animal; 
6.  Photographic or videographic records showing the animal and individual asserting ownership at home or in other environments; or 
7.  A signed and notarized affidavit in which the owner of the animal attests that the animal is his or her property. 
(Ord. No. 32-2016, § 2, 9-6-2016) 
Secs. 14-382-14-403. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ANIMAL SHELTER ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

Sec. 14-404. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created an Animal Shelter Advisory Committee. 
(Code 2001, § 14-321; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-405. - Representation. 
    The Animal Shelter Advisory Committee shall be composed of five persons with the following qualifications: one veterinarian; one animal welfare organization representative; one city official, designated as the Local Rabies Control Authority of Wichita Falls (LRCA), as mandated by the Texas Health and Safety Code § 826.017; one person whose duties include the daily operation of an animal shelter; and one citizen representing the general public. 
(Code 2001, § 14-322; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-406. - Term of office; meetings. 
    The Local Rabies Control Authority of Wichita Falls and the member whose duties include the daily operation of an animal shelter shall serve an indefinite term. The veterinarian appointed to the committee shall serve a term of two years; the animal welfare organization representative shall serve a term of two years; and the citizen representing the general public shall serve a term of two years. All terms expire on December 31. The committee shall meet at least three times each year. 
(Code 2001, § 14-323; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009; Ord. No. 01-2017, 1-3-2017) 
Sec. 14-407. - Duties. 
    The Animal Shelter Advisory Committee shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Assist the city in an advisory capacity in complying with the terms of the Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 823, as amended; and 
(2)  Assist the city in an advisory capacity in establishing procedures applicable to the city's animal control program as follows: 
a.  Procedures to ensure that the city's animal shelter shall separate all animals in its custody at all times by species, by sex (if known) and, if the animals are not related to one another, by size; 
b.  Procedures to ensure that the city's animal shelter will not confine healthy animals with sick, injured or diseased animals; 
c.  Procedures to ensure that the city, at least once a year, employs a veterinarian to inspect the city's animal control shelter to determine that such facility complies with the requirements of Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 823, as amended. The veterinarian shall file copies of his report with the person operating the shelter and with the Texas Department of Health on forms prescribed by the Texas Department of Health; and 
d.  Procedures to ensure that the shelter operator or contractor maintains the necessary records required under Texas Health and Safety Code § 823.003(e), as amended. 
(Code 2001, § 14-324; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Secs. 14-408-14-427. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RABIES CONTROL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Rabies control, Texas Health and Safety Code § 826.001 et seq. 

Sec. 14-428. - Reporting rabid animals, livestock, wildlife. 
    It shall be the duty of every animal or livestock owner or harborer, veterinarian, physician or any person to report to the health district all cases of rabies with which he comes in contact or to which his attention has been directed. This report shall be made immediately upon diagnosis or suspicion of a case of rabies. 
(Code 2001, § 14-346; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-429. - Reporting rabies exposure. 
    A person having knowledge of an animal bite or scratch to an individual or of an animal that the person suspects is rabid shall report the incident or animal to the health district. 
(Code 2001, § 14-347; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-430. - Quarantine of animals, livestock exhibiting symptoms. 
    Any animal or livestock that has symptoms of rabies as verified by a veterinarian shall at once be placed under rabies quarantine by the animal control supervisor. 
(Code 2001, § 14-348; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-431. - Quarantine and redemption of biting or attacking animals or livestock. 
(a)  If any person alleges that any animal or livestock has bitten, scratched or otherwise attacked any person within the city in a manner which caused a break in the skin of the person, he may report the incident to the health district and sign an animal bite complaint form. It shall be the duty of the animal control officer, as soon as feasible, to impound such animal or livestock for quarantine purposes. 
(b)  If a disagreement should occur or question arise as to whether or not a wound is the result of an animal or livestock bite or scratch, the complainant shall be required to sign a notarized affidavit before the impoundment and quarantine will be instituted. This quarantine shall take place at the animal reclaim center or at a local veterinary hospital for a period of at least ten days (240 hours from the time of the incident). 
(c)  Impoundment at any approved facility for rabies quarantine purposes shall be at the expense of the owner of the impounded animal or livestock. If a harborer of a quarantined animal cannot be identified and located within a reasonable length of time, the victim, at his option, may elect to have the animal examined by a veterinarian or to have the tissue submitted for laboratory examination, and the costs so incurred shall be borne by the victim. No animal or livestock confined for quarantine purposes under this article shall be released to any person until all vaccinations required under section 14-41 have been given. 
(d)  Should any owner or harborer of any animal or livestock which has bitten or scratched a person within the city fail to turn over the animal for quarantine, or refuse to allow the quarantine of such animal or livestock, pursuant to this section, or attempt to interfere with such impoundment, that person shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine set out under the provisions of this article. 
(e)  Unvaccinated animals should not be vaccinated against rabies during the ten-day (240 hours) observation period; however, animals may be treated for unrelated medical problems diagnosed by a veterinarian. 
(Code 2001, § 14-349; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-432. - Seizure warrant. 
    If the harborer of an attacking animal refuses to release for quarantine such animal, it shall be the duty of the animal control supervisor to obtain a seizure warrant for the seizure and quarantine of the animal in question. 
(Code 2001, § 14-350; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-433. - Citywide quarantine. 
(a)  Animals in public restricted. During the period of citywide quarantine, it shall be unlawful for any person to allow any animal to be taken, whether restrained or not, to the streets or any other public place. 
(b)  Conditions warranting. A citywide quarantine may be invoked for a period of 30 days by the local health authority after an investigation if it has been determined that there exists an immediate threat of rabies. 
(c)  Extension of time. If there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring during the 30-day period of the citywide quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended for an additional reasonable period of time. 
(Code 2001, § 14-351; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-434. - Animals or livestock bitten by suspected rabid animals. 
    Every unvaccinated animal or livestock bitten or attacked by another animal or wildlife suspected of being rabid shall be destroyed or quarantined for a period determined by state law, at the owner's expense. Vaccinated animals or livestock must be destroyed or quarantined for a period determined by state law from the date of exposure. 
(Code 2001, § 14-352; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Secs. 14-435-14-451. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CRUELTY TO ANIMALS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Treatment and disposition of animals, Texas Health and Safety Code § 821.001 et seq.; cruelty to animals, Texas Penal Code § 42.09. 

Sec. 14-452. - Food, water, shelter and shade. 
    No owner shall fail to provide his animals, fowl or livestock with sufficient good and wholesome food and water, adequate shelter, shade, and protection from the weather, adequate space and humane care and treatment, and reasonable veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering. All persons owning, possessing or harboring such shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Shelter and shade. Shelter and shade shall be provided as follows: 
a.  Animals. Animals shall be provided with access to shelter to allow them to remain dry and protected from the elements. Such shelter shall be enclosed fully on three sides, shall be roofed, and shall have a solid floor. The entrance to the shelter shall be flexible to allow the animal's entry and exit and sturdy enough to block entry of wind or rain. The shelter shall be small enough to retain the animal's body heat and large enough to allow the animal to stand and turn comfortably. The enclosure shall be structurally sound and in good repair. Bedding shall be provided. A suitable method shall be provided to rapidly eliminate excess water from the shelter area. In addition to the shelter, either natural or artificial shade with adequate ventilation shall be provided to protect the entire animal from direct sunlight at all times of the day. 
b.  Livestock. Livestock shall be provided with access to shelter to allow them to remain dry during rain and snow and protected from severe chill factor. Such shelter shall have three sides and a roof. It shall be structurally sound and in good repair to protect the livestock from injury. Such shelter will provide minimum space to accommodate all livestock confined within the compound as provided in section 14-491(a). Either natural or artificial shade shall be provided to protect livestock from direct sunlight. If shade is provided by the enclosure, allowance shall be made for adequate ventilation. A suitable method shall be provided to rapidly eliminate excess water from the shelter area. 
(2)  Chaining and tethering animals. 
a.  It shall be unlawful to keep an animal or livestock on a chain or rope placed in a manner that makes it possible to become entangled with the restraints of other animals or livestock or with any other objects. 
b.  It shall be unlawful to attach a collar or harness to an animal that chokes or pinches the animal unless the rope or tether is attached to the collar and is being held by that person. 
c.  It shall be unlawful for any animal to be attached to a chain or tether that weighs ten percent or more of the animal's body weight. 
d.  It shall be unlawful to stake a cat outside on a leash, tether, chain or similar apparatus. 
e.  It shall be unlawful to restrain an animal outside with a chain or tether unless: 
1.  A person is holding the chain or tether; or 
2.  The dog's owner or handler remains outside, within clear view of the animal and is within 50 feet of the animal, throughout the period of restraint. 
(Code 2001, § 14-381; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009; Ord. No. 44-2011, § 1, 8-16-2011; Ord. No. 13-2013, § 1(14-381), 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 14-2016, § 1, 6-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-453. - Inhumane treatment. 
    No person shall beat, cruelly treat, torment, mentally abuse, overload, overdrive, overwork, kill, torture, mutilate, maim or perform, cause to be performed or permit to be performed any other act of cruelty upon any animal, wildlife, fowl or livestock. No person other than a licensed veterinarian shall crop the ears, dock the tail or perform any surgery on any animal, wildlife, fowl or livestock, excluding livestock castration and dehorning. It shall be an affirmative defense under this section that such action was reasonably necessary to protect the health and safety of a human or an animal. 
(Code 2001, § 14-382; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-454. - Abandonment of animals; release of wildlife. 
    No person having custody of any animal, fowl or livestock, as owner or otherwise, shall abandon such animal, fowl or livestock. No person having custody of any wildlife shall abandon or release any such wildlife that is incapable of surviving on its own in the environment into which it is to be released. 
(Code 2001, § 14-383; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-455. - Giving animals as prizes or inducements; artificially colored baby fowl or animals; sale of quantities of young fowl. 
(a)  No person shall give away any live animal, reptile, fowl, livestock or wildlife as a prize for or inducement to enter any contest, game, or other competition; an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer is for the purpose of attracting trade. 
(b)  No chick, duckling, gosling, rabbit or hamster that has been dyed or otherwise colored artificially shall be sold or offered for sale; offered or given as a prize, premium or advertising device; or displayed in the city. 
(c)  No chickens, chicks, ducklings, goslings or similar fowl younger than eight weeks of age shall be sold in quantities of less than 12 to a single purchaser. Stores, shops, vendors and others offering such for sale in quantities of 12 or more shall provide and operate brooders or other heating devices that may be necessary to maintain the chicks, ducklings or goslings in good health and shall keep adequate food and water available to such fowl at all times. 
(Code 2001, § 14-384; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-456. - Duty of motor vehicle operator to report accidents involving animals, fowl, or livestock. 
    Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle within the city, strikes any animal, fowl or livestock shall stop at once, render such assistance as may be practicable, and report the accident to an appropriate law enforcement agency or the health district. 
(Code 2001, § 14-385; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-457. - Exposing poisonous substances or traps. 
(a)  No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the poison shall be liable to be eaten by an animal, fowl, livestock, wildlife or person. This subsection is not intended to prohibit the prudent use on one's own property of herbicides, insecticides or common rodent control materials (e.g., rat poisons) mixed only with a vegetable substance. 
(b)  No person shall expose an open-jaw-type trap, leg hold trap, snare trap or any type trap able or liable to cause physical harm or injury to any animal, fowl, livestock, wildlife or person. 
(Code 2001, § 14-386; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-458. - Performing animal exhibitions. 
(a)  No performing animal exhibition or circus shall be permitted in which performing animals are induced or encouraged to perform for entertainment through use of chemical, mechanical, electrical or manual devices in a manner which will cause or is likely to cause stress, physical injury or suffering to the performing animal. 
(b)  All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and shall be in good working condition. 
(Code 2001, § 14-387; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-459. - Confining animals to motor vehicles. 
(a)  No animal shall be confined within a motor vehicle at any location under such conditions as may endanger the health or well-being of the animal, including, but not limited to, dangerous temperature; lack of food, water or attention; or confinement with a dangerous animal. 
(b)  Any animal control or peace officer is authorized to remove any animal from a motor vehicle at any location when he reasonably believes it is confined in violation of subsection (a) of this section. Any animal so removed shall be delivered to the animal reclaim center, after the removing officer leaves written notice of such removal and delivery, including his name, in a conspicuous, secure location on or within the vehicle. 
(Code 2001, § 14-388; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Secs. 14-460-14-486. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CARE OF ANIMALS 

Sec. 14-487. - Sanitation; odor and vector control; cage sizes. 
    Every owner, possessor or harborer of animals, fowl and livestock shall comply with the following regulations and sanitation requirements: 
(1)  Animal wastes. Approved procedures for disposing of animal wastes shall be provided and utilized on a daily basis. 
(2)  Odor and vector control required. All persons keeping animals within the city shall keep the premises upon which such animals are kept clean and free from noxious and unpleasant odors and shall use some standard spray or other chemical control at reasonable intervals so as to keep such premises free from flies, mosquitoes, ticks, fleas and other vectors. 
(3)  Minimum cage size. Minimum cage size shall be as follows and overcrowding shall be prohibited: 
a.  Every keeper of an animal shall confine the animal in an enclosure sufficient to prevent its running at large. Such enclosure shall also be of sufficient size to maintain the animal comfortably and in good health. The following shall be the minimum standard for cage size: 
1.  Large breeds, over 50 pounds: four feet by six feet; or 24 square feet. 
2.  Medium breeds, 36 to 50 pounds: four feet by five feet; or 20 square feet. 
3.  Small breeds, ten to 35 pounds: three feet by four feet; or 12 square feet. 
4.  No more than two large, two medium, or three small breed animals shall be permitted per five-foot by ten-foot cage, nor shall overcrowding occur in cages of any size. 
b.  In addition, all permitted facilities will conform to this subsection except for the following allowances for pet shop cages: 
1.  Two feet by two feet by two feet for two pups not over five pounds each or four kittens. 
2.  Two and one-half feet by 21/2 feet by 21/2 feet for two pups not over ten pounds each. 
3.  Three feet by three feet by 21/2 feet for one small dog ten to 20 pounds. 
(Code 2001, § 14-416; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-488. - Keeping of rabbits. 
    No person shall own, possess or harbor rabbits in any enclosure which is less than 50 feet, shortest measure distance, from any residence, as defined in section 14-1, except the residence of the harborer. 
(Code 2001, § 14-417; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-489. - Keeping of fowl. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall: 
(1)  Harbor any fowl with less than 12 square feet of floor or ground area for each. Permitted pet shops shall be exempt from this subsection. 
(2)  Keep any fowl within any structure in the city without thoroughly cleaning the area at least once each day and so maintaining such structure that no offensive odors are emitted therefrom. 
(3)  Keep any fowl within any structure, the interior of which is not treated with an approved disinfectant at least once every six months to discourage insects, fleas, ticks, mites, mosquitoes and flies. 
(4)  Place the coop, pen, housing or enclosure nearer than 75 feet to any residence, excluding the residence of the harborer of the fowl. The distance may be reduced to not less than 50 feet if written permission is received from the resident who is closer than 75 feet. Permitted pet shops shall be exempt from this subsection. 
(5)  Keep any fowl in violation of any other section of this chapter. 
(b)  Breeding or keeping of certain pigeons. Standards for the breeding or keeping of certain pigeons shall be as follows: 
(1)  Restricted. No person shall keep, breed or raise pigeons within the corporate city limits except the Antwerp messenger or homing pigeons, commonly called carrier pigeons, when the keeper complies with this section. 
(2)  Identification required. The Antwerp messenger pigeon shall have the name of the owner stamped upon its wing or tail or a leg band or ring with the name or initials of its owner or an identification or registration number stamped thereon when permitted to race or to fly for necessary exercise and training. 
(3)  Odor elimination and setback required. The enclosure shall be kept clean and free of offensive odors, and the nearest point of the enclosure shall not be less than 100 feet from the nearest point of any residence on another's property. 
(4)  Trespassing prohibited. It shall be unlawful to maintain any Antwerp messenger pigeon in such a manner that constitutes a nuisance because of repeated trespasses on public property or private property, other than that of the owner of such pigeons. 
(c)  Keeping of guineas and peacocks prohibited. No person shall keep or maintain within the city limits any guinea fowl or peacocks. 
(Code 2001, § 14-418; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-490. - Keeping of fowl, rabbits, guinea pigs or ferrets for commercial purposes. 
    No owner, possessor or harborer of any domestic fowl, rabbits, guinea pigs or ferrets, where such fowl or animals are kept for sale or for any purpose other than domestic use or home consumption, shall allow such fowl or animals to roam in open pens on the ground. However, such harborer may keep such fowl or animals for sale or commercial purposes, provided he keeps such fowl or animals in batteries or coops, arranged inside of buildings and kept in a sanitary condition, removing all droppings from such buildings, batteries or coops at least once each day and disinfecting and deodorizing such buildings, batteries or coops at least once each day. Any such building must be at least 50 feet from any residence other than the harborer's. 
(Code 2001, § 14-419; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-491. - Keeping of livestock. 
(a)  Setback required; minimum space required. No livestock shall be kept or maintained at a distance closer than 200 feet from any residence located on another's property. All such livestock shall be maintained on a properly fenced parcel of land, providing a minimum of 600 square feet of area for each head of livestock. All such livestock shall have provided by their owner a shed of reasonable size for the number of livestock to be protected as provided in section 14-452(1)b. 
(b)  Odor, vector and pest control required. The place of keeping livestock shall be kept free of offensive odor, flies, rodents and other pests. 
(c)  Manure container required. Each and every enclosure in or on which any livestock are kept shall have a suitable manure container, into which all manure shall be placed daily. Each container shall be securely screened or otherwise protected from flies, rodents and other vermin and shall be cleaned out and disinfected at least once a week. Manure from containers shall not be left in open stacks, but shall be removed or buried. 
(d)  Exemptions. Livestock production areas, as defined in section 14-1, shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(Code 2001, § 14-420; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-492. - Keeping of swine. 
(a)  Definition. For the purposes of this section, the term "potbellied pig" shall mean a Vietnamese potbellied pig, and under no circumstances shall any swine be considered a potbellied pig if its weight exceeds 95 pounds. 
(b)  Restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep swine, pigs or hogs in the corporate city limits, except under the following circumstances: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or raise more than two potbellied pigs in any one location within the city. 
(2)  All such potbellied pigs shall be kept indoors at all times, other than times for evacuation of waste materials or during exercise periods. During the time periods the pig is permitted outdoors, it shall be confined within the property limits of the owner and shall not be left unattended. 
(3)  All potbellied pigs shall be spayed or neutered on or before the age of 12 weeks. No adult potbellied pig may be kept within the corporate city limits unless its tusks have been surgically removed and the pig has been spayed or neutered. 
(4)  All potbellied pigs shall receive annual vaccinations for erysipelas. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the pig or the property to forward to the animal control supervisor an erysipelas vaccination certificate from a licensed veterinarian, which shall include the following information: 
a.  Name and address of the owner. 
b.  Description of the pig. 
c.  Date of vaccination. 
d.  Weight. 
e.  Other appropriate information. 
(5)  No person shall keep any potbellied pig in any location within the city unless this person has filed with the animal control supervisor an application for harboring a potbellied pig and such application has been approved and a permit issued by the animal control supervisor. The annual permit fee shall be set by the health district and approved by the city council; the fee schedule will be posted in the environmental health division of the health district. 
(6)  If the potbellied pig dies, is moved or acquires a new owner or caretaker, it shall be the registered owner's duty to inform the animal control supervisor of the fact within 14 days of the event. 
(c)  Exceptions. Exceptions to this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Veterinary facilities. Veterinary hospitals, clinics and related practices of veterinary medicine shall be exempt from this section. 
(2)  Other facilities. Stock shows, livestock auctions, slaughterhouses, public zoos, governmental agencies including public schools, laboratories, certain school project animals, and research facilities, approved by the director of health, may be exempt from this section. 
(Code 2001, § 14-421; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-493. - Keeping of wildlife. 
    No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his premises any wild animal. This section shall not be construed to apply to approved zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, circuses, animals kept for treatment in a facility operated by a veterinarian or animals used for research or teaching purposes by a licensed hospital or nonprofit university or college providing a degree program. 
(Code 2001, § 14-422; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-494. - Disposition of litter and droppings. 
    Every harborer of animals, livestock or fowl shall cause the litter and droppings therefrom to be disposed of daily in a sanitary manner, such that the creation of odors and the breeding of flies, rodents and other vermin is minimized. The method employed must meet with the approval of the local rabies control authority. 
(Code 2001, § 14-423; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-495. - Storage of feed. 
    All feed provided for animals, livestock or fowl shall be kept in a rat-proof, fly-proof container. 
(Code 2001, § 14-424; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-496. - Keeping of project animals, livestock or fowl by school children. 
(a)  School-age children enrolled in a public or private school which offers FFA/4-H programs, in which the class participants are required or allowed to raise project animals, livestock or fowl for show or profit purposes, may apply for a permit to keep certain prohibited animals, livestock or fowl for the school project, even though the property may not be fully in compliance with the setback requirements of this article. Those students are required to: 
(1)  Apply for an annual FFA/4-H project animal/livestock/fowl permit. 
(2)  Pay the annual permit fee. 
(3)  Show proof of enrollment in one of the listed school programs. 
(4)  Agree to comply with cleanliness and sanitation requirements of this article and the state health and safety code. 
(5)  Obtain the approval, in writing, of all adjacent or across the road property owners. 
(6)  Allow inspection by the animal control staff of the animal, livestock or fowl, pens, facilities, and property before issuance of the permit. 
(b)  Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this section will disallow the issuance of the necessary permit. Permits are nontransferable and are revoked upon either graduation from high school, dropping the class, or nonattendance by the student. 
(Code 2001, § 14-425; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-497. - Nonconforming use. 
    Any property issued a nonconforming use permit and in operation on July 4, 1999, shall be allowed to renew their permit annually only as long as: 
(1)  The nonconforming use is not expanded by increasing the number and/or types of animals. 
(2)  The property does not change owners. 
(3)  The nonconforming use is continuous and not stopped for a period in excess of six months. 
(4)  Existing structures are not extensively modified or changed and remain in sound condition except for routine maintenance and repair. Additionally, the structures are not to be relocated unless there is a need to provide for the health and security of the animals and/or the public. 
(5)  Local and state cleanliness and sanitation requirements are perpetually in compliance. 
(Code 2001, § 14-426; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Secs. 14-498-14-517. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ANIMAL CONTROL HEARINGS 

Sec. 14-518. - Right to hearing. 
(a)  The following determinations may be appealed under the procedures in this article: 
(1)  Denial of any permit applied for under this chapter; 
(2)  Revocation of any permit applied for under this chapter; 
(3)  Seizure or impoundment of any animal; and 
(4)  The necessity of the destruction of any animal. 
(b)  The following determinations of the director may be appealed to the City of Wichita Falls Municipal Court under the procedures of Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 822, subch. D: Declaration of vicious dog. 
(c)  The following determinations of the director may be appealed to the City of Wichita Falls Municipal Court under the procedures of Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 822, subch. E: Denial or renewal of certificate of registration for a dangerous wild animal. 
(Code 2001, § 14-451; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-519. - Notice of right and request for hearing. 
(a)  Any determination which results in a right to a hearing under section 14-518(a) must be given in writing as an official notice to the owner, caregiver or possessor of the animal. 
(1)  Such writing must provide the owner, caregiver or possessor of the animal with notice of the right to a hearing, and instructions on the procedure for requesting a hearing. 
(2)  A written request for hearing must be filed with the director within five days of receiving written notice of the determination. 
(3)  The owner, caregiver or possessor of the animal shall be granted a hearing within ten days of receipt of a request for hearing. 
(4)  If no request for a hearing is received by the director within five days of receipt of the written notice of the determination by the owner, caregiver or possessor of the animal, the determination is sustained and becomes final. 
(5)  A notice as required in this section is properly served when it is delivered to the owner, caregiver or possessor of the animal, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner, caregiver or possessor of the animal. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(b)  Any determination which results in a right to a hearing under section 14-518(b) or (c) must be given in writing as an official notice to the owner, caregiver or possessor of the animal. Such writing must provide the owner, caregiver or possessor of the animal with notice of the right to a hearing. 
(Code 2001, § 14-452; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-520. - Representation. 
    The owner, harborer or other relevant party may represent himself or be represented by the licensed attorney of his choice at the hearing. 
(Code 2001, § 14-453; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 14-521. - Conduct of hearing. 
    The director or his designee shall conduct the hearings provided for in this article at a time and place designated by the director. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the director or designee shall make final findings, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the owner, caregiver, or possessor of the animal by the health district. If the outcome of the hearing allows for the re-issuance of the license, a reapplication fee shall be assessed at the discretion of the director. 
(Code 2001, § 14-454; Ord. No. 21-2009, § 1, 3-3-2009) 
Chapter 18 - AVIATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Aviation, Texas Transportation Code § 21.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HELICOPTERS 

Sec. 18-26. - Landing helicopters near residences. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to land a helicopter within 300 feet of a residential dwelling. 
(b)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution pursuant to this section that, at the time of the alleged offense: 
(1)  The residential dwelling was owned by an occupant of the helicopter; 
(2)  The helicopter is utilized for the transport of persons for the purpose of providing medical care to the persons being transported; 
(3)  The helicopter was landing at an airport permitted by the Federal Aviation Administration; 
(4)  The helicopter was operated by a government agency; or 
(5)  The helicopter was engaged in construction, utility operations, or firefighting. 
(Ord. No. 03-2013, § 1, 2-5-2013) 
Secs. 18-27-18-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WICHITA FALLS REGIONAL AIRPORT REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- County and municipal airports, Texas Transportation Code § 22.001 et seq 

Sec. 18-43. - Permission required to conduct commercial activities. 
    No person shall use the Wichita Falls Regional Airport for the purpose of carrying on any commercial activity other than airport-related activity. The carrying for hire of passengers, freight, express or mail; the instruction in aviation in any of its branches; the conduct of any phase of any aviation activity; the sale of fuel or refreshments; or any other commercial aviation-related purpose, must be by express written permission from the city council. 
(Code 2001, § 18-26; Ord. No. 54-2004, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
State Law reference- Authority to permit use of airport by another, Texas Transportation Code § 22.021. 
Sec. 18-44. - No unattended vehicles zone; establishment. 
(a)  The city Traffic Engineering Division is authorized to create a "No Unattended Vehicles" zone for the purpose of prohibiting unattended vehicles in specific locations where it has been determined such is necessary to promote a legitimate governmental interest. These zones must be marked with signs stating "No Unattended Vehicles." The Traffic Engineering Division shall arrange for the marking of all such zones. 
(b)  An unattended vehicle is defined as a motor vehicle that has no human occupants; and for which there are no persons responsible within ten feet of same. 
(c)  A person responsible for a motor vehicle commits an offense if he leaves the motor vehicle unattended in a zone designated by this section. It is a defense to prosecution that the person is assisting infirm and/or disabled passengers, so long as the responsible person does not leave the vehicle unattended for more than ten minutes. 
(Code 2001, § 18-27; Ord. No. 54-2004, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
Sec. 18-45. - Unattended baggage prohibited. 
    A person commits an offense if he leaves luggage, baggage, suitcases, cases, gear, or other belongings unattended at the Wichita Falls Regional Airport. An item shall be deemed unattended if the person responsible for the item is not within ten feet of the item. On-duty employees of the municipal airport or airlines are exempt from this restriction. 
(Code 2001, § 18-28; Ord. No. 54-2004, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
Sec. 18-46. - Off-airport rental car privilege fee. 
(a)  All persons conducting or soliciting commercial activities at the Wichita Falls Regional Airport or Kickapoo Downtown Airport (a "city airport") to obtain or serve customers for motor vehicle rental services ("rental car providers") shall pay the city an off-airport privilege fee of nine percent of all gross revenues related to said customers. Picking up motor vehicle rental customers ("customers") at a city airport, dropping off customers at a city airport or providing customers with their vehicles at a city airport shall be considered conducting commercial activities at a city airport. 
(b)  All persons obtaining revenue from the rental of motor vehicles to customers arriving via a city airport shall pay the city the aforesaid off-airport privilege fee of nine percent of all gross revenues related to said customers. Revenue shall be considered obtained from customers that arrived via a city airport if said customers arrived within a 24-hour period immediately preceding the rental, even though the customer arrived at the rental car provider's location on their own or the motor vehicle is dropped off by the customer elsewhere. Revenue payable pursuant to this subsection is not additive to revenue payable pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the term "gross revenues" is defined as all fees and charges to customers for the rental of motor vehicles and all other activities and services performed in connection with its rental car business for passengers at Wichita Falls Regional Airport or Kickapoo Downtown Airport, including business conducted at the fixed base operator (FBO) or within a five-mile radius of the airport, including, but not limited to, reservations made through travel agencies and reservations made by telephone, on-line reservations, facsimile, telegraph and other means of communications, and including, but not limited to, all base, time, and mileage fees and charges from customers picked up at a city airport, plus all premiums and other fees and charges (regardless of how they may be denominated) for personal accident insurance coverage, personal effects insurance coverage, personal effects protection insurance coverage, liability insurance supplement, additional liability insurance coverage, and all other types and kinds of insurance coverages and policies (regardless of how they are denominated, regardless of the parties covered, and regardless of the risks insured against, plus all sums for insurance waivers, collision damage waivers, and loss damage waivers, whether cash or credit, and whether collected or uncollected, plus all sums or other fees and charges the rental car provider receives, or is entitled to receive, for refueling motor vehicles rented to customers) plus all sums or other fees and charges the rental car provider receives, or is entitled to receive, for the rental of any optional equipment such as cell phones, GPS devices, luggage or ski racks and infant seats, plus all sums or other fees and charges the rental car provider receives, or is entitled to receive, for additional drivers). Provided, however, that gross revenues shall not include: 
(1)  Federal, state or municipal sales tax separately stated and collected from customers by the rental car provider, whether now or hereinafter levied or imposed separately stated on the rental agreement and collected from customers of the rental car provider; or 
(2)  Any sums collected as customer facility charges (CFC). 
(d)  Gross revenues shall be deemed received at the time the lease or service transaction occurs, giving rise to the rental car provider's right to collect said monies, regardless of whether said transaction was conducted in person, by telephone or by mail, whether the transaction was for cash or credit, and, if for credit, regardless of whether the rental car provider ultimately collects the monies owed for said transaction from the customer involved. Gross revenues are amounts which the rental car provider receives or is entitled to receive, either initially or by amendment, whichever is greater. 
(e)  On or before the 20th day of each month, the rental car provider shall provide to the city's airport administrator: 
(1)  An accurate statement of the amount of gross revenue related to rental car customers received from commercial activities of the rental car provider at a city airport, including rental car customers who were picked up or dropped off at a city airport or whose vehicles were provided at a city airport; 
(2)  An accurate statement of the amount of gross revenue obtained from customers who arrived at a city airport other than the customers listed in subsection (e)(1) of this section; and 
(3)  The nine percent fee based on subsections (e)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(f)  If the aforementioned nine percent fee is not paid within the calendar month of the due date, then: 
(1)  The city's airport administrator may prohibit representatives of the delinquent rental car provider from entering a city airport to the extent permitted by law; and 
(2)  The rental car provider shall pay a late charge equal to 1.5 percent per month of the unpaid balance, accruing from the due date until paid. 
(g)  This section shall not apply to revenue generated from the rental of vehicles by on-airport rental car providers who have obtained a concession from the city and paid a fee pursuant to said concession in an amount exceeding the nine percent fee described herein. 
(h)  The city manager is authorized to establish and implement procedures necessary for the collection of the fees provided by this section and execute all documents necessary for said collection. 
(Code 2001, § 18-29; Ord. No. 24-2010, § 1, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 18-47. - Disabled American Veteran parking. 
    A disabled American Veteran with a specially designed license plate on his vehicle, issued by the state to the disabled veteran, shall be allowed to park for no charge at Wichita Falls Regional Airport. 
(Ord. No. 05-2016, § 1, 2-2-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-2016, adopted Feb. 2, 2016, will become effective Mar. 3, 2016. 
Chapter 22 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate the construction, location, height and material used in all buildings, etc., § 7(o). 
State Law reference- Substandard buildings, Texas Local Government Code § 214.001 et seq.; building and rehabilitation codes, Texas Local Government Code § 214.211 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODES 

Sec. 22-26. - Adopted; amendments. 
    The following portions of the 2015 International Building Code, published by the International Code Council, are adopted by reference as though they were copied fully in this section: Chapters 2-35, and Appendices F, I, and J. 
    The following is hereby adopted as Chapter 1 of the Building Code and is intended to apply to all of the technical codes: 
CHAPTER 1: SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION 
Section 101 General 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the City of Wichita Falls, Texas, hereinafter referred to as "this code." The provisions of the 2015 International Building Code, the 2015 International Existing Building Code, the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code, the 2015 International Mechanical Code, the 2015 International Plumbing Code, and the 2015 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings adopted by the City of Wichita Falls shall be known collectively as "the technical codes of the City of Wichita Falls," or "the technical codes." 
101.2 Scope. The provisions of the technical codes shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances and systems connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
Exception: Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with the 2015 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, also known as the 2015 International Residential Code. 
101.2.1 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically adopted. 
101.3 Intent. The purpose of the technical codes is to establish the minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare through structural strength, properly installed and maintained systems, means of egress to and from facilities, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, energy conservation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment and to provide safety to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations. 
101.4 Referenced codes. The other codes listed in Sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.6 and referenced elsewhere in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. 
101.4.1 Gas. The provisions of the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code shall apply to the installation of fuel gas piping systems, fuel gas appliances, gaseous hydrogen systems and related accessories in accordance with Sections 101.4.1.1 through 101.4.1.4. 
101.4.1.1 Piping systems. These regulations cover piping systems for natural gas with an operating pressure of 125 pounds per square inch gauge (psig) (862 kPa gauge) or less, and for LP-gas with an operating pressure of 20 psig (140 kPa gauge) or less, except as provided in Section 402.6 of the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code. Coverage shall extend from the point of delivery to the outlet of the appliance shutoff valves. Piping system requirements shall include design, materials, components, fabrication, assembly, installation, testing, inspection, operation and maintenance. 
101.4.1.2 Gas appliances. Requirements for gas appliances and related accessories shall include installation, combustion and ventilation air and venting and connections to piping systems. 
101.4.1.3 Systems, appliances and equipment outside the scope. The 2015 International Fuel Gas Code shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Portable LP-gas appliances and equipment of all types that are not connected to a fixed fuel piping system. 
2.  Installation of farm appliances and equipment such as brooders, dehydrators, dryers and irrigation equipment. 
3.  Raw material (feedstock) applications except for piping to special atmosphere generators. 
4.  Oxygen-fuel gas cutting and welding systems. 
5.  Industrial gas applications using gases such as acetylene and acetylenic compounds, hydrogen, ammonia, carbon monoxide, oxygen and nitrogen. 
6.  Petroleum refineries, pipeline compressor or pumping stations, loading terminals, compounding plants, refinery tank farms and natural gas processing plants. 
7.  Integrated chemical plants or portions of such plants where flammable or combustible liquids or gases are produced by, or used in, chemical reactions. 
8.  LP-gas installations at utility gas plants. 
9.  Liquefied natural gas (LNG) installations. 
10.  Fuel gas piping in power and atomic energy plants. 
11.  Proprietary items of equipment, apparatus or instruments such as gas-generating sets, compressors and calorimeters. 
12.  LP-gas equipment for vaporization, gas mixing and gas manufacturing. 
13.  Temporary LP-gas piping for buildings under construction or renovation that is not to become part of the permanent piping system. 
14.  Installation of LP-gas systems for railroad switch heating. 
15.  Installation of hydrogen gas, LP-gas and compressed natural gas (CNG) systems on vehicles. 
16.  Except as provided in Section 401.1.1 of the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code, gas piping, meters, gas pressure regulators and other appurtenances used by the serving gas supplier in the distribution of gas, other than undiluted LP-gas. 
17.  Building design and construction, except as specified therein. 
18.  Piping systems for mixtures of gas and air within the flammable range with an operating pressure greater than 10 psig (69 kPa gauge). 
19.  Portable fuel cell appliances that are neither connected to a fixed piping system nor interconnected to a power grid. 
101.4.1.4 Other fuels. The requirements for the design, installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of mechanical systems operating with fuels other than fuel gas shall be regulated by the 2015 International Mechanical Code. 
101.4.2 Mechanical. The provisions of the 2015 International Mechanical Code shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of mechanical systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air-conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other energy-related systems. 
101.4.3 Plumbing. The provisions of the 2015 International Plumbing Code shall apply to the erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system, as that term is defined by the 2015 International Plumbing Code. The International Plumbing Code shall also regulate nonflammable medical gas, inhalation anesthetic, vacuum piping, nonmedical oxygen systems and sanitary and condensate vacuum collection systems. 
101.4.4 Fire prevention. The provisions of the 2015 International Fire Code shall apply to matters affecting or relating to structures, processes and premises from the hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of structures, materials or devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression and alarm systems or fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation. 
101.4.5 Energy. The provisions of the 2006 International Energy Conservation Code shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency. 
101.5 Existing buildings. The provisions of the 2015 International Existing Building Code shall apply to the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and relocation of all existing buildings, regardless of occupancy, subject to the criteria of Sections 101.5.1 and 101.5.2. 
101.5.1 Buildings not previously occupied. A building or portion of a building that has not been previously occupied or used for its intended purpose in accordance with the laws in existence at the time of its completion shall comply with the provisions of the 2015 International Building Code or the 2015 International Residential Code, as applicable, for new construction or with any current permit for such occupancy. 
101.5.2 Buildings previously occupied. The legal occupancy of any building existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically covered in the 2015 International Existing Building Code or the International Fire Code, or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public. 
101.5.3 Correction of violations of other codes. Repairs or alterations to an existing building mandated by any property, housing, or fire safety maintenance code or mandated by any licensing rule or ordinance adopted pursuant to law shall conform only to the requirements of that code, rule, or ordinance and shall not be required to conform to the 2015 International Existing Building Code unless the code requiring repair or alteration so provides. 
101.5.4 Compliance methods for existing buildings. The repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition or relocation of all existing buildings shall comply with one of the methods listed in Sections 101.5.4.1 through 101.5.4.3 as selected by the applicant. Application of a method shall be the sole basis for assessing the compliance of work performed under a single permit unless otherwise approved by the building official. Sections 101.5.4.1 through 101.5.4.3 shall not be applied in combination with each other. Where this code requires consideration of the seismic-force-resisting system of an existing building subject to repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition or relocation of existing buildings, the seismic evaluation and design shall be based on Section 101.5.4.4 regardless of which compliance method is used. 
Exception: Subject to the approval of the building official, alterations complying with the laws in existence at the time the building or the affected portion of the building was built shall be considered in compliance with the provisions of the 2015 International Existing Building Code unless the building is undergoing more than a limited structural alteration as defined in Section 807 of the 2015 International Existing Building Code. New structural members added as part of the alteration shall comply with the 2015 International Building Code. 
101.5.4.1 Prescriptive compliance method. Repairs, alterations, additions and changes of occupancy complying with Chapter 4 of the 2015 International Existing Building Code in buildings complying with the 2015 International Fire Code shall be considered in compliance with the provisions of the 2015 International Existing Building Code. 
101.5.4.2 Work area compliance method. Repairs, alterations, additions, changes in occupancy and relocated buildings complying with the applicable requirements of Chapters 5 through 13 of the 2015 International Existing Building Code shall be considered in compliance with the provisions of the 2015 International Existing Building Code. 
101.5.4.3 Performance compliance method. Repairs, alterations, additions, changes in occupancy and relocated buildings complying with Chapter 14 of the 2015 International Existing Building Code shall be considered in compliance with the provisions of the 2015 International Existing Building Code. 
101.5.4.4 Evaluation and design procedures. The seismic evaluation and design shall be based on the procedures specified in the International Building Code, ASCE 31 or ASCE 41. The procedures contained in Appendix A of this code shall be permitted to be used as specified in Section 101.5.4.4.2. 
101.5.4.4.1 Compliance with IBC level seismic forces. Where compliance with the seismic design provisions of the 2015 International Building Code is required, the procedures shall be in accordance with one of the following: 
1.  The 2015 International Building Code using 100 percent of the prescribed forces. The values of R, O0 and Cd used for analysis in accordance with Chapter 16 of the 2015 International Building Code shall be those specified for structural systems classified as "Ordinary" in accordance with Table 12.2-1 of ASCE 7, unless it can be demonstrated that the structural system satisfies the proportioning and detailing requirements for systems classified as "Detailed," "Intermediate" or "Special." 
2.  Compliance with ASCE 41 using both the BSE-1 and BSE-2 earthquake hazard levels and the corresponding performance levels shown in Table 101.5.4.4.1. 
TABLE 101.5.4.4.1: PERFORMANCE CRITERIA FOR IBC LEVEL SEISMIC FORCES 
OCCUPANCY CATEGORY (Based on IBC Table 1604.5) PERFORMANCE LEVEL FOR USE WITH ASCE 41 BSE-1 EARTHQUAKE HAZARD LEVEL PERFORMANCE LEVEL FOR USE WITH ASCE 41 BSE-2 EARTHQUAKE HAZARD LEVEL I Life safety (LS) Collapse prevention (CP) II Life safety (LS) Collapse prevention (CP) III Note a below Note a below IV Immediate occupancy (IO) Life safety (LS)  
a.  Acceptable criteria for Occupancy Category III shall be taken as 80 percent of the acceptance criteria specified for Occupancy Category IV performance levels. 
101.5.4.4.2 Compliance with reduced IBC level seismic forces. Where seismic evaluation and design is permitted to meet reduced 2015 International Building Code seismic force levels, the procedures used shall be in accordance with one of the following: 
1.  The 2015 International Building Code using 75 percent of the prescribed forces. Values of R, O0 and Cd used for analysis shall be as specified in Section 101.5.4.4.1 of this code. 
2.  Structures or portions of structures that comply with the requirements of the applicable chapter in Appendix A of the 2015 International Existing Building Code as specified in items 2.1 through 2.5 shall be deemed to comply with this section. 
2.1.  The seismic evaluation and design of unreinforced masonry bearing wall buildings in Occupancy Category I or II are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Chapter A1 of the 2015 International Existing Building Code. 
2.2.  Seismic evaluation and design of the wall anchorage system in reinforced concrete and reinforced masonry wall buildings with flexible diaphragms in Occupancy Category I or II are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Chapter A2 of the 2015 International Existing Building Code. 
2.3.  Seismic evaluation and design of cripple walls and sill plate anchorage in residential buildings of light-frame wood construction in Occupancy Category I or II are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Chapter A3 of the 2015 International Existing Building Code. 
2.4.  Seismic evaluation and design of soft, weak, or open-front wall conditions in multiunit residential buildings of wood construction in Occupancy Category I or II are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Chapter A4 of the 2015 International Existing Building Code. 
2.5.  Seismic evaluation and design of concrete buildings and concrete with masonry infill buildings in all occupancy categories are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Chapter A5 of the 2015 International Existing Building Code. 
3.  Compliance with ASCE 31 based on the applicable performance level as shown in Table 101.5.4.4.2. It shall be permitted to use the BSE-1 earthquake hazard level as defined in ASCE 41 and subject to the limitations in Item 4 below. 
4.  Compliance with ASCE 41 using the BSE-1 Earthquake Hazard Level and the performance level shown in Table 101.5.4.4.2. The design spectral response acceleration parameters SXS and SX1 specified in ASCE 41 shall not be taken less than 75 percent of the respective design spectral response acceleration parameters SDS and SD1 defined by the 2015 International Building Code. 
TABLE 101.5.4.4.2: PERFORMANCE CRITERIA FOR REDUCED IBC LEVEL SEISMIC FORCES 
OCCUPANCY CATEGORY (Based on IBC Table 1604.5) PERFORMANCE LEVEL FOR USE WITH ASCE 31 PERFORMANCE LEVEL FOR USE WITH ASCE 41 BSE-1 EARTHQUAKE HAZARD LEVEL I Life safety (LS) Life safety (LS) II Life safety (LS) Life safety (LS) III Notes a & b below Note a below IV Immediate occupancy (IO) Immediate occupancy (IO)  
a.  Acceptable criteria for Occupancy Category III shall be taken as 80 percent of the acceptance criteria specified for Occupancy Category IV performance levels. 
b.  For Occupancy Category III, the ASCE 31 screening phase checklists shall be based on the life safety performance level. 
101.6 One- and two-family dwellings. The provisions of the 2015 International Residential Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures. 
Exception: Live/work units complying with the requirements of Section 419 of the 2015 International Building Code shall be permitted to be built as one- and two-family dwellings or townhouses even if said live/work units do not comply with Section 419.5 of the 2015 International Building Code. 
101.7 Areas of special flood hazard. Where applicable, Chapter 54 of the City of Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances shall govern in areas of special flood hazard, as that phrase is defined by that chapter. 
Section 102 Applicability 
102.1 General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. Where, in any specific case, different sections of the technical codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. 
102.2 Other laws. The provisions of the technical codes shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
102.3 Application of references. References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of the technical codes. 
102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in the technical codes shall be considered part of the requirements of the technical codes to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of the technical codes and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of the 2015 International Building Code shall apply first, and then the provisions of the other technical codes shall apply. 
102.5 Severability. In the event that any part, provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of the technical codes is held to be unconstitutional, illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making unconstitutional, void or illegal any of the other parts, provisions, sections, subsections, clauses or phrases of the technical codes. 
102.6 Existing structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically covered in this code and the 2015 International Fire Code, or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public. 
102.7 Existing installations. Fuel gas, mechanical, electrical and plumbing systems lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of the technical codes shall be permitted to have their use and maintenance continued if the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original design and no hazard to life, health or property is created by such system. 
102.8 Maintenance. All fuel gas, mechanical, electrical and plumbing systems, materials and appurtenances, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in proper operating condition in accordance with the original design in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards required by the technical codes shall be maintained in compliance with the code edition under which they were installed. The owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for maintenance of systems. To determine compliance with this provision, the building official shall have the authority to require any system to be reinspected. 
102.9 Additions, alterations or repairs. Additions, alterations, renovations or repairs to any fuel gas, mechanical, electrical or plumbing system shall conform to that required for a new system without requiring the existing system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes. Additions, alterations or repairs shall not cause an existing system to become unsafe, unsanitary or overloaded. Minor additions, alterations, renovations and repairs to existing fuel gas, mechanical, electrical or plumbing systems shall meet the provisions for new construction, unless such work is done in the same manner and arrangement as was the existing system, is not hazardous and is approved. 
102.10 Change in occupancy. It shall be unlawful to make any change in the occupancy of any structure that will subject the structure to any special provision of the technical codes applicable to the new occupancy without approval of the building official. The building official shall certify that such structure meets the intent of the provisions of law governing building construction for the proposed new occupancy and that such change of occupancy does not result in any hazard to the public health, safety or welfare. 
102.11 Historic buildings. The provisions of the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code, the 2015 International Mechanical Code and the 2015 International Plumbing Code relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings. 
102.12 Moved buildings. Except as determined by Section 102.7, electrical, fuel gas, mechanical and plumbing systems that are part of buildings or structures moved into or within the jurisdiction shall comply with the provisions of the technical codes for new installations. 
102.13 Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed fuel gas, mechanical, electrical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the technical codes shall be determined by the building official. 
102.14 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in each of the technical codes shall be those that are listed in each of the specific technical codes, and such codes and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of the technical codes to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of the technical codes and the referenced standards, the provisions of the technical codes shall apply. 
102.15 Application of references. Reference to chapter section numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of the technical codes. 
Section 103 Duties and Powers of Building and Code Administrator 
103.1 General. The building and code administrator and his employees and agents are hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the technical codes. Any reference in the technical codes to "building official" or "code official" shall be held to mean "building and code administrator." The building and code administrator shall head the division of building and code administration and shall have the authority to render interpretations of the technical codes and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of the technical codes. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in the technical codes. 
103.2 Applications and permits. The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection, alteration, demolition and moving of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued, and enforce compliance with the provisions of the technical codes. 
103.3 Notices and orders. The building official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with the technical codes. 
103.4 Inspections. The building official shall make all of the required inspections, or the building official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The building official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority. 
103.5 Identification. The building official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under the technical codes. 
103.6 Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of the technical codes, or where the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of the technical codes which makes the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by the technical codes, provided that if such structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
103.7 Official records. The building official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required for retention of public records. 
103.8 Liability. The building official, members of the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals, and employees charged with the enforcement of the technical codes, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by the technical codes or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and are hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of the technical codes shall be defended by legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The building official or any subordinate shall not be liable for cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of the technical codes. 
103.9 Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equipment and devices approved by the building official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval. 
103.9.1 Used materials and equipment. The use of used materials which meet the requirements of the technical codes for new materials is permitted. Used equipment and devices shall not be reused unless approved by the building official. 
103.10 Modifications. Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of the technical codes, the building official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon application of the owner or owner's representative, provided the building official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of the technical codes impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of the technical codes and that such modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the division of building and code administration. 
103.11 Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment. The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by the technical codes, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design or method of construction shall be approved where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of the technical codes, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. 
103.11.1 Research reports. Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in the technical codes, shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources. 
103.11.2 Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of the technical codes, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of the technical codes, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the jurisdiction. Test methods shall be as specified in the technical codes or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the building official for the period required for retention of public records. 
Section 104 Contractor Registration 
104.1 Definitions. 
104.1.1 Contractor defined. Contractor shall mean any person or entity who undertakes or attempts to submit, or does submit a price or bid to or otherwise offers to or does construct, supervise, superintend, oversee, schedule, direct, or in any manner assume charge of the construction, alteration, repair, improvement, movement, demolition, putting up, tearing down, or furnishing labor to install material or equipment for any building, highway, road, railroad, sewer, grading, excavation, pipeline, public utility, structure, project development, housing, housing development, improvement or any other construction undertaking. The terms includes, but is not limited to, a prime contractor, electrical contractor, construction manager, residential construction manager, construction consultant and any architect or engineer who conducts or provides any activity or service described herein other than the practice of engineering or architecture as those terms are governed by State law. The term also includes any person, company, firm, partnership or corporation desiring to act as an irrigator, or to engage in the business of work on fuel gas, mechanical, electrical or plumbing systems. 
104.1.2 Maintenance work defined. Maintenance work shall mean repair work and all other work required for the continued normal performance of a commercial property. 
104.1.3 Owner defined. Owner shall mean a person or entity who possesses legal title to a property or such person or entity who may be a regular bona fide employee of the person or entity who possesses legal title to a property. Such term shall not include an "independent contractor" or self-employed individual performing work for a person or entity who possesses legal title to a property, or a person who performs the same work for members of the general public. 
104.2 Contractor registration required. In order to act as a contractor or to perform work pursuant to a building permit, a person or entity must be registered as a contractor with the building official, and must reregister annually, in accordance with the following provisions: 
1.  Application for contractor registration shall be made upon forms provided by the building official and the applicant shall provide all information required by such form. 
2.  Unregistered contractors shall not acquire building permits or continue work on currently issued building permits. 
3.  Failure to keep any bond and insurance required by city, state, or federal law in force will result in revocation of contractor registration, and will invalidate any building permits issued to the contractor. 
4.  If a contractor registration expires or is revoked and is then renewed, all permits thereunder must be reissued, and the contractor will be required to pay all applicable fees, including permit fees, again. 
5.  Contractor registration may be revoked and applications for contractor registration may be rejected by the building official for the following reasons: 
a.  Failure to maintain any required bond and insurance; 
b.  Failure to fully complete contractor registration form; 
c.  Failure to pay any required fee; 
d.  Refusal to correct any violation of the technical codes after notice; or 
e.  Conviction of three or more violations of the technical codes. 
6.  No contractor registration shall be required to issue a building permit for a residential structure to a homeowner who occupies the property in question as his permanent residence. No contractor registration shall be required to issue a building permit for a residential structure to a homeowner who is constructing a new permanent residence and acting as the general contractor for the work performed. A homeowner may obtain a "new permanent residence" permit not more than once every two years. Any subcontractor who performs work under a homeowner's permits must meet all city and state licensing requirements. 
7.  The annual contractor registration carries no fee. 
8.  An owner shall be exempt from contractor registration requirements when the owner is undertaking work on his own property and the work is of one of the types listed below: 
a.  Electrical maintenance work to include the repair, maintenance and replacement of existing electrical apparatus, existing lighting fixtures, and existing plugs and switches, but not to include the changing of electrical service or the installation of new breaker panels or wiring. 
b.  Plumbing maintenance work to include the repair, maintenance and replacement of existing potable water piping, existing sanitary waste and vent piping, existing plumbing fixtures, and existing electrical water heaters, but not to include cutting into fuel gas plumbing systems or the installation of gas-fueled water heaters. 
c.  Air conditioning and refrigeration maintenance work to include any work required for the continued normal performance of an environmental air conditioning system, commercial refrigeration system or equipment, or process cooling or heating system. 
d.  Building maintenance work to include the repair and maintenance of sheetrock, doors, siding, and windows of any existing building, but not to include the replacement of sheetrock or any new construction or structural change of an existing building, or repair of any load-bearing or structural element of any building. 
9.  No contractor registration shall be required for a building permit to be issued to an owner of a one- or two-family dwelling unit for work on carports, outbuildings and other similar structures which do not include any livable area. 
10.  Any contractor whose registration has been revoked or whose application for contractor registration has been rejected by the building official may appeal to the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals per Section 113 as follows: 
a.  Written notice of the appeal must be made to the construction board of adjustment and appeals within fourteen calendar days of the date on which the building official served notice of his decision either by certified mail or hand delivery. 
b.  The Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall hear the appeal within 30 calendar days from the notice of appeal filed by the contractor. During the pendency of the appeal, the contractor shall not perform any additional work. 
Section 104.3 Bond and insurance requirements. Any person or entity required to be registered as a contractor, who seeks to acquire any building permit for a type of work identified in the table below, shall first furnish the building official with a compliance bond, a statement of whether or not said contractor maintains general liability insurance, and if so, a copy of the certificate of insurance, as well as proof of any bond and insurance that is required by state law. The aforementioned documents will be publicly available in response to a citizen inquiry. 
Type of work Bond Residential roofing $25,000.00 Commercial roofing $100,000.00 Siding $25,000.00 Residential $50,000.00 Residential/commercial remodel or renovation under $50,000.00 $25,000.00 General contractor $100,000.00 Sign contractor $0 House movers $0 Demolition contractor $0 Excavation, paving or swimming pool work $25,000.00  
104.3.1 Bond standards. All compliance bonds shall be issued by a surety agency authorized to do business in the State of Texas. All sureties on said bond shall be liable for any breach by the principal, and his agents and employees of any and all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations of the City of Wichita Falls and the State of Texas; to the owner of the property upon which work is performed; to any person or entity with whom the principal has contracted either orally or in writing to perform building construction, alteration, repair or other work; and to any person who may be damaged or injured by the principal's failure to comply with the laws, ordinances and regulations of the City of Wichita Falls or the State of Texas. A claim upon said bond may be made by any person damaged by reason of the principal's failure to perform his obligations under the laws, ordinances and regulations of the City of Wichita Falls or the State of Texas. Suspension or revocation of any registration or permit shall not limit the liability of either the principal or the surety on any such bond. 
Section 105 Permits 
105.1 Required. Any contractor, owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first obtain a permit from the building official. 
105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of the technical codes shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of the technical codes or any other applicable laws. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
1.  Electrical work involving the repair or replacement of existing electrical apparatus, existing lighting fixtures and existing plugs and switches, but not to include the changing of electrical service or the installation of new breaker panels or wiring. 
2.  The clearing of stoppages and the repairing of leaks in drains or water, soil, waste or vent pipes, but not to include the removal and replacement with new material of any concealed trap, drainpipe, or water, soil, waste or vent pipe. 
3.  The clearing of stoppages and the repairing of leaks in plumbing valves and fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
4.  Mechanical work involving the following: 
a.  Portable heating appliances. 
b.  Portable ventilation appliances. 
c.  Portable cooling units. 
d.  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment or appliances regulated by the 2015 International Mechanical Code. 
e.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment, modify the equipment's compliance with any applicable law, or make such equipment unsafe. 
f.  Portable evaporative coolers; 
g.  Self-contained refrigeration systems that contain 10 pounds (4.5 kg) or less of refrigerant, or that are actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (0.75 kW) or less; and 
h.  Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. 
5.  Gas work involving any portable heating, cooking or clothes-drying appliances. 
6.  Building work involving the following activities: 
a.  Minor repair of damaged sheetrock, not to include areas of required means of egress, rated walls or removal of sheetrock due to damage from water, mold, fire or termites. 
b.  Replacement of any existing door, door casing or door hardware. 
c.  Repair of damaged siding, fascia or soffit when the repaired area does not exceed ten percent of the total area of the structure's siding and is not repair due to damage caused by water, mold, fire or termites. 
d.  Repair of torn shingles or roof patching when no "tear-off" is required and when the area to be repaired is no more than 500 square feet. 
e.  Work on cabinets, countertops and similar finish work. 
f.  Painting, carpeting, and similar cosmetic work. 
g.  Work on playground equipment accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling. 
h.  Work on sidewalks and drives not more than 30 inches above adjacent grade and not over any basement or story below, but not to include sidewalks or driveways in the city right-of-way. 
i.  Installation, repair or replacement of fences not over six feet high. 
j.  Work on retaining walls that are not over four feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall. 
k.  Work on a prefabricated swimming pool accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy when the pool is less than 24 inches deep, does not exceed 5000 gallons and is installed entirely above ground. 
l.  Work on window awnings supported by the exterior wall of a Group R-3 or U occupancy when the awnings do not project more that 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require additional support. 
105.2.1 Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, a permit application shall be submitted to the building official on the next working business day. 
105.2.2 Repairs. Application or notice to the building official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles, provided such repairs do not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety. 
105.2.3 Public utilities. A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission, distribution or metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership and control of public utilities by established right. 
105.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application with the building official. Such application shall: 
1.  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made. 
2.  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work. 
3.  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended. 
4.  Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as required in Section 107. 
5.  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
6.  Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant's authorized agent. 
7.  Give such other data and information as required by the building official. 
105.3.1 Action on application. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the building official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the building official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. 
105.3.2 Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
105.4 Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of the technical codes or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the technical codes or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. The building official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of this code or of any other ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
105.6 Suspension or revocation. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code. 
105.7 Placement of permit. All permits or copies thereof shall be kept on the site of the work until the completion of the project. 
105.8 Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined any buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. 
105.9 Restoration permit. A restoration permit may be issued for buildings of structures at the order of the City Council under Section 22-605 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Wichita Falls. Such permit will be issued with requirements and deadlines as established by the City Council in an order it shall issue in accordance with Section 22-605. 
Section 106 Floor and Roof Design Loads 
106.1 Live loads posted. Where the live load for which each floor or portion thereof of a commercial or industrial building is or has been designed to exceed 50 psf (2.40 kN/m2), such design live loads shall be conspicuously posted by the owner in that part of each story in which they apply, using durable signs. It shall be unlawful to remove or deface such notices. 
106.2 Issuance of certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy required by Section 111 shall not be issued until the floor load signs, required by Section 106.1, have been installed. 
106.3 Restrictions on loading. It shall be unlawful to place, or cause or permit to be placed, on any floor or roof of a building, structure or portion thereof, a load greater than is permitted by this code. 
Section 107 Submittal Documents 
107.1 General. Submittal documents consisting of construction documents, statement of special inspections, geotechnical report and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets with each permit application. The construction documents shall be prepared and sealed with an official seal by an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of the State of Texas regulating the practice of architecture or engineering when the permit application concerns the following: 
1.  A Group A (Assembly), Group E (Education) or Group I (Institutional) occupancy of 2,500 square feet or more in area; 
2.  A building or structure of three or more stories; or 
3.  A building or structure of 5,000 square feet or more in area. 
107.1.1 Regarding registered design professional. If the building official determines the preparation of the construction documents for any permit application necessitates the "practice of engineering" as defined by the Texas Occupations Code, then the construction documents or the part thereof that constitutes the "practice of engineering" must be sealed by a Texas-licensed engineer. For all other permit applications, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that state law permits its preparation by a person not legally registered as an architect or engineer under the laws of the State of Texas regulating the practice of architecture or engineering, except that construction documents for a permit application concerning a Group R-3 building or structure, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect or engineer nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
107.1.2 Exception. The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered architect or engineer by this code or applicable state law if the permit application demonstrates that the nature of the work is such that a review of the construction documents by the building official is not necessary to obtain compliance with the technical codes. 
107.2 Construction documents. Construction documents shall be in accordance with Sections 107.2.1 through 107.2.5. 
107.2.1 Information on construction documents. Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the building official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the building official. 
107.2.2 Fire protection system shop drawings. Shop drawings for the fire protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate conformance to this code and the construction documents and shall be approved prior to the start of system installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required by the referenced installation standards in Chapter 9. 
107.2.3 Means of egress. The construction documents shall show in sufficient detail the location, construction, size and character of all portions of the means of egress in compliance with the provisions of this code. In other than occupancies in Groups R-2, R-3, and I-1, the construction documents shall designate the number of occupants to be accommodated on every floor, and in all rooms and spaces. 
107.2.4 Exterior wall envelope. Construction documents for all buildings shall describe the exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with this code. The construction documents shall provide details of the exterior wall envelope as required, including flashing, intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves or parapets, means of drainage, water-resistive membrane and details around openings. 
The construction documents shall include manufacturer's installation instructions that provide supporting documentation that the proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system which was tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure used. 
107.2.5 Site plan. The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished grades and, as applicable, flood hazard areas, floodways, and design flood elevations; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The building official is authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when the application for permit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted. 
107.3 Examination of documents. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying submittal documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of this code and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
107.3.1 Approval of construction documents. When the building official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved, in writing or by stamp, as "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the building official. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or a duly authorized representative. 
107.3.2 Previous approvals. This code shall not require changes in the construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within 180 days after the effective date of this code and has not been abandoned. 
107.3.3 Phased approval. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of this code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted. 
107.3.4 Design professional in responsible charge. 
107.3.4.1 General. When it is required that documents be prepared by a registered design professional, the building official shall be authorized to require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered design professional who shall act as the registered design professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a substitute registered design professional in responsible charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered design professional in responsible charge. The building official shall be notified in writing by the owner if the registered design professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties. 
The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building. 
107.3.4.2 Deferred submittals. For the purposes of this section, deferred submittals are defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the building official within a specified period. 
Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior approval of the building official. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by the building official. 
Documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered design professional in responsible charge who shall review them and forward them to the building official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and found to be in general conformance to the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until the deferred submittal documents have been approved by the building official. 
107.4 Amended construction documents. Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents. 
107.5 Retention of construction documents. One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the building official for a period of not less than 180 days from date of completion of the permitted work, or as required by state or local laws. 
Section 108 Temporary Equipment, Structures and Uses 
108.1 General. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary equipment, structures, systems and uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The building official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause. 
108.2 Conformance. Temporary equipment, structures, systems and uses shall conform to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light, ventilation and sanitary requirements of this code as necessary to ensure public health, safety and general welfare. 
108.3 Temporary utilities. The building official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply utilities before an installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary utilities in the technical codes and in NFPA 70. 
108.4 Termination of approval. The building official is authorized to terminate such permit for temporary equipment, structures, systems or uses and to order the temporary equipment, structure, system or use to be discontinued. 
Section 109 Fees 
109.1 Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
109.2 Schedule of permit fees. The fees for work shall be as indicated in the schedule located in the Code of Ordinances. 
109.3 Building permit valuations. The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application. Permit valuations shall include total value of work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and permanent systems. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the building official. 
109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee established by the building official that shall be in addition to the required permit fees. 
109.5 Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in connection to or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. 
109.6 Refunds. The building official is authorized to establish a refund policy. 
Section 110 Inspections 
110.1 General. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
110.2 Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. 
110.3 Required inspections. The building official, upon notification, shall make the inspections set forth in Sections 110.3.1 through 110.3.10. 
110.3.1 Footing and foundation inspection. Footing and foundation inspections shall be made after excavations for footings are complete and any required reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete foundations, any required forms shall be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except where concrete is ready mixed in accordance with ASTM C 94, the concrete need not be on the job. 
110.3.2 Concrete slab and under-floor inspection. Concrete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel and building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories and other ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor. 
110.3.3 Lowest floor elevation. In flood hazard areas, upon placement of the lowest floor, including the basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the elevation certification required in Chapter 54 of the Code of Ordinances shall be submitted to the building official. 
110.3.4 Frame inspection. Framing inspections shall be made after the roof deck or sheathing, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and pipes, chimneys and vents to be concealed are complete and the rough electrical, plumbing, heating wires, pipes and ducts are approved. 
110.3.5 Lath and gypsum board inspection. Lath and gypsum board inspections shall be made after lathing and gypsum board, interior and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is applied or gypsum board joints and fasteners are taped and finished. 
Exception: Gypsum board that is not part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly or a shear assembly. 
110.3.6 Fire- and smoke-resistant penetrations. Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies, smoke barriers and smoke partitions shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved. 
110.3.7 Energy efficiency inspections. Inspections shall be made to determine compliance with Chapter 13 and shall include, but not be limited to, inspections for: envelope insulation R- and U- values, fenestration U- value, duct system R -value, and HVAC and water-heating equipment efficiency. 
110.3.8 Plumbing inspections. The building official, upon notification from the permit holder or the permit holder's agent, shall make the following plumbing inspections: 
1.  Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches are excavated and bedded, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, firestopping, draftstopping and bracing is in place and all sanitary, storm and water distribution piping is roughed-in, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection shall be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
110.3.9. Mechanical inspections. The building official, upon notification from the permit holder or the permit holder's agent, shall make the following mechanical systems inspections: 
1.  Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches are excavated and bedded, piping installed, and before backfill is put in place. When excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks and other rubble that would damage and break the piping or cause corrosive action, clean backfill shall be on the job site. 
2.  Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and all ducting and other components to be concealed are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection shall be made upon completion of the mechanical system. 
110.3.9.1 Inspections involving ground-source heat pump loop systems. Ground-source heat pump loop systems tested in accordance with Section 1208.1.1 of the 2015 International Mechanical Code shall be permitted to be backfilled prior to inspection. 
110.3.9.2 Replacement of heating equipment or appliances. The requirements of Sections 110.3.9 and 110.3.9.1 shall not be considered to prohibit the operation of any heating equipment or appliances installed to replace existing heating equipment or appliances serving an occupied portion of a structure provided that a request for inspection of such heating equipment or appliances has been filed with the building official not more than 48 hours after such replacement work is completed, and before any portion of such equipment or appliances is concealed by any permanent portion of the structure. 
110.3.10 Evaluation and follow-up inspection services. Prior to the approval of a prefabricated system or construction assembly and the issuance of an applicable permit, the building official shall require the submittal of an evaluation report on each prefabricated system or assembly indicating the complete details of the system, including a description of the system and its components, the basis upon which the system is being evaluated, test results and similar information, and other data as necessary for the building official to determine conformance to this code. 
110.3.10.1 Evaluation service. The building official shall designate the evaluation service of an approved agency as the evaluation agency, and review such agency's evaluation report for adequacy and conformance to this code. 
110.3.10.2 Follow-up inspection. Except where ready access is provided to all systems, service equipment and accessories for complete inspection at the site without disassembly or dismantling, the building official shall conduct the frequency of in-plant inspections necessary to ensure conformance to the approved evaluation report or shall designate an independent, approved inspection agency to conduct such inspections. The inspection agency shall furnish the building official with the follow-up inspection manual and a report of inspections upon request, and the system or construction assembly shall have an identifying label permanently affixed to the system indicating that factory inspections have been performed. 
110.3.10.3 Test and inspection records. All required test and inspection records shall be available to the building official at all times during the fabrication of the system or construction assembly and the erection of the building, or such records as the building official designates shall be filed. 
110.3.11 Special inspections. Special inspections of alternative engineered design plumbing systems shall be conducted in accordance with Sections 110.3.11.1 and 110.3.11.2. 
110.3.11.1 Periodic inspection. The registered design professional or designated inspector shall periodically inspect and observe the alternative engineered design to determine that the installation is in accordance with the approved construction documents. All discrepancies shall be brought to the immediate attention of the plumbing contractor for correction. Records shall be kept of all inspections. 
110.3.11.2 Written report. The registered design professional shall submit a final report in writing to the building official upon completion of the installation, certifying that the alternative engineered design conforms to the approved construction documents. A notice of approval for the plumbing system shall not be issued until a written certification has been submitted. 
110.3.12 Testing. Fuel gas, mechanical and plumbing work and systems shall be tested in accordance with and as required by the technical codes. Tests shall be made by the permit holder and observed by the building official. 
110.3.12.1 New, altered, extended or repaired systems. New fuel gas, mechanical, electrical and plumbing systems and parts of existing systems that have been altered, extended or repaired shall be tested as prescribed herein to disclose leaks and defects, except that testing is not required in the following cases: 
1.  In any case involving a plumbing system that does not include addition to, replacement, alteration or relocation of any water supply, drainage or vent piping. 
2.  In any case where plumbing equipment is set up temporarily for exhibition purposes. 
110.3.12.2 Equipment, material and labor for tests. All equipment, material and labor required for testing a fuel gas, mechanical or plumbing system or part thereof shall be furnished by the permit holder. 
110.3.12.3 Reinspection and testing. Where any work or installation does not pass any initial test or inspection, the necessary corrections shall be made to comply with this code. The work or installation shall then be resubmitted to the building official for inspection and testing. 
110.3.13 Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the building official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this code and other laws that are enforced by the building and code administration division. 
110.3.14 Special inspections. For special inspections, see Section 1704 of the 2015 International Building Code. 
110.3.15 Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after all work required by the building permit is completed. 
110.4 Inspection agencies. The building official is authorized to accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability. 
110.5 Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of the building permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the building official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for inspections of such work that are required by this code. 
110.6 Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with this code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official. 
110.7 Revocation. The building official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a notice of approval issued under the provisions of the technical codes wherever the notice is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure, premise or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
Section 111 Certificate of Occupancy 
111.1 Use and occupancy. No building, structure, altered area of a building or relocated building shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made, until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. 
Exception: Certificates of occupancy are not required for work exempt from permits under Section 105.2. 
111.2 Certificate issued. After the building official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this code or other laws that are enforced by the building and code administration division, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy that contains the following: 
1.  The building permit number. 
2.  The address of the structure. 
3.  The name and address of the owner. 
4.  A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued. 
5.  A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this code for the occupancy and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified. 
6.  The name of the building official. 
7.  The edition of the code under which the permit was issued. 
8.  The use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3. 
9.  The type of construction as defined in Chapter 6. 
10.  The design occupant load. 
11.  If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether the sprinkler system is required. 
12.  Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit. 
111.3 Temporary occupancy. The building official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The building official shall set a time period during which the temporary certificate of occupancy is valid. 
111.4 Revocation. The building official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or completion issued under the provisions of this code wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code. 
Section 112 Service Utilities 
112.1 Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel, power, water system or sewer system to any building or system that is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official. 
112.2 Temporary connection. The building official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility, source of energy, fuel power, water system or sewer system for the purpose of testing or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
112.3 Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the technical codes in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or when such utility connection has been made without the approval of the building official. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and wherever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
Section 113 Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals 
113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official or the fire marshal relative to the application and interpretation of the technical codes or the fire code, there shall be a Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals which shall consist of eleven regular members and two alternate members. The Board shall be appointed by the City Council and shall hold office at its pleasure. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business. 
113.2 Limitations on authority. A person shall have the right to appeal any decision of the building official or the fire marshal to the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of the technical codes or the fire code or a rule adopted thereunder has been incorrectly interpreted, that the provisions of the technical codes or the fire code do not fully apply, or that an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of the technical codes or the fire code. 
113.3 Qualifications. The Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall be composed of one general building contractor, one mechanical engineer, one structural engineer, one architect, one person representing the home building industry, one plumbing contractor, one air conditioning contractor, one electrical contractor, one Master Electrician, one person representing the property insurance industry and one citizen at large not connected with the construction industry. The two alternate members shall consist of one general building contractor and one person representing the home building industry. A board member shall not act in any case where he has a financial interest. The City Council shall have the authority to substitute a member who is qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction for any of the listed individuals. A current employee of the City shall not sit on the board. 
113.4 Terms. Members to the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall be appointed for three-year terms. In no case shall a member serve more than six consecutive years. Board members' terms shall expire on December 31. 
113.5 Quorum and voting. Five members of the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of the technical codes or fire code or modifying a decision of the building official or fire marshal, affirmative votes of the majority present, but not less than five affirmative votes, shall be required. In the event that regular members are unable to attend a meeting, the alternate members shall vote. 
113.6 Board acting in an advisory capacity. In addition to the duties noted herein, the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall act as an advisory board on matters of technical or fire code requirements, modifications or amendments. The Board may hear evidence of any proposals from the building official or fire marshal or other persons and may present opinions of such proposals to the City Council for further action. 
113.7 Removal of member for absence. Continued absence of any member from required meetings of the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall, at the discretion of the City Council, render any such member subject to immediate removal from the Board. 
Section 114 Violations and Penalties 
114.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by the technical codes, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
114.2 Notice of violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of the technical codes, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the technical codes. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. In cases of immediate danger to life or property, the building official may act to disconnect or otherwise abate an immediately dangerous circumstance without such notice of violation. 
114.2.1 Responsibility for enforcement. The building official, the Building and Code Administration Division, the code compliance and code enforcement officers and all other employees of the division shall enforce all city ordinances relating to buildings, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, landscaping and zoning. No personal shall interfere in any manner with or give false information to these City employees in the performance of their duties. When a building, structure or system is maintained in violation of the technical codes and in violation of a notice of violation issued by the building official pursuant to the technical codes, the building official shall institute appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation. 
114.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the building official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of the technical codes or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
114.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of the technical codes or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the technical codes, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be deemed to have committed a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any of the provisions of the technical codes is committed or continued, and upon convictions of any such violation, such person shall be punished by a fine as provided in Section 1-14 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Wichita Falls. 
114.5 Unsafe condition as nuisance. Any condition, system or circumstance regulated by the technical codes that is unsafe or that constitutes a fire or health hazard, unsanitary condition, or is otherwise dangerous to human life is hereby declared unsafe. Any use of a system regulated by the technical codes constituting a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is hereby declared an unsafe use. Any such unsafe system is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal. 
114.6 Authority to order disconnection of energy sources. The building official shall have the authority to order disconnection of energy sources supplied to a building, structure or system regulated by the technical codes when it is determined that a system or any portion thereof utilizing such energy sources has become hazardous or unsafe. Written notice of such order to disconnect service and the causes therefore shall be given within 24 hours to the owner and occupant of such building, structure or premises, provided, however, that in cases of immediate danger to life or property, such disconnection shall be made immediately without such notice. Where energy sources are provided by a public utility, the building official shall immediately notify the serving utility in writing of the issuance of such order to disconnect. 
114.7 Connection after order to disconnect. A person shall not make energy source connections to systems regulated by the technical codes which have been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the building official, or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by the building official until the building official authorizes the reconnection and use of such systems. 
Section 115 Stop Work Order 
115.1 Authority to stop work. Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by the technical codes being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of the technical codes or dangerous or unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order. Such order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent or to the person doing the work, or shall be posted on the property. The order shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. When an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
115.2 Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. 
115.3 Unlawful continuance. It shall be unlawful for any person to continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition. 
Section 116 Dangerous Building or Structures 
116.1 Regulation of dangerous buildings or structures. Dangerous buildings or structures shall be regulated by Article VIII of Chapter 22 of the Code of Ordinances. 
Section 117 Emergency Measures 
117.1 Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the building official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building that endangers life, or when any building or part of a building has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the building, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors, or the presence of toxic fumes, gases, or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the building official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The building official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: "This Structure is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the Building Official." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making required repairs, removing the hazardous condition, or of demolishing the same. 
117.2 Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of the technical codes, whenever, in the opinion of the building official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the building official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedures herein described have been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the building official deems necessary to meet such emergency. 
117.3 Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the building official shall temporarily close structures and close or order the police department to close sidewalks, streets, public ways, and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized. 
117.4 Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the building official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
117.5 Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the City, and the Legal Department shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs. 
Section 118 Care to Other Structures and Sites Due Upon Removal 
118.1 Foundations of adjacent structures. Whenever a building or structure is removed, the site shall be left in such condition so as to prevent the accumulation of water that may undermine foundations of adjacent buildings of structures. 
118.2 Party walls. Whenever a building or structure on one side of a party wall or adjacent wall is removed, the remaining party wall or adjacent wall shall be left in a safe, weatherproof condition. Permanent bracing or other repairs shall be provided as necessary whenever the building official determines that the stability of the remaining wall is affected. Open beam holes or other openings between the top wall and roof shall be closed in such manner as to make the remaining building closed to the effects of weather. All such repairs, stabilizing and weatherproofing must be done in a manner approved by the building official, and all work will be done at the expense of the person who removes the building or structures. After repairs are completed and approved, continued maintenance of the remaining wall will become the responsibility of the person who owns the remaining building. After a building or structure is removed, the owner of the remaining building shall be allowed access to the adjacent property for the purpose of maintenance of the remaining wall. 
(Code 1966, § 7-14; Code 2001, § 22-26; Ord. No. 94-2002, § 1, 11-5-2002; Ord. No. 1-2004, § 1, 1-6-2004; Ord. No. 85-2005, § 1, 10-18-2005; Ord. No. 45-2007, § 1, 5-1-2007; Ord. No. 33-2011, § 1, 7-5-2011; Ord. No. 57-2015, § 1, 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 22-27. - Changes, deletions and amendments. 
    The following changes, deletions and amendments are made to the specified sections in the 2015 International Building Code adopted in Section 22-26. Where an adopted section of the 2015 International Building Code has not been changed, deleted, or amended by this ordinance, it is adopted as worded in the 2015 International Building Code. Except where noted as deleted or amended, all definitions in the 2015 International Building Code Section 202 are adopted as written. 
Section 202 Definitions 
    Historic Buildings. Buildings that were constructed prior to 1945, that are listed in or eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places, or that are designated as historic under an appropriate state or local law. 
423.4 Group E occupancies. In areas where the shelter design wind speed for tornados is 250 MPH in accordance with Figure 304.2(1) of ICC 500, all Group E occupancies with an aggregate occupant load of 50 or more shall have a storm shelter constructed in accordance with ICC 500. The shelter shall be capable of housing the total occupant load of the Group E occupancy to be added. 
Section 310 
Residential Group R 
310.7 Required distance to a solid waste transfer station. A property within the City limits containing a multi-family residential development may have its boundary no less than zero feet (i.e., adjacent) to the boundary of a property containing a solid waste transfer station, and shall conform to Chapter 6 of the International Building Code as adopted by the City of Wichita Falls. 
Section 706 Fire walls 
706.1.1 Party walls. Any wall located on a lot line between adjacent buildings, which is used or adapted for the joint service between the two buildings, shall be constructed as a fire wall in accordance with Section 706. Party walls shall be constructed without openings and shall create separate buildings. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Openings in a party wall separating an anchor building and a mall shall be in accordance with Section 402.4.2.2.1. 
2.  A-3 and R-1 mixed occupancies when constructed on or abutting a lot line may be designed and built as if it were constructed on the same lot. 
2902.2 Separate facilities. Where plumbing fixtures are required, separate facilities shall be provided for each sex. 
Exceptions: 
2.  Separate facilities shall not be required in structures or tenant spaces with a total occupant load, including both employees and customers, of 25 or fewer. 
2902.6 Small occupancies. Drinking fountains shall not be required for an occupant load of 25 or fewer. 
(Code 1966, § 7-15; Code 2001, § 22-27; Ord. No. 20-2000, § 1, 3-1-2000; Ord. No. 121-2000, §§ 1, 2, 12-19-2000; Ord. No. 127-2000, § 1, 12-19-2000; Ord. No. 98-2001, §§ 1, 2, 10-2-2001; Ord. No. 94-2002, § 1, 11-5-2002; Ord. No. 104-2002, § 1, 12-17-2002; Ord. No. 113-2003, § 1, 11-18-2003; Ord. No. 51-2005, § 1, 7-5-2005; Ord. No. 16-2007, § 1, 2-6-2007; Ord. No. 45-2007, § 1, 5-1-2007; Ord. No. 33-2009, § 1, 5-19-2009; Ord. No. 53-2010, § 5, 9-21-2010; Ord. No. 33-2011, § 1, 7-5-2011; Ord. No. 56-2014, § 1, 11-4-2014; Ord. No. 57-2015, § 1, 12-1-2015; Ord. No. 03-2018, § 1, 1-2-2018; Ord. No. 04-2018, § 1, 1-16-2018) 
Secs. 22-28-22-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICITY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-56. - Declaration of policy. 
    The Board of Electrical Examiners has determined that there is a need to update and modernize those sections of this Code that establish the city electrical code and provide for the board of examiners, and it is in the best interest of the health and safety of the city's citizens that such sections of this Code be kept current with modern electrical codes and regulations. 
(Code 1966, § 14-1; Code 2001, § 22-56; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-57. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Apprentice electrician must be at least 16 years of age and be engaged in the process of learning and assisting in the installation of electrical work under the supervision of a registered master electrician. 
    Board means the city Board of Electrical Examiners. 
    Code means the city electrical code. 
    Direct supervision means the review and inspection of all electrical work done by a supervisor, who shall be either a registered journeyman electrician, master electrician, or industrial electrician, and who shall be actually present at the job site at all times while electrical work is in progress. 
    Electrical maintenance work means the keeping in safe repair and operating condition of any and all electrical installations, apparatuses and equipment within or without any building or structure or located in or upon any lot or premises within the city. 
    Electrical work means: 
(1)  All wiring, circuits, fixtures, appurte-nances and appliances for the supply of electrical power, for all personal, domestic and commercial purposes in and about buildings or other structures where persons live, work or assemble; all wiring, circuits, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances outside such buildings or structure connecting the building with the source of electricity; 
(2)  The installation, repair and maintenance of all wiring, circuits, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances in and about buildings or structures where persons live, work or assemble, for a supply of electricity; and 
(3)  All other activities, including demolition of structures where energized circuits exist, installations or measures incidental to the distribution or electrical energy which are covered, regulated or in any fashion controlled by the specific section of this article. 
    Engineer means a person who is registered to practice engineering in the state and is actively engaged in electrical design or consulting services within the state. 
    Graduate engineer means a person who holds a degree in electrical engineering from any accredited college or university. 
    Industrial electrician means any person licensed by the state as an industrial electrician. 
    Inspector means the electrical inspector or his designated representative, qualified in electrical code inspections, who shall have the duty of inspecting any and all electrical work for electrical code compliance. 
    Job site means the specific premises or installation described in the electrical permit under which electrical work is being performed. 
    Journeyman electrician means any person licensed by the state as a journeyman electrician. 
    Maintenance electrician means a person with at least two years' experience in the electrical trade who is a full-time employee of a company or business and whose duty it is to maintain the existing electrical system, including all fixtures and appurtenances contained in a building, structure, lot or premises owned or operated by his employer. 
    Master electrician means any person licensed by the state as a master electrician. 
    N.E.C. means the National Electrical Code, as adopted by the city in section 22-401, compiled by the National Fire Protection Association. 
    Sign means any physical device, panel or installation attached to or located on a building, premises or structure, used to display any message or communicate any thought or idea and which uses electrical current for its intended operation. 
(Code 1966, § 14-22; Code 2001, § 22-57; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Secs. 22-58-22-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 22-86-22-110. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Electrical Inspector 

Sec. 22-111. - Office established. 
(a)  There is established within the Building and Code Administration Division of the Community Development Department the office of electrical inspector. The electrical inspector and assistants shall be charged with the enforcement of this article under the direct administration of the building and code administrator. 
(b)  The electrical inspector and assistants shall be appointed by the building and code administrator with the approval of the city manager. Appointment and removal of the electrical inspector or assistant electrical inspectors shall be in accordance with the requirements of this article and the city's personnel rules and regulations. 
(c)  The electrical inspector shall possess adequate supervisory and administrative abilities as are required for the performance of duties and shall have a thorough knowledge of current approved methods and practices relating to the electrical code adopted in this article and electrical installations. The electrical inspector shall have at least five years' experience as a journeyman or master electrician in the practice of his trade or as an electrical inspector. In lieu of such experience, the electrical inspector may possess equivalent qualifications as approved by the building and code administrator. 
(d)  Assistant electrical inspectors shall be knowledgeable in current and approved methods and practices relating to the electrical code adopted in this article and electrical installations. They shall have at least two years' experience as a master or journeyman electrician in the practice of their trade. In lieu of such experience, an assistant electrical inspector may possess equivalent qualifications as approved by the building and code administrator. 
(e)  An applicant for the position of electrical inspector or assistant electrical inspector shall be required to pass a written examination for journeyman electrician prior to employment or shall have passed such examination within five years prior to such application. 
(Code 1966, § 14-2; Code 2001, § 22-111; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-112. - Enforcement duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to enforce the provisions of the city electrical code and to discharge the responsibilities assigned to him by this article. 
(Code 1966, § 14-11; Code 2001, § 22-112; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-113. - Identification cards. 
    The electrical inspectors shall have identification cards in their possession at all times when engaged in the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 14-25; Code 2001, § 22-113; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-114. - Delegation of duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to enforce this article; however, the electrical inspector is authorized to designate qualified employees serving under his direction and control to assist in the discharge of such duty. 
(Code 1966, § 14-26; Code 2001, § 22-114; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-115. - Conflict of interest. 
    No person discharging the duties of electrical inspector under this article shall be an employer or employee of or have any pecuniary interest, direct or indirect, in any business, firm, company or association engaged in any phase of electrical work within the city. 
(Code 1966, § 14-27; Code 2001, § 22-115; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-116. - Right of entry; interference with entry. 
(a)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the sections of this article, or whenever the electrical inspector has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or electrical code violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the electrical inspector may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the building or premises or to perform any duty imposed upon the electrical inspector by this article. However, if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry; if such building or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the electrical inspector shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  When the electrical inspector shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as provided in this section, to promptly permit entry therein by the electrical inspector for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1966, § 14-31; Code 2001, § 22-116; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-117. - Notice of violation. 
    When the electrical inspector observes or if it comes to his attention that any electrical work is installed contrary to or in violation of this article, it shall be his duty to immediately notify the responsible master electrician, industrial electrician, other permitted electricians or the owner or occupant of the premises to immediately correct such installation or cease work on the entire installation until the violation is corrected. 
(Code 1966, § 14-32; Code 2001, § 22-117; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Secs. 22-118-22-145. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Board of Electrical Examiners 

Sec. 22-146. - Created. 
    There is created a Board of Electrical Examiners for the city to be appointed by the city council. The administration of the appeal and registration provisions of the city electrical code shall be vested in the board. 
(Code 1966, § 14-4; Code 2001, § 22-146; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-147. - Membership. 
    The Board of Electrical Examiners shall consist of seven members, who shall serve without compensation. these members shall include two master electricians, one journeyman electrician, one member who is an employee of the local electric utility company, one member who shall be a representative of industry, one member who shall be a homebuilder or otherwise associated with the homebuilding industry, and one member who shall be designated as a member at large. This member shall not be connected with the electrical contracting industry for monetary gain. 
(Code 1966, § 14-4(A); Code 2001, § 22-147; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-148. - Terms of office; officers; removal; vacancies. 
(a)  All appointments of members to the Board of Electrical Examiners shall be for terms of two years; however, no member shall serve for more than three consecutive terms. Terms shall be staggered and shall end on July 31. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed. 
(b)  The chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be elected by the members of the board annually. When good cause exists, a member may be removed by the city council. Any member absent for four consecutive regular meetings, without cause, shall be replaced by the council. 
(Code 1966, § 14-4(B); Code 2001, § 22-148; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-149. - Supplies. 
    The city shall provide the Board of Electrical Examiners with proper books of record, blank forms, stationery and supplies, proper and adequate for the conduct of its business. 
(Code 1966, § 14-5; Code 2001, § 22-149; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-150. - Quorum. 
    Any four of the seven members of the board of electrical examiners shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business before the board, except where a greater number is specifically required by other sections of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 14-6; Code 2001, § 22-150; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-151. - Rules, policies. 
(a)  The Board of Electrical Examiners is directed to adopt such policies and promulgate such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this article and the Charter and the city electrical code, as it may find necessary to expedite the enforcement and administration of such duties as are in this article delegated to the board. All policies, rules and regulations which shall be adopted by the board shall be reduced to writing and kept in book form in the same office of the electrical inspector and open to the public at all reasonable times. 
(b)  All master electricians and industrial electricians registered as provided under this article shall be notified in writing of any changes to such rules and regulations. 
(Code 1966, § 14-7; Code 2001, § 22-151; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-152. - Recommendation for improvement of electrical code. 
    The Board of Electrical Examiners is directed to submit to the city council its written recommendations, as necessary, for the improvement of this article and the electrical code adopted in this article. 
(Code 1966, § 14-9; Code 2001, § 22-152; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-153. - Powers and duties. 
    The electrical inspector shall act as the secretary of the Board of Electrical Examiners with the power and duty to: 
(1)  Keep and maintain a full record of all proceedings of the board. 
(2)  Administer oaths in hearings held before the board concerning the granting, denying, suspension or revocation of a registration, requested or issued, pursuant to this article. 
(3)  Certify all official acts of the board. 
(4)  Issue subpoenas for attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers at all hearings before the board concerning the granting, denying, suspension or revocation of a registration, requested or issued, pursuant to this article. 
(5)  To the extent requested by the board, assist the board in keeping all forms up to date with the provisions of the electrical code. 
(Code 1966, § 14-10; Code 2001, § 22-153; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-154. - Registration. 
(a)  A person licensed by the state as an electrical contractor or electrical sign contractor who seeks to perform electrical work in the city shall register his state license with the Building and Code Administration Division prior to work being done. 
(b)  Upon registration of a state license, an electrical contractor may perform electrical work in the city, provided such work is within the scope of his state license and city ordinances. 
(Code 1966, § 14-12; Code 2001, § 22-154; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004; Ord. No. 16-2007, § 2, 2-6-2007; Ord. No. 53-2010, § 5, 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 22-155. - Interpretation of electrical code. 
(a)  When a proper appeal has been made in accordance with section 22-403, the Board of Electrical Examiners is authorized, empowered and directed to interpret any word, clause, sentence, paragraph or other provision contained in the city electrical code. When a question arising by appeal is acted upon by the board, such action shall be by a majority vote of the board hearing the appeal, and the board's decision in each case shall be reduced to writing and filed in the office of the electrical inspector. 
(b)  Each decision rendered by the board in accordance with subsection (a) of this section shall be final, subject, however, to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(c)  Any decision rendered by the board in accordance with this section may be modified or revoked when the board finds that facts and circumstances warrant such action. Any decision made under this subsection which substantially changes, modifies, or revokes a prior decision of the board made under this section shall not become effective until ten days after the decision of the board has been filed in the office of the electrical inspector, unless specifically ordered to the contrary by the board. 
(d)  This section shall never by construed as granting any legislative power to the board, such power being exclusively in the city council. 
(e)  A copy of any decision of the board rendered under this section shall be mailed to every registered master electrician or industrial electrician within the city affected by such decision and to any other person designated by the board to receive the decision. 
(Code 1966, § 14-8; Code 2001, § 22-155; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-156. - Procedure for conduct of hearings. 
    When a public hearing is authorized or required to be held by the Board of Electrical Examiners, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be appropriate by the board. 
(2)  In addition to the record of the proceeding made by the board, any person appearing before the board may, at his expense, have the proceeding recorded by a duly certified court reporter. When a court reporter is employed, the person employing the reporter shall furnish a transcript of the hearing as produced by the reporter to the board at no cost to the board. 
(3)  The board may grant a continuance of a hearing for good cause shown. 
(4)  The chairperson of the board or the board's secretary shall have the power to administer oaths or affirmations at any hearing conducted by the board. 
(5)  Notice of any hearing held by the board shall be sent to any person affected by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF HEARING 
TO (Name) 
ADDRESS 
"You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before the City of Wichita Falls Board of Electrical Examiners at _______ on the _____ day of _______, 20___ at the hour of _____ o'clock ___.m. 
The subject matter of the hearing is as follows: 
______________________________ 
You may be present at the hearing and may represent yourself or be represented by legal counsel of your choice. 
You may present any relevant evidence on your behalf concerning the subject matter of the hearing and will be given the full opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses offering evidence against you. 
You may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, documents, papers or other matters by filing a written request for such subpoena with the Secretary of the Board." 
(6)  The secretary of the board shall issue all subpoenas requested in writing by any party to a hearing before the board. It shall, however, be the obligation of the requesting party to furnish to the secretary of the board all necessary information for the proper issuance of any subpoena. 
(7)  The board itself, in addition to any party to a hearing held by the board, may, by motion, request a subpoena to be issued to compel the attendance of any witness or the production of books, papers, documents or other things in the interest of fairness. 
(8)  The secretary of the board shall not issue any subpoena when the requesting party fails to provide the necessary information to the secretary for its issuance. 
(9)  The right to cross-examination shall be allowed to all parties to a hearing held before the board. 
(10)  The right to be represented by legal counsel shall be extended to all parties to a hearing before the board. 
(11)  The right to call a witness on his behalf shall be extended to all parties to a hearing before this board. 
(12)  In every case where the subject matter of the hearing before the board is the suspension or revocation of the registration of any state licensee, the burden of proof shall be upon the person commencing such action. 
(13)  During a hearing held before the board, any member of the board shall have the right to direct any question to either party to such hearing. 
(14)  Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation of the witness offering such evidence. 
(15)  Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. 
(16)  The board shall have in mind that it is conducting an administrative hearing and, consistent with this section, may adopt any rules necessary to conduct such hearing held before it. 
(17)  The board shall render its decision in writing within five days of the conclusion of any hearing held before it. 
(Code 1966, § 14-19; Code 2001, § 22-156; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Secs. 22-157-22-185. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Permits 

Sec. 22-186. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake any electrical work within the city without having obtained a permit authorizing the person to undertake such work. 
(b)  There shall only be one electrical permit issued or outstanding at the same time for any electrical work undertaken at any job site within the city. However, the electrical inspector shall be authorized to issue two or more permits for a job site when the electrical work to be undertaken at a job site is to be done in separate phases and the electrician applying for the permit is to be responsible for one or more phases of the electrical work, but not the total work required for completion of the job. 
(c)  When a master electrician has obtained a permit to undertake electrical work and the electrician is seeking to undertake less than the total electrical work at a job site, the following requirements apply: 
(1)  The master electrician shall, prior to the issuance of such permit, supply to the electrical inspector drawings, diagrams or plans which show the exact scope of the work to be undertaken. 
(2)  The master electrician shall be solely responsible for all electrical work to be undertaken by such electrician at the job site. 
(3)  The master electrician who has obtained a permit to do electrical work at a job site when such work is a phase or part of the total work, but less than the total work required at the job site, shall do only such work at the job site authorized by his permit. 
(4)  When there is more than one electrical permit issued for a job site within the city, where two or more master electricians are working on different parts or phases of the electrical work at such site, it shall be the joint responsibility of all such electricians so permitted to see that the individual work undertaken is compatible with all other electrical work undertaken at the job site and in conformity with the approved plans for the job and this article. 
(5)  When two or more master electricians have performed phases or work at a job site, the electrical inspector shall make one final electrical inspection at the job site, which shall cover all electrical work undertaken or done at the job site, and shall not pass the work unless all electrical work undertaken at the job site is found to comply with this article. 
(d)  The electrical inspector shall issue only one electrical permit per job site for the same or identical work with the following exceptions: 
(1)  When the master electrician has failed to complete the work, and such fact is communicated by the general contractor or property owner. 
(2)  When the electrical inspector is notified in writing by the master electrician that his contract for the electrical work is no longer in effect. 
(3)  When the electrical inspector has been notified in writing by the general contractor permitted at the job site that the master electrician originally permitted to do the work at the job site has been replaced with a new electrician. 
(e)  When the electrical inspector determines that a new permit will be issued, the person requiring such permit shall pay the full fee for the permit, and no refund shall ever be made on the original permit issued. 
(f)  The electrical inspector is authorized to require any other type of evidence from the general contractor or master electrician which he deems necessary prior to the issuance of a new electrical permit. 
(g)  The issuance of a new permit under this section shall release the first permitted electrician of any responsibility for compliance with this article for work completed by such electrician, and the new permitted electrician shall be responsible for compliance with this article for the entire job site. 
(h)  The electrical inspector shall require the owner, general contractor or subcontractor or other interested person to execute an indemnity agreement agreeing to hold harmless and defend the city and building and code administrator from any and all liability which may be alleged as a result of the issuance of a new electrical permit under this section and to require such agreement to be secured by bonds and insurance deemed appropriate unless a release is signed by all parties. 
(Code 1966, § 14-64(A)-(D); Code 2001, § 22-186; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-187. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No permit shall be required for a registered electrician or a homeowner to undertake minor electrical work, which by way of illustration and not limitation is as follows: 
(1)  Repairing flush and snap switches. 
(2)  Replacing fuses. 
(3)  Changing lamp sockets and receptacles. 
(4)  Replacing neon tubing in or on an existing sign erected in compliance with this article. 
(5)  Changing lamp or ballast. 
(b)  No permit shall be required to attach or repair electrical wiring or install service to electrical apparatuses or equipment which are a part of a refrigeration, heating or air conditioning system or unit or any motor unit driving other equipment. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as allowing any person to install new electrical wiring to or in a building or premises in order to install any of the equipment listed in this subsection, and this section shall be construed to allow a person to connect to existing wiring only. 
(c)  No permit shall be required, after original installation and inspection, to change an electrical fixture or repair or replace an electrical fixture unless the work will require a change in the size of the wiring supplying current to such fixture. 
(Code 1966, § 14-70; Code 2001, § 22-187; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-188. - Classification. 
    The following types of permits for electrical work may be issued by the electrical inspector: 
(1)  General electrical permit. A general electrical permit shall only be issued to a master electrician and shall authorize the electrician to perform any type of electrical work at a specific job site for which his registration qualifies. 
(2)  Homeowner's permit. 
a.  A homeowner's electrical permit shall only be issued to a person who owns and resides in a single-family home and may be used by such homeowner to do electrical work on the premises used by the homeowner as his residence. The electrical inspector shall be authorized to require proof of ownership and residence for any permit issued under this subsection. 
b.  Exception. A homeowner's permit shall not include any electrical installation for a swimming pool, hot tub or spa, and all such electrical work shall only be allowed by a general electrical permit issued to a master electrician. 
(3)  In-house electrical permit. An in-house electrical permit shall only be issued to a person registered as an industrial electrician, and shall authorize such electrician to perform any type of electrical work for his employer for which his registration qualifies. No permit issued to an industrial electrician shall ever authorize such electrician to perform any electrical work for any person other than the employer of such electrician and upon the buildings, grounds or equipment owned or leased by such employer. 
(Code 1966, § 14-64(E); Code 2001, § 22-188; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-189. - Applications. 
    Application forms for any type of electrical permit authorized by section 22-188 shall be obtained from the electrical inspector and shall be fully completed by the individual seeking the permit and returned to the electrical inspector. The electrical inspector shall not issue the permit requested if he finds any of the following: 
(1)  The proposed electrical work does not comply with this article. 
(2)  Plans and specifications for the work to be done under the requested permit are insufficient to allow the electrical inspector to determine if the work proposed to be done under the requested permit complies with this article. 
(3)  The individual is seeking a permit to perform electrical work which he is not qualified to perform under the registration issued to such person by the board of electrical examiners. 
(4)  If for a homeowner's permit, the individual applying therefor is not the owner and resident of the premises for which the permit is sought. 
(5)  If for a homeowner's permit, the individual seeking the permit has failed to demonstrate a working knowledge of this article. 
(6)  The individual seeking the permit has failed to furnish the certificate of insurance required by section 22-349, or such insurance has been canceled or reduced in coverage. This defect may be cured by compliance with the terms of section 22-349. 
(Code 1966, § 14-65; Code 2001, § 22-189; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-190. - Plans and specifications required. 
(a)  Two sets of electrical plans and specifications may be required by the electrical inspector prior to the issuance of a permit for the following electrical work: 
(1)  All new construction for which a building permit is required in accordance with this Code. 
(2)  All alterations to existing buildings or structures for which a building permit is required in accordance with this Code. 
(b)  In addition to subsection (a) of this section, the electrical inspector may require two sets of electrical plans and specifications when, in the opinion of the electrical inspector, such plans and specifications are necessary for the electrical inspector to determine if the proposed electrical work to be undertaken, if a permit is issued, will comply with this article. 
(c)  When plans and specifications are required by this section, they shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The size of the feeders and subfeeders and their length when there are more than four branch circuits. 
(2)  All current connected device locations. 
(3)  All circuitry to panels. 
(4)  All panels and the service entrance must be sized on the plans. 
(d)  In addition to the requirements set forth in subsection (c) of this section, the electrical inspector may require the calculations for the plans prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(e)  The plans required by this section shall be sealed or certified as follows: 
(1)  All commercial building plans shall bear the seal of an electrical engineer or a certification by a master electrician or industrial electrician that the plans are approved by him. However, all plans must bear the seal of an engineer licensed to practice in the state when required by the Texas Occupations Code. 
(2)  All other plans shall be approved and bear the seal or certification of any one of the following persons: 
a.  An engineer licensed by the state. 
b.  A registered master electrician who is contracted for the job. 
c.  A homeowner who is performing electrical work on his own residence. 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything contained in this subsection to the contrary, a registered industrial electrician may certify plans for electrical work for his employer, if such plans do not require the seal of a licensed engineer in this state pursuant to the Texas Occupations Code. 
(Code 1966, § 14-67; Code 2001, § 22-190; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-191. - Issuance; contents. 
(a)  When the electrical permit fee, as established by separate ordinance, is paid and all other applicable sections of this article are complied with, the electrical inspector shall issue the permit requested. 
(b)  The permit shall specify the following: 
(1)  The type of permit issued. 
(2)  The proposed work to be done. 
(3)  The location of the job site. 
(4)  The name and address of the registered electrician receiving the permit or, if a homeowner, his name and address. 
(5)  The name and address of any company, firm, business, partnership or corporation with whom the registered electrician is an officer, employee or partner. 
(6)  The date of issuance and the signature of the electrical inspector. 
(7)  The signature of the electrician or homeowner receiving the permit and responsible for electrical code compliance. 
(Code 1966, § 14-66; Code 2001, § 22-191; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-192. - Temporary installations. 
(a)  The electrical inspector is authorized, in addition to other permits allowed by this article, to issue temporary permits for a period of time not to exceed 90 days. All electrical work undertaken under a temporary permit shall nonetheless comply with all other sections of this article, unless the electrician seeking such temporary permit shall prove to the electrical inspector that a lesser standard will provide a safe installation for the period of time the permit is enforced. 
(b)  Upon the expiration of the time set forth in any temporary permit issued in accordance with this section, the person obtaining such permit will do the following: 
(1)  Apply for and secure a regular permit for electrical work to either complete the temporary work or bring such work into full compliance with this article; or 
(2)  Remove all such temporary electrical work installed or undertaken under the temporary permit issued and restore the building or premises to full code compliance. 
(Code 1966, § 14-68; Code 2001, § 22-192; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-193. - Ready-built homes. 
    Where buildings are constructed in lumberyards or on premises other than where the building is on a permanent foundation and where such building is to be moved into and located within the city limits, wiring installation shall be made by an insured and registered master electrician in conformity with this article, and permits shall be applied for. 
(Code 1966, § 14-69; Code 2001, § 22-193; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-194. - Emergency work necessitating new wiring. 
    If an emergency occurs necessitating immediate new wiring or repairs to electrical wiring at a time when the office of the Building and Code Administration is closed, the work may be carried out without first obtaining a permit. Thereafter, a written application shall be submitted to the Building and Code Administration for a permit during the next day that such office is open. Before the permit shall be issued, all requirements for its issuance must be complied with. 
(Code 1966, § 14-71; Code 2001, § 22-194; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Secs. 22-195-22-220. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Inspections 

Sec. 22-221. - Required. 
    All electrical work for which a permit has been issued in accordance with this article shall be inspected by the electrical inspector for compliance with this article. The electrical inspector in discharging this duty shall make the following inspections: 
(1)  Rough-in inspection. The registered electrician or homeowner who has secured the permit for electrical work shall be responsible for notification to the Building and Code Administration that the electrical work is ready for a rough-in inspection at such time that all raceways, panel board cabinets, service equipment, outlet boxes, junction boxes, conduit, conductors and conductor splices are installed and ready for visible inspection. The electrical inspector shall refuse to make any rough-in inspection when the electrical work has been covered from view. 
(2)  Final inspection. The registered electrician or homeowner who has secured the permit for electrical work shall be responsible for notification to the Building and Code Administration that the electrical work is ready for a final inspection. Electrical work shall be considered ready for final inspection when such work has passed all prior inspections made by the electrical inspector, or when such work has been corrected to comply with this article where a violation has been found to exist upon prior inspection, and where the electrical work has been completed in accordance to plans and specifications by the registered electrician or homeowner who has secured the permit. The electrical inspector shall have the option of requiring the presence of the permitted electrician or journeyman in charge of the work at any final inspection. 
(3)  Additional inspections. In addition to the inspection required to be made by the electrical inspector under subsections (1) and (2) of this section, such inspector is further required to make any and all additional inspections he shall deem necessary to ensure that all electrical work undertaken or existing in the city is in compliance with this article. 
(4)  Sign inspections. The master electrician securing a permit for electrical work in connection with any sign to be installed within the city shall be responsible for notification to the electrical inspector that the electrical work, for which the permit is issued, is ready for inspection. Electrical work necessary for installation or erection of a sign shall be considered ready for inspection when all work necessary for its installation or erection has been completed by the person holding the permit. The electrical inspector shall have the authority to require a sign to be opened or uncovered when necessary to complete the inspection required by this subsection. 
(Code 1966, § 14-72; Code 2001, § 22-221; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-222. - Request for inspections. 
(a)  Every registered electrician or homeowner securing a permit under this article to undertake electrical work shall be responsible for notifying the electrical inspector of any requested inspection. The electrical inspector shall complete such inspection within 24 working hours after receipt of the notice requesting such inspection. 
(b)  A request for inspection may be made in writing or by telephone and shall contain or specify the following information: 
(1)  The address where the work is located. 
(2)  The permit number if requested by the electrical inspector. 
(3)  The electrical contractor's name and address or the name of the homeowner. 
(4)  The type of inspection requested, which shall be as follows: 
E1 Construction tap E2 Rough in (before work is covered) E3 Final (all work complete, power on) E4 Reinspection (when work is rejected) E5 Courtesy inspection (to discuss or plan work) E6 Electrical system safety check (before power is connected or occupancy change to existing service) E9 Temporary power on (to power system before final inspection. If the structure is occupied or code violations are noted, the electrical inspector may request immediate disconnect of service to the electrical utility)  
(Code 1966, § 14-73; Code 2001, § 22-222; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-223. - Procedure for identifying results. 
    The electrical inspector, after completing any inspection required or authorized by this article, shall identify the results of such inspection in the following manner: 
(1)  If the electrical inspector determines upon inspection that the electrical work inspected complies in every respect with this article, he shall attach or affix, at a visible and accessible point, a notice which will signify that the work has been inspected and was found to be in compliance with this article. The notice shall be signed by the inspector making the inspection, shall be dated, shall set forth the address of the job site where the inspection was made, and shall authorize the electrician or homeowner to continue with the work. 
(2)  If the electrical inspector determines upon inspection that the electrical work inspected does not comply with this article, he shall attach or affix, at a visible and accessible point, a notice which will signify that the work has been inspected and was found not to comply with this article. The notice shall be signed by the inspector, shall be dated, shall contain a statement that the work has not passed the inspection, and shall contain a warning that it is a violation of this article to proceed with the electrical work until such work has passed inspection, and that a reinspection fee will be paid before reinspection. The inspector shall also note on the back of the notice the violation of this article discovered during his inspection and any other information deemed relevant. 
(3)  When the electrical inspector is requested to make a final inspection on any electrical work, he shall determine at such inspection if the electrical work complies with this article and is ready to be connected to a source of electrical current. If the electrical inspector approves and passes the work inspected, he shall attach or affix, at a visible and accessible point, a notice which shall signify that the work has been inspected and found to be in compliance with this article, and is ready to be connected to a source of electrical current. The notice shall be signed by the inspector, shall be dated, shall set forth the address of the job site, and upon issuance, the inspector shall notify the utility company to provide service to the site in accordance with section 22-224. 
(4)  For minor violations of this article where electrical work will remain open to view, the electrical inspector may issue a notice of approval with notations of minor violations. Such notice shall be attached or affixed at a visible and accessible point of the work. The notice will signify that the work has been inspected and minor violations of this article were discovered upon inspection. Any registered electrician or homeowner who has received a notice of approval with minor violations shall make all necessary corrections to the electrical work found to be a minor violation of this article prior to the next inspection by the electrical inspector or within ten days after receipt of the notice, whichever period is the shortest period of time. The notice shall be signed by the inspector, shall be dated, shall set forth the location of the job site and shall point out the items of work that must be corrected. If the registered electrician or homeowner has failed to make corrections to electrical work as listed on the notice within the time period in this subsection, the inspector shall issue a rejection notice following the procedures set forth in subsection (b) of this section to such electrician or homeowner. 
(Code 1966, § 14-74; Code 2001, § 22-223) 
Sec. 22-224. - Clearance to connect electrical service. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to connect, reconnect or cause connection or reconnection of electrical service to any building, structure, installation, construction tap, sign or outdoor lighting system without a clearance from the electrical inspector except a registered master electrician connecting service in an emergency, as allowed in section 22-194. 
(b)  No electric utility company furnishing electric service within the city shall furnish electric service in any of the following cases until authorization to connect has been secured from the electrical inspector: 
(1)  New service to any new building, structure, tent, installation, sign or outdoor lighting. 
(2)  Electrical service has been terminated due to the alteration or repair of any building, structure, installation, sign, premises or outdoor lighting. 
(3)  Electrical service has been terminated due to fire, flood, windstorm, earthquake, explosion or any other similar disaster to any building, structure, installation, sign, premises or outdoor lighting. 
(4)  Electrical service has been terminated due to unsafe electrical conditions existing at or in any building, structure, installation, sign, premises or outdoor lighting, and the utility has been made aware of such fact by the electrical inspector. 
(5)  Electrical service has been discontinued or there has been a change of occupants to any building or premises, except private residences and apartments where service is carried over for a continuing occupancy. 
(Code 1966, § 14-75; Code 2001, § 22-224; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Secs. 22-225-22-254. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VI. - Fees 

Sec. 22-255. - Permit and inspection fees. 
(a)  A fee shall be assessed for each permit required by this article. Such fee shall be established by separate ordinance. All permit fees shall be paid upon application for the permit. 
(b)  When any electrical work is commenced within the city and no permit as required by this article has been issued prior to the commencement of such work, the fee for issuance of the required permit may be charged and assessed at twice the amount required by separate ordinance. This subsection shall not, however, apply when the electrical work has been undertaken as an emergency in accordance with section 22-194. 
(c)  Permit fees as established by separate ordinance shall not be assessed for permits involving work for any of the following: 
(1)  School districts within the city limits. 
(2)  The city. 
(3)  The county. 
(d)  When a permit has been issued and the electrical work has been inspected by the electrical inspector, and such inspector determines upon inspection that the electrical work failed to comply with this article and issues a rejection notice for such work pursuant to section 22-223(b), a reinspection fee shall be charged, as established by separate ordinance. 
(Code 1966, § 14-80; Code 2001, § 22-255; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-256. - Fee adjustments. 
    All fees and charges as established and set forth by separate ordinance are and shall be subject to adjustment in accordance with this Code. 
(Code 1966, § 14-81; Code 2001, § 22-256; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Secs. 22-257-22-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 22-286-22-345. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Licenses 

Sec. 22-346. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to do or undertake to do any electrical work within the city unless licensed by the state to perform such work in accordance with this article, except where a person is performing electrical work for a class of business that is exempt from this article as set forth in section 22-404, or the person is a homeowner performing electrical work or wiring on his own residence and is exempt from this article as set forth in section 22-404. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on, directly or indirectly, or to advertise or to hold himself out as engaging in or carrying on electrical work or to perform any act as a master electrician, industrial electrician, journeyman electrician, maintenance electrician, master sign electrician, journeyman sign electrician, residential wireman, or apprentice electrician, as defined within this article, without first obtaining an appropriate license from the state. 
(c)  In addition to any license required in this section, any person who shall engage in the business of electrical contracting shall, prior to making contracts or subletting the contracts, obtain a registration, referred to as an "electrical contractor registration." Such electrical contractor registration shall be issued by Building and Code Administration, contingent upon compliance with the applicable sections of this article and the following: 
(1)  The business for which the registration is issued shall be owned by or have in its employment at least one registered master electrician, and such master electrician shall be designated on the registration application as responsible for the daily supervision of all electrical work of the business so registered. 
(2)  Such designated master electrician's name, address and telephone number shall be provided to the Building and Code Administration upon application for the electrical contractor registration. 
(3)  Such master electrician shall make himself available during the normal working hours of the Building and Code Administration in order to meet with the electrical inspector either at the job site or at the inspector's office regarding any electrical work performed by that business. When such designated master electrician may be unavailable, such as in cases of emergency, illness, or absence from the city, the electrical inspector may allow the business to designate an alternate master or journeyman electrician as the city contact during such period of absence. 
(4)  At any time the designated master electrician's registration is suspended, revoked, or expires, or such master electrician leaves the employment of the business so registered under this subsection, the electrical contractor registration shall become null and void until such master electrician registration has been reinstated or another master electrician has been designated by the business. 
(5)  An electrical contractor's registration shall expire on December 31 and may be renewed thereafter. 
(6)  A fee shall be charged for each electrical contractor registration, issued in accordance with the fee established by separate ordinance. 
(7)  No permits shall be issued to any master electrician whose contractor's registration is not current. 
(d)  A master electrician or industrial electrician shall not use his registration to obtain electrical permits issued under this article for any other class of electrician who is not a full-time employee of the master electrician's or industrial electrician's company and under his direct supervision and control. Business records of the electrical contractor may be required by the board of electrical examiners to substantiate the master's involvement with the business. 
(Code 2001, § 22-346; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-347. - Unlawful work; false claims. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any registered electrician to perform or hold himself out as being able to perform any type or class of electrical work not expressly included under coverage of his registration. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or to hold out or to state to the public or to any customer, either directly or indirectly, that any electrical work or installation complies with the city electrical code unless such work has in fact been inspected and approved by the electrical inspector. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person or the owner, agent or occupant of any premises to aid or abet an electrical contractor in the violation of this article or connive in its violation. 
(Code 2001, § 22-347; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-348. - Unregistered electricians. 
    It shall be unlawful for any registered electrician to allow any unregistered electrician or unregistered apprentice to work at any job site or electrical installation project under his control or supervision. 
(Code 2001, § 22-348; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-349. - Fee and insurance requirements. 
(a)  Each successful applicant for any class of registration provided for by this article shall pay a fee to the secretary of the Board of Electrical Examiners in the amount set forth by separate ordinance. No applicant shall be entitled to obtain a permit for or undertake any electrical work within the city until such time as the fee has been paid. The fee required shall be paid to the secretary, who shall pay such fee over to the city's general fund. 
(b)  Any person engaged in the electrical contracting business in the corporate city limits shall obtain and have in full force and effect a policy of liability insurance, insuring against claims or actions for personal injuries or property damage occurring or claiming to have occurred upon or growing out of engaging in the electrical contracting business with limits as prescribed by state licensing requirements. A current certificate of insurance meeting or exceeding these limits must be on file in the electrical inspector's office prior to the issuance of any permit. The insurance coverage shall include a provision that if such coverage is canceled or reduced, the insurance carrier shall notify the electrical inspector at least ten days prior to such cancellation or reduction in coverage. 
(c)  No electrical permit shall be issued to any master electrician until such time as the certificate of insurance required in subsection (b) of this section is filed with the electrical inspector. 
(d)  It shall not be necessary, however, for a master electrician to furnish a certificate of insurance as required by this section if such electrician does not actively engage in the electrical business as a master electrician and files with the electrical inspector a letter so stating. A master electrician may engage in his electrical business at any time by so advising the electrical inspector in writing and furnishing the required insurance certificate. 
(e)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  A homeowner seeking a homeowner's permit to do work on his own residence. 
(2)  An industrial electrician seeking an in-house electrical permit as provided in section 22-188(3) to do work outlined by such permit. 
(Code 2001, § 22-349; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-350. - Possession. 
    The holder of any electrical registration shall, when on the job site of any electrical installation, have in his immediate possession a wallet-size identification of such registration. The registrant shall, upon request, present such registration for identification to the electrical inspector or any of his deputies. In addition to the identification requirement in this section, each master electrician and industrial electrician shall cause to be posted in a prominent place at his place of business or employment the certificate of qualification which is issued by the secretary at the time his registration is issued. 
(Code 2001, § 22-350; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-351. - Business address. 
(a)  Every master electrician and industrial electrician shall file with the electrical inspector a written statement setting forth the current business address and phone number of such electrician. It shall be the responsibility of the electrician to advise the electrical inspector of any changes to the information required in this subsection. 
(b)  The electrical inspector shall not issue any permit required by this article to any master electrician or industrial electrician who has not complied with this section. 
(Code 2001, § 22-351; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-352. - Transferability. 
    Any electrical registration issued in accordance with this article shall be nontransferable. 
(Code 2001, § 22-352; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-353. - Employment of journeyman or apprentice. 
(a)  Every master electrician or industrial electrician shall be responsible for and exercise supervision and control over every journeyman electrician or apprentice electrician performing work upon any job site for which the master electrician or industrial electrician has secured a permit in accordance with this article. Consistent with the responsibility of the master electrician or industrial electrician to exercise supervision and control over journeyman electricians and apprentices, no master electrician or industrial electrician shall use the services of a journeyman electrician or apprentice on any job who is not a full-time employee of the same company as the master electrician or industrial electrician. 
(b)  The electrical inspector may require the master electrician or industrial electrician to produce payroll records, quarterly federal withholding reports, or other information to verify the employee relationship. 
(Code 2001, § 22-353; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-354. - Supervision of journeyman electrician. 
    It shall be a violation of this article and an additional reason for revocation or suspension of a journeyman's registration if a journeyman electrician is found to be undertaking or engaged in performing electrical work when a permit for such work has not been issued to the master electrician or industrial electrician who is employed on a full-time basis by the same company as the journeyman electrician. 
(Code 2001, § 22-354; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-355. - Notification of employment. 
(a)  The holder of a journeyman electrician registration shall notify the electrical inspector in writing if the holder of such a registration changes places of employment. The notice shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the new employer, together with the date of new employment. 
(b)  The holder of a maintenance electrician registration shall follow the same procedure as set forth in subsection (a) of this section if he changes places of employment. 
(c)  The holder of an industrial electrician registration shall follow the same procedure as set forth in subsection (a) of this section if he changes places of employment. 
(d)  The notification required by this section shall be made to the electrical inspector no later than ten days after the commencement of new employment. 
(Code 2001, § 22-355; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-356. - Supervision of apprentice electrician. 
    No class of registered electrician shall have more than three apprentice electricians working under his direct supervision and control. 
(Code 2001, § 22-356; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-357. - Expiration and renewal. 
(a)  Each electrician's registration issued under this article shall expire at 12:00 midnight on December 31 of each year. 
(b)  Every holder of any class of registration issued in accordance with this article may make written application for renewal of his registration; however, such application shall be filed with the electrical inspector prior to the expiration of his current registration. 
(c)  Application forms for renewal of any registration issued in accordance with this article shall be furnished by the electrical inspector. 
(d)  A fee shall be charged for each renewal registration issued in accordance with the schedule of fees established by separate ordinance. 
(e)  The electrical inspector shall refuse to renew any registration issued in accordance with this article where the applicant for renewal thereof fails to maintain his license through the state, complete the required application, maintain insurance as required, and tender the fees for renewal. 
(Code 2001, § 22-357; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-358. - Vehicle and other identification. 
(a)  Each vehicle used in the business of electrical contracting work in the city shall be properly identified by the placement of a sign or lettering on such vehicle. The sign shall display the name of the person doing business, and the lettering for such sign shall be at least two inches in height in contrasting colors. These signs shall be placed on both front doors of each vehicle or on both upper side panels of each van. 
(b)  In addition to subsection (a) of this section, all trucks or other vehicles used by any master electrician shall also have, placed upon the left-hand side of such vehicle, the registration number of the master electrician, in numbers a minimum height of two inches in size. These numbers shall be placed above the door signs or included as part of the sign. 
(c)  Every master electrician shall include his registration number on all printed or written advertising used or employed by such electrician. 
(Code 2001, § 22-358; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-359. - Procedure for revocation or suspension. 
(a)  The Board of Electrical Examiners is authorized either to suspend (for a period of time not to exceed one year) or revoke the registration of any state licensee for proper cause as set forth in section 22-360. 
(b)  The board shall follow the following procedures in exercising the powers set forth in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  When the board is to determine whether or not an electrician's registration is to be suspended or revoked, the board shall proceed upon a sworn affidavit of the electrical inspector or upon the sworn affidavit of any person aggrieved by the action of such electrician. The affidavit shall set forth the grounds upon which the affiant relies to suspend or revoke the registration in question, together with sufficient facts in support thereof. 
(2)  When the electrical inspector or an aggrieved person seeks to commence action to suspend or revoke the registration of an electrician, he shall prepare the required affidavit in writing and shall file the original and two copies with the electrical inspector, who shall note the date and time of filing of such affidavit and shall forward a copy to the chairperson of the board and to the electrician who is the subject of the allegations. The electrical inspector shall retain one copy of the affidavit in his files. The electrical inspector shall forward the copy of the affidavit to the electrician named in the affidavit by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(3)  The electrician named in the affidavit shall have ten days from the date of receipt of such affidavit to file a sworn response to the charges set forth in the affidavit. The electrician in question shall file the response and two copies with the secretary of the board, who shall forward one copy to the chairperson of the board and one copy to the person filing the affidavit to which the response is directed. The electrical inspector shall retain the original response in his office. 
(4)  The chairperson of the board, upon receipt of an affidavit of complaint for suspension or revocation of the registration of any electrician, shall give notice of such affidavit of complaint to each member of the board. After each member of the board has been notified of the affidavit of complaint, the board shall meet at a regular meeting or a special meeting called by the chairperson for the purpose of entering an order of the board setting a date and time at which the board shall enter upon a hearing to determine whether or not the electrician in question should have his registration suspended or revoked. The board shall cause a copy of its order setting a hearing in the matter to be served upon the electrician named in the affidavit of complaint by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing set by the board. 
(5)  The board shall thereafter meet at the time and place set forth in its order and enter upon a hearing to determine whether or not the board shall order the registration of the electrician in question suspended or revoked. 
(6)  The board shall cause a copy of its final order to be served upon the electrician in question by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall file a copy of its order with the electrical inspector. 
(7)  When the chairperson of the board has received the affidavit of complaint which, in the unanimous opinion of the board, sets forth allegations that would cause immediate danger to life or property, the board may, by unanimous vote, enter its order temporarily suspending the registration of the electrician named in the affidavit of complaint for a period of time not to exceed 20 days. When the board enters a temporary order of suspension as authorized in this subsection, it shall enter its final determination on the merits of the complaint prior to the expiration of the temporary order of suspension. 
(8)  When an electrician has had his registration suspended by order of the board, he shall not be eligible to undertake any electrical work within the city during the time of suspension set forth in the board's order. At the conclusion of the term of suspension, the electrician's registration shall automatically be reinstated or renewed in accordance with this article, and he may once again undertake electrical work within the city. 
(9)  When an electrician has had his registration revoked by order of the board, he shall not be eligible to undertake any electrical work within the city until such time as he has successfully qualified for a new registration as provided in this article. Any electrician whose registration has been revoked shall be ineligible to apply for a new registration for a period of one year from the date of the order of the board revoking same. 
(Code 2001, § 22-359; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-360. - Grounds for suspension or revocation. 
(a)  One or more of the following shall constitute cause for suspension or revocation for any class of electrical registration issued by the Board of Electrical Examiners: 
(1)  The failure or refusal by an electrician, after due notice from the electrical inspector, to correct any electrical work found to be in violation of this article or the electrical code. 
(2)  The furnishing of false or incorrect information in any application submitted to the board for licensing under the board's powers. 
(3)  Knowingly causing or allowing wiring to be covered or concealed from sight prior to inspection by the electrical inspector. 
(4)  The refusal to uncover or make available for inspection by the electrical inspector any electrical wiring or work inadvertently covered or concealed by the electrician. 
(5)  A final conviction in a court of law of any violation of this article or the electrical code. 
(6)  A plea of nolo contendere entered by any electrician licensed by the state to any complaint or charge against him in which he is charged with a violation of this article or the electrical code and upon which the court has entered a judgment of conviction against the electrician. 
(7)  The habitual violation of this article or the electrical code. The term "habitual violation" shall mean three or more separate violations of a similar or identical nature occurring at separate job sites within any 12-month period, except minor violations of subdivision II of division 4 of this article. 
(8)  Any violation of this article or the electrical code, which violation is a clear and present danger to life or property. 
(9)  The failure of any registered master electrician or industrial electrician to maintain adequate supervision over all journeyman and others registered under this article, working directly under or for him on any project or job for which a permit has been secured by the master electrician or industrial electrician. The term "adequate supervision," for the purpose of this subsection, shall mean that the master electrician or industrial electrician shall maintain such contact with a job or project for which he has obtained a permit as necessary to ensure that those electricians under his control and direction are complying and have complied with all applicable sections of this article and provisions of the electrical code. 
(b)  It shall be a ground for suspension or revocation of a registration issued to a master electrician, industrial electrician, maintenance electrician, journeyman electrician, master sign electrician, journeyman sign electrician, residential wireman, or apprentice electrician if the board of electrical examiners finds by a preponderance of evidence that such electrician has obtained a permit under this article or the electrical code and has allowed any other electrician to work upon the job or project for which the permit was issued other than those electricians registered by the board under his direct employment and supervision. This subsection shall not apply, however, to a joint venture by any two or more master electricians, provided that at the time the permit is obtained for the job or project in question the fact that the project is to be a joint venture is noted upon the permit at the time of issuance, along with the name and address of the master electrician who will have immediate responsibility and control over the job or project from which the permit is obtained. 
(c)  It shall be a ground for revocation of any registration issued to any electrician that the electrician in question has had his registration suspended by the board on two separate occasions within an 18-month period of time. 
(d)  It shall be a ground for suspension of a registration issued by the Board of Electrical Examiners if a holder of a registration, required to furnish a certificate of insurance in accordance with this article, fails to furnish such certificate or maintain the requisite insurance coverage such certificate evidences. 
(e)  It shall be a ground for suspension of any registration issued by the board of electrical examiners if an applicant for renewal of such registration fails or refuses to furnish any information requested by the board in writing concerning the applicant's ability, training, experience or performance as an electrician. 
(f)  It shall be a ground for suspension or revocation of a registration issued to a journeyman electrician for any such electrician to undertake any electrical work when such electrical work is not under the supervision of a master electrician or industrial electrician. 
(g)  It shall be a ground for suspension, only of a registration issued to a master electrician or industrial electrician, for any such electrician to fail to keep his current telephone number and address on file with the electrical inspector. 
(h)  It shall be a ground for revocation of a registration issued to any class of electrician for any such electrician to undertake any electrical work during the time his registration has been suspended by the board. 
(i)  It shall be a ground for suspension or revocation of a registration for any electrician authorized by this article to obtain permits for electrical work to undertake any electrical work without first obtaining the required permit, unless specifically authorized by this article to secure such permit at a later date. 
(j)  It shall be a ground for suspension or revocation of a registration issued to any class of electrician to perform any electrical work not authorized to be performed or undertaken under the terms of the registration held by such electrician. 
(k)  It shall be a ground for suspension or revocation of a registration issued to any master electrician or industrial electrician to allow any person to perform electrical work on a job site for which the electrician has secured a permit when such person is not authorized by this article to perform such electrical work. 
(Code 2001, § 22-360; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-361. - Appeal of revocation or suspension. 
(a)  Any person whose registration has been revoked or suspended by action of the Board of Electrical Examiners or any applicant for any class of registration who feels that he has been aggrieved by the action of the board because of any alleged arbitrary or capricious action of the board, may appeal this decision to the city council within ten days after the written decision of the board has been filed in the office of the secretary of the board and a copy has been served on the registrant. The filing of the notice of appeal by the registrant whose registration has been suspended or revoked shall operate to stay the suspension or revocation order until the city council renders its decision. 
(b)  The secretary of the board shall notify the city manager upon receipt of written notice of appeal filed in accordance with this section. The city manager shall, upon such notice, place the appeal on the next convenient city council agenda in accordance with this Code. The city council may affirm, modify or vacate any finding of the board of electrical examiners or enter any order which it may deem necessary. On entry of such order, the board shall within a reasonable time comply with such order, not to exceed 45 days from the execution of such order by the city council. 
(Code 2001, § 22-361; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-362. - City licensees. 
    An electrician licensed by the city on October 19, 2004, may continue to perform electrical work in the city provided his city license is registered, timely renewed and is otherwise maintained in good standing. Except for the licensing requirements of section 32-346(a), an electrician performing work under a city license shall comply with all requirements and shall be subject to all disciplinary action for a state licensee under this article. In the event a city licensee shall fail to renew his license within 31 days of expiration, he shall be required to obtain a state license before performing any electrical work that requires a license. 
(Code 2001, § 22-362; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Secs. 22-363-22-400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ELECTRICAL STANDARDS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Adoption of the National Electrical Code, Texas Local Government Code § 214.214. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 22-401. - National Electrical Code adopted by reference. 
    The National Electrical Code, 2005 edition, ANSI/NFPA 70, published by the National Fire Protection Association, is adopted as a part of this article as fully as if copied at length in this division. A copy of the National Electrical Code, 2005 edition, shall be filed with the City Clerk's office as a public record. If a conflict occurs with any provision of the National Electrical Code and this article, the sections of this article shall control. 
(Code 1966, § 14-35; Code 2001, § 22-401; Ord. No. 50-2002, § 1, 7-2-2002; Ord. No. 91-2002, § 1, 11-5-2002; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004; Ord. No. 74-2005, § 1, 9-20-2005) 
Sec. 22-402. - Scope. 
    All electrical work installed within the city shall be installed in conformity with this article, and it is declared to be unlawful for any person to install any electrical work in violation of this article and the provisions of the electrical code as adopted. 
(Code 1966, § 14-28; Code 2001, § 22-402; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-403. - Interpretations; appeals. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to interpret the sections of this article as may be necessary to administer and enforce this article. 
(b)  Any person, jointly or severally, who may be aggrieved by the interpretation of the electrical code rendered by the electrical inspector may appeal the decision of the electrical inspector to the Board of Electrical Examiners. 
(c)  Any person seeking to appeal the decision of the electrical inspector rendered in accordance with this section shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Written notice of the appeal must be made to the Board of Electrical Examiners within five days of the date on which the electrical inspector rendered his decision. 
(2)  The appeal must clearly set forth the decision of the electrical inspector, together with the position of the person taking the appeal to the board. 
(3)  The person seeking the appeal must set forth his reasons in support of his position, together with any evidence he may have in support of his position. 
(4)  The written appeal shall be filed with the secretary of the board. 
(5)  The electrical inspector shall have a period of five days from receipt of the appeal to file a response thereto with the board. 
(6)  In an emergency to life or property, which emergency shall be specifically set forth in the written appeal filed with the board, the board shall render a decision on such appeal within 24 hours from the time such appeal is filed with the board. The board shall determine in any such case whether or not a true emergency exists, and its decision in this regard shall be final. 
(7)  In every case to be heard by the board on an emergency basis, the electrical inspector shall be present and shall be allowed to present his position to the board. 
(8)  The decision of the board on any appeal taken under this section shall be final and binding. 
(Code 1966, § 14-29; Code 2001, § 22-403; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-404. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  Any electrical work performed by any electrical public utility holding a certificate of service from the state public utility commission and operating within the city. 
(2)  Any electrical work undertaken by the city in conjunction with street lighting or traffic-control signals. 
(3)  Any electrical work performed by a telephone, telegraph or district messenger company operating under a franchise issued by the city. 
(4)  Any electrical work performed by any broadcast transmission business or entity. 
The exceptions from this article in this subsection do not, however, authorize any of such classes of business named to perform electrical work for the general public or to do any other type of electrical work except that which is necessary and customary to the class of business involved. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the exception set forth in subsection (a) of this section, this article shall apply to the wiring and installation for light, heat and power for all buildings containing equipment or housing employees of any class of business excepted by subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to require a property owner to obtain a registration or furnish a certificate of insurance before doing electrical work in or on a building occupied by himself as a single-family residence, provided the following conditions exist: 
(1)  He has applied for and obtained a permit from the electrical inspector to do the electrical work. 
(2)  He has presented a set of plans showing the electrical work to be undertaken and such plans are found to conform to this article. 
(3)  He agrees to call for all inspections required by this article. 
(4)  He is able to demonstrate to the electrical inspector that he has a working knowledge of this article and the ability to do electrical work in conformance with the provisions of the electrical code. 
(5)  He agrees to correct any violations of this article found or discovered upon any inspection performed by the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1966, § 14-37; Code 2001, § 22-404; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-405. - Premises involved in fire; reinstatement of service. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the fire chief or the fire inspector to have the premises involved in a fire fully inspected by the electrical inspector when the chief of the Fire Department or the fire inspector determines that a fire originated due to any of the following causes: 
(1)  Faulty electrical wiring; 
(2)  Overloading of electrical equipment; 
(3)  Overloading of electrical lines; 
(4)  Unauthorized electrical installation; or 
(5)  Any damage to the electrical system by the fire. 
(b)  When the electrical inspector finds that a fire has caused damage to the electrical system or originated for any of the reasons set forth in subsection (a) of this section, no electrical service shall be reinstated or reconnected to the property by any electrician or by the owner of such property until such time as the conditions have been repaired in compliance with this article and approved by the electrical inspector. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the electrical inspector may approve temporary electrical service necessary to complete repairs or reconstruction of the property in question. 
(Code 1966, § 14-30; Code 2001, § 22-405; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-406. - Improperly installed or defective equipment. 
(a)  If any part of any electrical equipment or wiring in or about any building, facility, installation, premises or lot within the city is found to have been installed or connected in violation of this article, it shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to notify in writing the owner of the premises or the tenant of the premises or the person in possession of the premises to immediately cease using electrical current in any such violation identified by the electrical inspector. 
(b)  If any part of any electrical equipment or wiring in or about any building, facility, installation, premises or lot within the city is found to have fallen into a state of disrepair which would render the use of such electrical equipment dangerous to life or property, it shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to notify in writing the owner of the premises or the tenant of the premises or the person in possession of the premises to immediately cease using electrical current in any such violation or condition identified by the electrical inspector. 
(c)  The written notice required in this section shall state the following: 
(1)  The date that the inspection was made by the electrical inspector where a violation of this article or a condition dangerous to life or property is found. 
(2)  The section of this article or the electrical code which the inspection reveals has been violated. 
(3)  For conditions dangerous to life or property, a brief description of such conditions. 
(4)  A specified time, not to exceed ten days from the date of the written notice, to correct all violations identified or to correct all conditions identified as dangerous to life or property. 
(5)  A statement advising the owner, tenant or person in control and possession of the building, facility, installation, premises or lot that, if there are any persons using the area in question who require electrical service for life support, it is the duty of the person receiving this notice immediately and without failure to notify the electrical inspector of such fact. 
(d)  If the owner, tenant or person in possession of the premises identified in the written notice given pursuant to this section fails to take action necessary to correct any and all such violations or conditions dangerous to life or property within the time limit specified in the written notice, the electrical inspector shall take the following action: 
(1)  The electrical inspector shall serve upon the owner, tenant or person in possession of the property an order to cease use of the property, facility, installation, premises or lot until such time as proof is presented to the electrical inspector that all defects have been corrected and such work is verified by inspection. 
(2)  When the violation of this article found to exist is of such a nature as to cause immediate danger to life or property, the electrical inspector shall issue an order to the public utility supplying such power to immediately terminate such electrical service until such time as all violations are corrected. 
(3)  If the owner, tenant or person in possession of the building, facility, installation, premises or lot fails to comply with an order of the electrical inspector issued under subsection (d)(1) of this section within three days of receipt of such order, the electrical inspector shall issue his order as provided in subsection (d)(2) of this section to the public utility providing the electrical services. 
(4)  Notwithstanding any provision set forth in subsections (d)(1) through (3) of this section, when the electrical inspector has been notified by the owner, tenant or person in possession of the building, facility, installation, premises or lot that there is a person residing within any of such structures or areas who requires electrical service for life support, the electrical inspector is authorized to take one or all of the following courses of action: 
a.  Notify the owner, tenant or person in possession of such structure or area to immediately make arrangement to provide an alternative location for the person involved. 
b.  Withhold taking action to terminate electrical service for a reasonable period of time not to exceed ten days. 
c.  Terminate all electrical service not necessary for the life support of the person involved. 
d.  Request the city attorney to seek a proper court order requiring the relocation of the person involved. 
(Code 1966, § 14-33; Code 2001, § 22-406; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-407. - Liability for defective work. 
    This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical wiring connections, fixtures, appliances, apparatus, machinery, equipment or work, inside or outside, overhead or underground, in the city for damages to any person injured by defects therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming any liability because of the inspection authorized by this article or certificate or permit issued as provided for and regulated. 
(Code 1966, § 14-34; Code 2001, § 22-407; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-408. - Construction against implicit repeal of article. 
    This article being a general ordinance intended as a unified coverage of its subject matter, no part of it shall be deemed to be implicitly repealed by subsequent ordinances if such construction can reasonably be avoided. 
(Code 1966, § 14-23; Code 2001, § 22-408; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-409. - Control of zoning ordinance. 
    Whenever there is a conflict between the sections of this article governing signs and the provisions of the city zoning ordinance in appendix B to this Code, the provisions of the zoning ordinance shall control. 
(Code 1966, § 14-24; Code 2001, § 22-409; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Secs. 22-410-22-435. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - General Specifications 

Sec. 22-436. - General installation of wiring, fixtures and apparatus. 
(a)  In the installation of all wiring, fixtures and apparatus, the rules and requirements adopted by section 22-401 shall be complied with, together with the rules contained in this article and such additional requirements as may from time to time be adopted. 
(b)  When an electrician or any homeowner has sought to install any type of electrical equipment and such equipment has been found not to comply with this article, the electrician or homeowner shall have the right to appeal the decision of the electrical inspector to the Board of Electrical Examiners in accordance with section 22-403. The board shall, upon such hearing, determine whether or not the type of electrical equipment sought to be installed by the electrician or homeowner is equivalent to the sections of this article. When the board determines that the equipment in question is equivalent to that required by this article, it shall enter an order to such effect, and the electrical inspector shall be governed by the terms of such order in all future cases where the same type of equipment is sought to be installed. 
(Code 1966, § 14-82; Code 2001, § 22-436; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-437. - Wiring. 
(a)  All electrical wiring shall be installed in rigid metallic conduit, electrical metallic tubing, approved metallic raceways, approved metal-clad cable, approved nonmetallic conduit and raceway or approved multi-outlet assemblies. However, all single-family and multifamily residences not exceeding three stories and outbuildings on the same premises may be wired in nonmetallic sheathed cable as a minimum requirement. However, if any part of a residence or other building is converted to any commercial purposes not within such exceptions, the entire building shall be classified as a business premises, and the entire building shall be rewired. All conduit installed for electrical use shall be installed under the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Electrical nonmetallic tubing (ENT) shall not be used in any location except where NM cable is acceptable in the city. 
(c)  Manufactured wiring systems as approved by electrical code adopted in this article shall be acceptable. 
(d)  No electrical metallic tubing (EMT) shall be permitted in any electrical installation where such tubing is in contact with the ground or earth or is embedded in a concrete slab. 
(e)  All MC cable shall have a green grounding conductor. 
(Code 1966, § 14-83; Code 2001, § 22-437; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-438. - Size of conductors; aluminum conductor. 
(a)  Aluminum conductors may be installed on service and feeders only and must be terminated properly using approved compression-type crimp lugs installed with a proper tool and with an approved inhibitor (Petrox). 
(b)  No aluminum conductors shall be installed on any branch circuits or grounding in dwellings. 
(Code 1966, § 14-84; Code 2001, § 22-438; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-439. - Residence circuits. 
    An electrical conduit of not less than three-fourths inch trade size shall be installed from the panel to an accessible crawl space in the attic, under the floor or to the outside of the house if it has no attic and has a concrete floor. This conduit is to facilitate the future installation of the two space circuits to be left open as spares in all residential panels. 
(Code 1966, § 14-85; Code 2001, § 22-439; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-440. - Commercial circuits. 
    Commercial electrical circuits shall be installed as required by the electrical code adopted in this article. 
(Code 1966, § 14-86; Code 2001, § 22-440; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-441. - Service entrance. 
(a)  All-metal entrances. An all-metal complete electrical service entrance shall be used from the point of contact with the electric company to the service switch or distribution panel except as provided in this article. Underground service entrance may be schedule 40 PVC. 
(b)  Busway entrance. Installations using a busway as a service entrance shall be made with a totally enclosed busway assembly and accessories approved for use as service entrance equipment and shall have totally enclosed weatherproof construction where used outside of a building. 
(c)  Overhead service drops. Overhead service drops shall be installed in accordance with the following: 
(1)  New installations. When a new electrical installation is to be served with an overhead service drop, a means of attachment shall be provided. When an electrical installation is started before the electric company facilities are placed, it shall be the responsibility of the electric company to determine the location of the facility from which the service drop for the electrical installation will be installed. The means of attachment shall be a clamp on a service mast or a galvanized hook bolt or eye bolt, rigidly attached to a rafter or stud to give adequate support to the service drop. Landing and meter heights shall comply with the utility company guidelines. 
(2)  Additions to existing installations. When an addition is to be made to an existing building that requires that the service entrance be relocated to the new portion of the building, the service entrance shall comply with the rules established for all new installations. 
(3)  Existing installations. When the meter loop is changed on an existing installation, the installation shall reasonably comply with the electrical code and this section without altering the roof of the existing building. The means of attachment shall be changed by the master electrician or the homeowner and shall be at the maximum height that can be maintained on the building. The new means of attachment shall be an eye bolt or hook bolt, rigidly attached to a rafter or stud and to give adequate support to the service drop. Other suitable means of attachment, including insulators attached with a single lag screw, may be approved by the electrical inspector if commonly accepted within the trade. 
(d)  Service mast. If a service mast is used to attain the height required by the electrical code, the service mast shall be a minimum two-inch IMC or rigid conduit having adequate strength to withstand the strain of the service drop and shall meet minimum standards established by the electric company and approved by the Board of Electrical Examiners as defined in the publication, "National Electrical Safety Code," from the electric company. 
(e)  Providing for metering. The master electrician or homeowner shall provide for and install facilities to accommodate metering of an electrical installation in accordance with uniform practices established by the electric company in accordance with the franchises granted by the city which conform to this article. The meter enclosure shall be mounted on the outside of a building near the point of contact between the electrical installation and the electric company service lines at a location that does not subject the enclosure to physical damage and will cause the meter to be readily accessible to representatives of the electric company for installing, replacing, removing, inspecting, testing and reading. Exceptions to the outside location may be made only by specific agreement with the electric company and with the approval of the electrical inspector. 
(f)  Enclosed metering. If the addition or alteration of any building encloses the metering installation such that it will no longer be in an accessible outside location, the metering installation shall be relocated to a point outside the addition or alteration, maintaining strict conformance to this article. 
(g)  Existing inside metering locations. Metering installations which are located inside a building shall be moved to an outside location at such time that changes, alterations or additions are made to the service entrance of the electrical installations. Metering installations moved outside shall conform to this article. 
(h)  Disconnecting switches. All disconnecting switches accessible to the general public under 200 amperes shall have raintight and dead-front panels. All disconnecting switches 200 amperes or over that are exposed or accessible to the general public shall have raintight and locked or bolted closed panels. 
(i)  Minimum conductor use. The service entrance shall conform to the electrical code, except that the entrance conductor size shall not be less than the equivalent of number 6 THW copper. 
(Code 1966, § 14-87; Code 2001, § 22-441; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-442. - Underground service entrance. 
(a)  Conductors. Electrical conductors and cables on underground service entrances may be installed in approved raceways or may be buried directly in the earth when approved direct burial cables are used. 
(b)  Mechanical protection. Rigid metal raceways or electrical metallic tubing shall be used on all underground service entrance conductors to provide mechanical protection where needed. Raceways approved for the purpose shall be provided for underground service entrance conductors entering under any projection of a building, such as, but not limited to, porches, patios, concrete driveways, walkways or pads adjacent to a building which does not provide adequate space between driveways, walkways or pads in order to permit repair or replacement of conductors, and the raceway shall be continuous from the point of entry under any projections to the service entrance switch or panel. 
(Code 1966, § 14-88; Code 2001, § 22-442; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-443. - Underground feeder circuits and branch circuits. 
    Electrical feeder circuits and branch circuits installed underground shall comply with the full requirements of section 22-442 for underground service entrances. 
(Code 1966, § 14-89; Code 2001, § 22-443; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-444. - Encroachment on public way. 
    Neither feeder circuits nor branch circuits on any private electrical installation shall extend into or cross over or under any street, alley or public way which has been dedicated for public use, except that an electrical installation which is confined within a building or structure where a license and hold harmless agreement has been approved by the city and projects into or crosses over or under a dedicated street, alley or public way will not be affected by this section. 
(Code 1966, § 14-90; Code 2001, § 22-444; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-445. - Buildings moved to location. 
    The electrical installation in any building or structure which is moved from outside of the city or within the city shall conform to the requirements of this article as though the building, structure or residence had been newly constructed on the location. 
(Code 1966, § 14-91; Code 2001, § 22-445; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-446. - Building remodeling and additions. 
    In a building, structure or residence which is altered, remodeled or added to, the electrical installation within the altered, remodeled or added-on portion shall conform to this article. 
(Code 1966, § 14-92; Code 2001, § 22-446; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-447. - Electric signs and outline lighting. 
(a)  New installation. All electric signs and outline lighting shall be installed in compliance with the electrical code adopted in this division, this Code, and this article. 
(b)  Existing installation. The electrical inspector, when he determines that any electric sign or outline light constitutes a hazard impairing safety of life or property, shall require that the sign or outline lighting installation be revised to meet the minimum standards established by this article and shall specify the time allowed for such revisions. If the required revisions are not completed within the time allotted, the electrical inspector shall order the electric sign or outline lighting disconnected from the power supply and the installation removed. Failure to comply with such a disconnect or removal order shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(c)  New installation. Any electrical installation on an electric sign after such sign is delivered to its permanent location shall be performed by a registered electrician. All new electric sign installations shall also require a permit and inspection and approval of the electrical installation by the electrical inspector. 
(d)  Sign installations to conform to zoning. No electrical permit shall be issued for any sign in a district where signs are prohibited by this zoning ordinance in appendix B to this Code, nor shall any permit be issued for any sign which does not conform to the zoning requirements of the area in which the sign is to be placed. 
(Code 1966, § 14-94; Code 2001, § 22-447; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-448. - Construction tap service posts. 
(a)  Specifications. The post used for a construction electrical tap service shall be equivalent to a four-inch by four-inch structural grade timber and shall have an overall length of not less than 16 feet. 
(b)  Installation. The construction tap service post shall be installed such that the post extends not less than three feet into undisturbed earth and shall be securely tamped in place. The post installation shall include supports, braces or guys necessary to maintain the post in a vertical position safely under the strain of the service drop conductors. 
(c)  Equipment. The construction tap service post shall be equipped with a raintight service entrance including metallic conduit from a raintight and dead-front service switch or panel board of adequate size to provide sufficient branch circuits to weatherproof receptacles. The service entrance shall have a minimum conductor size of number 6 THW copper wire and shall be grounded in accordance with this article. Receptacles only shall be used to supply power to extension cords, tools and special equipment. Receptacles shall be the grounding type and shall be rated for the voltage and current requirements of the load to be served. All 120-volt receptacles shall be GFI protected. 
(d)  Load wiring. All wiring connected to construction tap branch circuit receptacles shall be attached with approved plugs and shall comply with the requirements of the electrical code and this article. 
(e)  Use restricted. Construction tap service posts shall be used only for supplying specific construction project loads during the construction period and within the time period specified on the construction tap permit. 
(f)  Permits. Permits for construction tap service post shall only be issued to master electricians. 
(Code 1966, § 14-95; Code 2001, § 22-448; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-449. - Mobile homes and travel trailers. 
    Electrical service entrance equipment for mobile homes and travel trailers shall be considered as permanent electrical installations and shall meet the full requirements of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 14-96; Code 2001, § 22-449; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-450. - Temporary electrical installations. 
(a)  Permits. The electrical inspector is permitted to issue special limited permits for temporary electrical installations where, in his opinion, the installation is necessary or advisable for the benefit and protection of the public. 
(b)  Wiring methods. Wiring methods other than those required by this article may be allowed for temporary electrical installations, provided that such wiring methods shall be safe and adequate for the specified purpose and use and to the satisfaction of the electrical inspector. 
(c)  Time limitation. Permits for temporary electrical installations shall be for a specified time set by the electrical inspector and shall not exceed 90 days. 
(d)  Inspection. Any temporary installation shall be inspected and approved by the electrical inspector before it is connected to a power source. The use of any temporary installation shall be disconnected immediately upon expiration of the permit. 
(e)  Time extensions. If the temporary electrical installation is needed beyond the 90-day period, subsequent permits may be issued. An inspection shall be made before the issuance of any subsequent permit, and each subsequent permit shall be for a period not to exceed 90 days. 
(Code 1966, § 14-97; Code 2001, § 22-450; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-451. - Materials and equipment standards. 
(a)  Approved equipment. All electrical equipment, including materials, apparatuses, fixtures and appliances used on electrical installations, shall conform to standards set by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., and shall bear an Underwriters' Laboratories label or be certified as listed by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. 
(b)  Equipment use. Such electrical equipment shall be used only for the specific purpose for which it has been labeled or listed. 
(c)  Unstandardized equipment. Electrical equipment which has not been approved or for which standards have not been established by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., may be used on electrical installations, provided such electrical equipment is approved by the electrical inspector. 
(d)  Unapproved equipment. The electrical inspector shall deny approval for use of any electrical equipment which is not labeled or listed by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., when he reasonably believes the use of such equipment is unsafe or hazardous. 
(Code 1966, § 14-98; Code 2001, § 22-451; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-452. - Electrical fences. 
    All electrical fence installations shall require a permit in accordance with section 22-401. The materials and equipment used shall conform to the requirements of section 22-451. 
(Code 1966, § 14-99; Code 2001, § 22-452; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-453. - Low-voltage wiring. 
(a)  A low-voltage electrical system to be used to operate any mechanical system, air conditioning unit, central heating unit and other such system shall be installed under the supervision of a registered master electrician. This subsection is not to be construed as including self-generated control systems. 
(b)  All low-voltage transformers, such as may be used for doorbells, floor furnaces and other such installations, shall be installed in a convenient and readily accessible place. 
(c)  All wiring, line voltage or low voltage used for data processing or energy control and like systems shall be considered electrical work and must conform to this article. 
(d)  All other wiring shall conform to the electrical code adopted in this article. 
(Code 1966, § 14-100; Code 2001, § 22-453; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Sec. 22-454. - Existing installation. 
    Any electrical system or electrical equipment lawfully installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may have its existing use, maintenance or repair continued if the use is in accordance with the original design and location, and such system is not dangerous to public health, safety and welfare and is approved by the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1966, § 14-101; Code 2001, § 22-454; Ord. No. 85-2004, § 1, 10-19-2004) 
Secs. 22-455-22-480. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Plumbing and sewers, Texas Local Government Code § 214.011 et seq.; plumbers and plumbing code, Texas Occupations Code § 1301.001 et seq. 

Sec. 22-481. - Adopted. 
    The following portions of the 2015 International Plumbing Code, published by the International Code Council, are adopted by reference as though they were copied fully in this section: Chapters 2-15, and Appendices B through E. 
(Code 1966, § 7-14; Code 2001, § 22-481; Ord. No. 112-2003, § 1, 11-18-2003; Ord. No. 45-2007, § 2, 5-1-2007; Ord. No. 33-2011, § 2, 7-5-2011; Ord. No. 57-2015, § 2, 12-1-2015) 
State Law reference- Adoption of plumbing code, Texas Occupations Code § 1301.255. 
Sec. 22-482. - Changes, deletions and amendments. 
    The following changes, deletions and amendments are made to the specified sections in the 2015 International Plumbing Code adopted in Section 22-481. Where an adopted section of the 2015 International Plumbing Code has not been changed, deleted, or amended by this ordinance, it is adopted as worded in the 2015 International Plumbing Code. 
Section 202 General Definitions 
    Building Drain. That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system that receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside and that extends 3 feet in developed length of pipe beyond the exterior walls of the building and conveys the drainage to the building sewer. 
312.2 Drainage and vent water test. A water test shall be applied to the drainage system either in its entirety or in sections. If applied to the entire system, all openings in the piping shall be tightly closed, except the highest opening, and the system shall be filled with water to the point of overflow. If the system is tested in sections, each opening shall be tightly plugged except the highest openings of the section under test, and each section shall be filled with water, but no section shall be tested with less than a 10-foot (3048 mm) head of water. In testing successive sections, at least the upper 10 feet (3048 mm) of the next preceding section shall be tested so that no joint or pipe in the building, except the uppermost 10 feet (3048 mm) of the system, shall have been submitted to a test of less than a 10-foot (3048 mm) head of water. This pressure shall be held for at least 15 minutes. The system shall then be tight at all points. Drainage lines outside the building shall be exempt from this test unless covered by concrete or asphalt. In lieu of water tests an air test with 3 psi may be used with a 4" gas test gauge. Air tests shall be required when the City is under Stage 2 drought conditions. 
312.9 Shower liner test. Where shower floors and receptors are made water-tight by the application of materials required by Section 417.5.2, the completed liner installation shall be tested as required by the building official. The pipe from the shower drain shall be plugged water tight for the test. The floor and receptor area shall be filled with potable water to a depth of not less than 2 inches (51 mm) measured at the threshold. Where a threshold of at least 2 inches (51 mm) high does not exist, a temporary threshold shall be constructed to retain the test water in the lined floor or receptor area to a level not less than 2 inches (51 mm) deep measured at the threshold. The water shall be retained for a test period of not less than 15 minutes, and there shall not be evidence of leakage. 
312.10 Installation and testing of backflow prevention assemblies. Installation and testing shall comply with Sections 312.10.1 and 312.10.2. 
312.10.1 Installation. The installation of all devices used for the prevention of backflow or back siphonage shall meet the requirements of International Plumbing Code Table 608.1. Devices installed in a potable water supply for protection against backflow shall be testable and be maintained in an operable condition by the property owner or other person having control of such devices. The building official shall require periodic testing of such devices and, when found to be inoperative or defective, shall require that such devices be repaired or replaced. 
312.10.2 Testing. All backflow prevention devices shall be tested in accordance with manufacturer's recommended performance standards. Testing shall be conducted at the time of installation, then every five years thereafter. If the device is repaired or relocated, testing of the device shall be conducted at the time of repair or relocation, and every five years of service thereafter. Backflow devices used in hazardous applications shall be tested annually. 
314.2.3. Auxiliary and secondary drain systems. In addition to the requirements of Section 314.2.1, where damage to any building components could occur as a result of overflow from the equipment primary condensate removal system, one of the following auxiliary protection methods shall be provided for each cooling coil or fuel-fired appliance that produces condensate: 
403.2 Separate facilities. Where plumbing fixtures are required, separate facilities shall be provided for each sex. 
Exceptions: 
2.  Separate facilities shall not be required in structures or tenant spaces with a total occupant load, including both employees and customers, of 25 or fewer. 
410.2 Small occupancies. Drinking fountains shall not be required for an occupant load of 25 or fewer. 
413.3 Commercial food waste disposer waste outlets. Commercial food waste disposers shall be connected to a drain not less than 1 1/2 inches (38 mm) in diameter. Commercial food waste disposers shall be connected and trapped separately from any other fixtures or sink compartments and shall have a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
424.9 Water closet personal hygiene devices. Personal hygiene devices integral to water closets or water closet seats shall have a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer and shall conform to the requirements of ASME A112.4.2. 
504.7 Required pan. Where a storage tank-type water heater or a hot water storage tank is installed in a location where water leakage from the tank will cause damage, the tank shall be installed in a galvanized steel pan having a material thickness of not less than 0.0236 inch (0.6010 mm) (No. 24 gage), or other pans approved for such use. Tankless water heater installations in an attic shall require a pan. If an existing installation is being replaced and does not include a pan, a pan need not be installed for the replacement water heater or hot water storage tank where the building official determines that a drain is not readily accessible. 
504.7.1 Pan size and drain. The pan shall be not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in depth and shall be of sufficient size and shape to receive all dripping or condensate from the tank or water heater. The pan shall be drained by an indirect waste pipe having a diameter of not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm). Piping for safety pan drains shall be Schedule 40 PVC or those materials listed in Table 605.4. 
504.7.2 Pan drain termination. The pan drain shall extend full size and terminate over a suitably located indirect waste receptor or floor drain or of the building and terminate not less than 6 inches (152 extend to the exterior mm) and not more than 24 inches (610 mm) above the adjacent ground surface. 
504.7.3 Water detection device. A water detection device with alarm shall be installed in drain pans when the pan does not conform to Section 504.7.2. 
607.2 Hot or tempered water supply to fixtures. In new installations, the developed length of hot or tempered water piping, from the source of hot water to the fixtures that require hot or tempered water, shall not exceed 50 feet (15 240 mm). Recirculating system piping and heat-traced piping shall be considered to be sources of hot or tempered water. 
608.7 Water Supply Control. An accessible one-fourth turn ball valve shall be installed outside, near the entrance of the water service pipe to the building or structure. The valve shall be a full port bronze one-fourth turn ball valve, 400 WOG (nonshock), 125 psi saturated stream. It shall be located and accessible in a valve box with a readily removable access cover which extends to grade level. 
608.7.1 Valves and outlets prohibited below grade. Potable water outlets and combination stop-and-waste valves shall not be installed underground or below grade. Freezeproof yard hydrants that drain the riser into the ground are considered to be stop-and-waste valves. 
Exception: Freezeproof yard hydrants that drain the riser into the ground shall be permitted to be installed, provided that the potable water supply to such hydrants is protected upstream of the hydrants in accordance with Section 608 and the hydrants are permanently identified as nonpotable outlets by approved signage that reads as follows: "Caution, Nonpotable Water. Do Not Drink." 
708.1.3 Building drain and building sewer junction. The junction of the building drain and the building sewer shall be served by a cleanout raised 6 inches above grade that is located outside the building within 3 feet of the building wall. For the requirements of this section, the removal of the water closet shall not be required to provide cleanout access. 
712.3.3 Discharge pipe and fittings. Discharge pipe and fittings serving sump pumps and ejectors shall be constructed of materials in accordance with Sections 712.3.3.1 and 712.3.3.2 and shall be approved. 
712.3.3.1 Materials. Pipe and fitting materials shall be constructed of brass, copper, CPVC, ductile iron, galvanized pipe, PE, or PVC. 
802.3 Waste receptors. For other than hub drains that receive only clear-water waste and standpipes, a removable strainer or basket shall cover the outlet of waste receptors. Waste receptors shall not be installed in concealed spaces. Waste receptors shall not be installed in plenums, crawl spaces, interstitial spaces above ceilings and below floors. Ready access shall be provided to waste receptors. 
1002.4 Trap seals. Each fixture trap shall have a liquid seal of not less than 2 inches (51 mm) and not more than 4 inches (102 mm), or deeper for special designs relating to accessible fixtures. 
1002.4.1 Trap seal protection. Trap seals of emergency floor drain traps and trap seals subject to evaporation shall be protected by one of the methods in Sections 1002.4.1.1 through 1002.4.1.4. 
1002.4.1.1 Reclaimed or gray water-supplied trap seal primer valve. A reclaimed or gray water-supplied trap seal primer valve shall supply water to the trap. Water-supplied trap seal primer valves shall conform to ASSE 1018. The quality of reclaimed or gray water supplied to trap seal primer valves shall be in accordance with the requirements of the manufacturer of the trap seal primer valve. The discharge pipe from the trap seal primer valve shall connect to the trap above the trap seal, on the inlet side of the trap. 
1002.4.1.2 Waste water-supplied trap primer device. A waste water-supplied trap primer device shall supply water to the trap. Waste water-supplied trap primer devices shall conform to ASSE 1044. The discharge pipe from the trap seal primer device shall connect to the trap above the trap seal on the inlet side of the trap. 
1002.4.1.3 Barrier-type trap seal protection device. A barrier-type trap seal protection device shall protect the floor drain trap seal from evaporation. Barrier-type floor drain trap seal protection devices shall conform to ASSE 1072. The devices shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
1302.2 Sources. On-site nonpotable water reuse systems shall collect waste discharge from only the following sources: bathtubs, showers and lavatories. Water from other approved nonpotable sources including swimming pool backwash operations, air conditioner condensate, rainwater, cooling tower blow-down water, foundation drain water, steam system condensate, fluid cooler discharge water, food steamer discharge water, combi- nation oven discharge water, industrial process water and fire pump test water shall also be permitted to be collected for reuse by on-site nonpotable water reuse systems, as approved by the code official and as appropriate for the intended application. 
(Code 1966, § 7-16; Code 2001, § 22-482; Ord. No. 112-2003, §§ 2, 3, 11-18-2003; Ord. No. 83-2006, § 1, 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 16-2007, § 3, 2-6-2007; Ord. No. 45-2007, § 2, 5-1-2007; Ord. No. 53-2010, § 5, 9-21-2010; Ord. No. 33-2011, § 2, 7-5-2011; Ord. No. 57-2015, § 2, 12-1-2015) 
Secs. 22-483-22-510. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 22-511. - Adopted. 
    The following portions of the 2015 International Mechanical Code, published by the International Code Council, are adopted by reference as though they were copied fully in this section: Chapters 2-15. 
(Code 1966, § 7-14; Code 2001, § 22-511; Ord. No. 110-2003, § 1, 11-18-2003; Ord. No. 45-2007, § 3, 5-1-2007; Ord. No. 33-2011, § 3, 7-5-2011; Ord. No. 57-2015, § 3, 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 22-512. - Changes, deletions and amendments. 
    The following changes, deletions and amendments are made to the specified sections in the 2015 International Mechanical Code adopted in Section 22-511. Where an adopted section of the 2015 International Mechanical Code has not been changed, deleted, or amended by this ordinance, it is adopted as worded in the 2015 International Mechanical Code. 
307.2.3. Auxiliary and secondary drain systems. In addition to the requirements of Section 307.2.1, where damage to any building components could occur as a result of overflow from the equipment primary condensate removal system, one of the following auxiliary protection methods shall be provided for each cooling coil or fuel-fired appliance that produces condensate: 
504.5 Dryer exhaust duct power ventilators. Domestic dryer exhaust duct power ventilators shall be listed and labeled to UL 705 for use in dryer exhaust duct systems. The dryer exhaust duct power ventilator shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and readily accessible. 
(Code 1966, § 7-18; Code 2001, § 22-512; Ord. No. 110-2003, §§ 2, 3, 11-18-2003; Ord. No. 16-2007, § 4, 2-6-2007; Ord. No. 45-2007, § 3, 5-1-2007; Ord. No. 53-2010, § 5, 9-21-2010; Ord. No. 33-2011, § 3, 7-5-2011; Ord. No. 57-2015, § 3, 12-1-2015) 
Secs. 22-513-22-540. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HOUSING CODE 

Sec. 22-541. - Adopted. 
    The Standard Housing Code, 1997 edition, published by the Southern Standard Building Code Congress International, Inc., and the whole of such code, save and except such portions as may be amended in this article, is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set forth at length in this section. The provisions of the Standard Housing Code shall be controlling in the use, maintenance and occupancy of all dwellings, dwelling units and/or structures within the city. One copy of such code is on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Code 1966, § 181/4-1; Code 2001, § 22-541) 
Sec. 22-542. - Construction of terms. 
    Whenever the term "building official" is used in the Standard Housing Code adopted in section 22-541, it shall be held to mean the city's chief building inspector. 
(Code 1966, § 181/4-2; Code 2001, § 22-542) 
Sec. 22-543. - Amendments. 
    The following amendments are made in the housing code adopted in section 22-541: 
Section 106.1 Appointment. Section 106.1 is amended to read as follows: 
There is hereby established a board to be called the construction board of adjustment and appeals which shall consist of nine regular members and two alternate members. The board shall be appointed by the applicable governing body. 
Section 106.2.1 Membership. Section 106.2.1 is amended to read as follows: 
The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall be composed of one general building contractor, one mechanical engineer, one structural engineer, one architect, one person representing the home building industry, one plumbing contractor, one air conditioning contractor, one person representing the property insurance industry and one citizen at large not connected with the construction industry. The two alternate members shall consist of one general building contractor and one person representing the home building industry. A board member shall not act in any case where he has a financial interest. Board members' terms shall expire on December 31. 
Section 106.2.2 Terms. Section 106.2.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Of the regular members first appointed, three shall be appointed for terms of one year, three shall be appointed for terms of two years and three shall be appointed for terms of three years. The two alternate members shall be appointed for two-year terms. In no case shall a member serve more than six consecutive years. Continued absence of any member from required meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the applicable governing body, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
Section 106.2.3 Quorum and Voting. Section 106.2.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Five members of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of this code or modifying a decision of the building official, affirmative votes of the majority present, but not less than five affirmative votes, shall be required. In the event that regular members are unable to attend a meeting, the alternate members shall vote. 
Section 106.3 Board Acting in an Advisory Capacity. Section 106.3 is amended to read as follows: 
In addition to other duties noted herein, the board shall act as an advisory board on matters of building code requirements, modifications or amendments. The board may hear evidence of any proposals from the building code administrator or other persons and may present opinions of such proposals to the city council for further action. 
Section 108 Violations and Penalties. Section 108 is amended to read as follows: 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish or move any structure, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building or structure in violation of this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished by a fine as provided in the Code of Ordinances, City of Wichita Falls, section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 181/4-3; Code 2001, § 22-543) 
Secs. 22-544-22-570. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - GAS CODE 

Sec. 22-571. - Adopted. 
    The following portions of the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code, published by the International Code Council, are adopted by reference as though they were copied fully in this section: Chapters 2-8, and Appendices A through D. 
(Code 1966, § 7-14; Code 2001, § 22-571; Ord. No. 111-2003, § 1, 11-18-2003; Ord. No. 45-2007, § 4, 5-1-2007; Ord. No. 33-2011, § 4, 7-5-2011; Ord. No. 57-2015, § 4, 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 22-572. - Changes, deletions and amendments. 
    The following changes, deletions and amendments are made to the specified sections in the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code adopted in Section 22-571. Where an adopted section of the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code has not been changed, deleted, or amended by this ordinance, it is adopted as worded in the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code. 
304.10 Size of openings. The required size of openings for combustion, ventilation and dilution air shall be 1 square inch of uninterrupted combustion air per 1000 Btu, or as specified in the manufacturer's recommendation, whichever is greater 
310.1.1 CSST. Unless manufacturers recommendations state otherwise, corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) gas piping systems and piping systems containing one or more segments of CSST shall be bonded to the electrical service grounding electrode system or, where provided, the lightning protection grounding electrode system. 
403.10.4 Metallic fittings. Metallic fittings shall comply with the following: 
(Code 1966, § 7-17; Code 2001, § 22-572; Ord. No. 111-2003, §§ 2, 3, 11-18-2003; Ord. No. 45-2007, § 4, 5-1-2007; Ord. No. 33-2011, § 4, 7-5-2011; Ord. No. 57-2015, § 4, 12-1-2015) 
Secs. 22-573-22-600. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Substandard buildings, Texas Local Government Code § 214.001 et seq. 

Sec. 22-601. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dangerous building or structure means all buildings or structures of any nature that are found to be dangerous structures or buildings or dilapidated buildings or structures or buildings or structures that are calculated to increase the fire hazard; that injure, hurt or harm individuals; that may hurt or annoy the lands, tenements, hereditaments of another; or which endanger life or health or violate laws of decency or obstruct the reasonable and comfortable use of property or are subversive of public order, decency or morals and which have any one or all of the following defects: 
(1)  Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33 percent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting members or 50 percent of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
(2)  Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the city. 
(3)  Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or which utterly fail to provide amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation or are likely to cause sickness or disease so as to cause injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein. 
(4)  Those that have light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein. 
(5)  Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other means of communications. 
(6)  Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property. 
(7)  Those which have a foundation that is not so free of holes, cracks, buckling, crumbling and defects as to support adequately the dwelling structure. 
(8)  Those which do not have a floor, exterior wall and roof that are so free of holes, cracks and loose, rotten, warped or protruding boards as to protect the occupants of the dwelling or dwelling unit reasonably from weather elements and from danger of collapse. 
(9)  Those buildings or structures existing in violation of any provision of the city building code or any provision of the city fire code or other sections of this Code or city ordinances. 
(Code 1966, § 7-25; Code 2001, § 22-601) 
Sec. 22-602. - Public nuisances. 
    All dangerous buildings and structures within the terms of section 22-601 are declared to be public nuisances and shall be vacated and repaired or demolished as provided in this article. 
(Code 1966, § 7-26; Code 2001, § 22-602) 
Sec. 22-603. - Standards for repair, vacation or demolition. 
    The following standards shall be followed in substance by the building inspector, fire marshal and the city council, acting in its capacity as Building Commission under the terms of this article, in ordering vacation and repair or demolition: 
(1)  If the dangerous building or structure can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of this article, it shall be ordered repaired. 
(2)  If the dangerous building or structure is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the health, safety, morals or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
(3)  When a dangerous building or structure is 50 percent or more damaged, decayed or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be demolished, and when a building or structure cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of this article, it shall be demolished. When a dangerous building or structure is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of this article or any city ordinance or state statutes, it shall be demolished. Included in the term "demolished" in this article is the cleaning of the property and removing all debris and trash. 
(4)  All refuse and debris resulting from the demolition of a dangerous building or structure may be disposed of at the landfill without charge if such building or structure was located within the corporate limits, has been declared dangerous under this article and has been demolished by an authorized contractor or the owner of the building or structure. 
(Code 1966, § 7-27; Code 2001, § 22-603) 
Sec. 22-604. - Duties of building code administrator. 
    Under this article, the building code administrator shall: 
(1)  Inspect or cause to be inspected, when necessary, all public buildings, schools, halls, churches, theaters, hotels, tenements or apartments, other multifamily residences, and commercial manufacturing buildings for the purpose of determining whether any conditions exist which render any such place a dangerous building or structure within the terms of section 22-601. 
(2)  Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are filed by any person to the effect that a building wall or structure is or may be existing in violation of this article. 
(3)  Determine the names and current addresses of the owners and other persons having an interest in any building found to be a dangerous building or structure by reviewing the deed records of the county in which the structure is situated. 
(4)  Provide written notice to the owner and other persons having an interest in the structure by personal service or certified mail at their current addresses. If the owner and other interested persons or their current addresses cannot be determined, such notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(5)  Set forth in the notice provided for in subsection (4) of this section, a description of the building or structure deemed unsafe, a statement of the particulars which make the building or structure a dangerous building or structure, and an order requiring the building or structure to be put in such condition as to comply with this article. Such order shall state that: 
a.  The owner shall vacate, repair or demolish the building or structure in accordance with the terms of this notice and this article. 
b.  The occupant or lessee must vacate the building or structure or may have it repaired in accordance with the notice and remain in possession. 
c.  The owner or other person having an interest in the building or structure may at his own risk repair or demolish the building or structure or have such work or act done, provided that any person notified under this subsection to repair or demolish any building or structure shall be given such reasonable time, not exceeding 60 days, prior to a public hearing, as may be necessary to do or have done the work or act required by the notice provided for in this subsection. 
(6)  Report to the city council, in its capacity as Building Commission, any noncompliance with the notice provided for in subsections (4) and (5) of this section. 
(7)  Appear at all hearings conducted by the city council, in its capacity as Building Commission, and testify as to the conditions of the dangerous building. 
(8)  Place a note on all dangerous buildings, upon a determination by the city council that the structure is hazardous, reading as follows: 
"This building has been found to be a dangerous building by the City of Wichita Falls Building Code Administrator or his designee. This notice is to remain on the building until it is repaired, vacated, or demolished in accordance with the notice which has been given the owner. It is unlawful to remove this notice until such notice is complied with." 
(Code 1966, § 7-28; Code 2001, § 22-604) 
Sec. 22-605. - Duties of city council. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a report of the building code administrator as provided for in section 22-604(6), notice shall be given as required by section 22-604(4) to the owners and all other persons having an interest in the building to appear before the Building Commission on a date specified in the notice to show cause why the building or structure reported to be a dangerous building or structure should not be repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with the statement of particulars set forth in the building code administrator's notice provided for in section 22-604(5). 
(b)  The city council shall hold a hearing and hear such testimony as the building code administrator and the owner or any other person having an interest in the building shall offer relative to the determination of the question or whether the building or structure in question is a dangerous building. 
(c)  The city council may make written findings of fact from the testimony offered, pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, as to whether or not the building in question is a dangerous building within the terms of section 22-601. 
(d)  In conducting a hearing authorized under this section, the city council shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the building to, within 30 days: 
(1)  Secure the building from unauthorized entry; or 
(2)  Repair, remove or demolish the building, unless the owner or lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days. 
(e)  If the city council, acting as Building Commission, allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 30 days to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the city council shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed, as determined by the hearing official. 
(f)  The city council, acting as Building Commission, may not allow the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to repair, remove, or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee: 
(1)  Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and 
(2)  Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within 90 days because of the scope and complexity of the work. 
(g)  If the city council, acting as Building Commission, allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than 90 days to complete any part of the work required to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the city council shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the code enforcement division to demonstrate that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has complied with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work. The order may also require that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee appear before the city council to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules. 
(h)  In a public hearing to determine whether a building complies with the standards set out in an ordinance adopted under this section, the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with the ordinance and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. 
(i)  Upon a determination that the building or structure in question does constitute a dangerous building or structure within the meaning of section 22-601, the city council shall issue an order based upon findings of facts made pursuant to subsection (c) of this section commanding the owner or any other person having an interest in the building to repair, vacate or demolish any building found to be a dangerous building within the terms of this article. 
(j)  If, at the expiration of 30 days from the determination that the building or structure is a dangerous building and the building or structure has not been repaired, vacated or demolished, it shall be demolished or removed at the expense of the city by the city or its contractor, and the expenses shall be assessed on the land on which the building stood or to which it was attached. The materials of such building shall be sold and the net cost of the demolition or removal shall be charged to the owner of the property. If any balance remains, it shall be held for the owner or any other parties entitled thereto. If the cost of the demolition or removal exceeds the value of the materials of such building, such excess shall be assessed against the land and shall be a personal liability and charged against the owner thereof. Such expenses shall be recovered by the city by the means available under the law, including forced sale of the property by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 7-29; Code 2001, § 22-605; Ord. No. 94-2002, § 2, 11-5-2002) 
Sec. 22-606. - Immediate demolition to preserve life and property. 
    Notwithstanding all other sections of this article, nothing in this article shall be deemed a limitation on the duty of the city to summarily order the demolition of any building or structure where it is apparent that the immediate demolition of such building or structure is necessary to the preservation of life and property in the city. 
(Code 1966, § 7-30; Code 2001, § 22-606) 
Sec. 22-607. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  The owner of any dangerous structure or building who shall fail to comply with any notice or order to repair, vacate or demolish such building or structure, such notice or order given by the authority of the Building Commission, shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section 1-14, and each day the violation continues shall constitute a new offense. 
(b)  The occupant or lessee in possession of any dangerous building or structure who fails to comply with any notice or order to vacate such building or structure and fails to repair such building or structure, given by authority of the building commission, shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section 1-14, and each day the violation continues shall constitute a new offense. 
(c)  Any person removing the notice provided for in section 22-604(7) shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 7-31; Code 2001, § 22-607) 
Sec. 22-608. - Transfer of ownership of hazardous structures. 
    No owner of any building used or designed or intended to be used for human habitation upon whom a notice has been served that a violation of this article exists in such building or on its premises shall sell, transfer, grant, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such property until compliance with such notice or order has been secured or until such owner shall have furnished to the purchaser, transferee, grantee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of such notice or order and at the same time shall have given written notification to the code enforcement official of his intent to enter into such transaction, including supplying the name and address of the person to whom the sale, transfer, grant, mortgage or lease is proposed. A purchaser who has been informed of the existence of any notice or order pursuant to this article shall be bound thereby. 
(Code 1966, § 7-33; Code 2001, § 22-608) 
Secs. 22-609-22-635. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - EXCAVATIONS, GRADING AND EARTHWORK CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 22-636. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    As-graded means the surface conditions extent on completion of grading. 
    Bedrock means in-place solid rock. 
    Bench means a relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill is to be placed. 
    Borrow means earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading on a site. 
    Certification means a written engineering or geological opinion concerning the progress and completion of the work. 
    Civil engineer means a professional engineer registered in the state to practice in the field of civil works. 
    Civil engineering means the application of the knowledge of the forces of nature, principles of mechanics and the properties of materials to the evaluation, design and construction of civil works for the beneficial uses of mankind. 
    Compaction means the densification of a fill by mechanical means. 
    Completed residential subdivision means a subdivision in which more than 90 percent of the lots established pursuant to its original final plat contain a residence. For purposes of this definition, a replatted lot shall be considered to be part of the original final platted subdivision in which it was originally platted and shall not cause a subdivision to not be considered a completed residential subdivision. 
    Earth material means any rock, natural soil or fill and/or any combination thereof. 
    Engineering geologist means a geologist experienced and knowledgeable in engineering geology. 
    Engineering geology means the application of geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works. 
    Erosion means the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water and/or ice. 
    Excavation means the mechanical removal of earth material. 
    Existing grade means the grade prior to grading. 
    Fill means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means. 
    Finish grade means the final grade of the site which conforms to the approved plan. 
    Grade means the vertical location of the ground surface. 
    Grading means any excavating or filling or combination thereof. 
    Key means a designed compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material beneath the toe of a proposed fill slope. 
    Nuisance means an obnoxious creation of dust and/or noise that interferes with the rights of nearby residential property owners. 
    Rough grade means the state at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan. 
    Site means any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership, where grading is performed or permitted. 
    Slope means an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. 
    Soil means naturally occurring surficial deposits overlying bedrock. 
    Soil engineer means a civil engineer experienced and knowledgeable in the practice of soil engineering. 
    Soil engineering means the application of the principles of soil mechanics in the investigation, evaluation and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection and testing of the construction thereof. 
    Terrace means a relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes. 
(Code 1966, § 7-57; Code 2001, § 22-636; Ord. No. 12-2013, § 1(22-636), 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 22-637. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to safeguard life, limb, property and the public welfare by regulating grading on private property. 
(Code 1966, § 7-54; Code 2001, § 22-637) 
Sec. 22-638. - Grading permit required. 
    No person shall do any grading without first having obtained a grading permit from the building code administrator except for the following: 
(1)  Grading in an isolated, self-contained area if there is no danger or nuisance apparent to private or public property. Grading in a completed residential subdivision will not be considered to be in an isolated, self-contained area if the building code administrator determines that the grading constitutes a danger or nuisance to nearby properties and notifies the owner of the property being graded of the danger or nuisance. 
(2)  An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, retaining wall or other structure authorized by a valid building permit. This shall not exempt any fill excavation having an unsupported height greater than five feet after the completion of such structure. 
(3)  Cemetery graves. 
(4)  Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations. 
(5)  Excavations for wells or tunnels or utilities. 
(6)  Exploratory excavations under the direction of soil engineers or engineering geologists. 
(7)  An excavation which: 
a.  Is less than two feet in depth; or 
b.  Does not create a cut slope greater than five feet in height and steeper than 11/2 horizontal to one vertical. 
(8)  A fill less than one foot in depth, and placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter than five horizontal to one vertical, or less than three feet in depth, not intended to support structures, which does not exceed 50 cubic yards on any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course. 
(Code 1966, § 7-55; Code 2001, § 22-638; Ord. No. 12-2013, § 2(22-638), 3-19-2013) 
Sec. 22-639. - Grading permit regulations. 
(a)  Permits required. Except as exempted in section 22-638, no person shall do any grading without first obtaining a grading permit from the building code administrator. A separate permit shall be required for each site and may cover both excavations and fills. 
(b)  Application. The provisions of section 106 of the building code adopted in section 22-26 shall be applicable to grading, and, in addition, the application for the permit shall state the estimated quantities of work involved. 
(c)  Plans and specifications. When required by the building code administrator, each application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by two sets of plans and specifications, and supporting data consisting of a soil engineering report and engineering geology report. The plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer when required by the building code administrator. 
(d)  Information on plans and in specifications. Plans shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper or cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the sections of this Code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give the location of the work and the name and address of the owner and the person by whom they were prepared. The plans shall include the following information: 
(1)  General vicinity of the proposed site. 
(2)  Property limits and accurate contours of existing ground and details of terrain and area drainage. 
(3)  Limiting dimensions, elevations or finish contours to be achieved by the grading, and proposed drainage channels and related construction. 
(4)  Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls, cribbing, dams and other protective devices to be constructed with or as a part of the proposed work together with a map showing the drainage area and the estimated runoff of the area served by any drains. 
(5)  Location of any buildings or structures on the property where the work is to be performed, and the location of any buildings or structures on land of adjacent owners which are within 15 feet of the property or which may be affected by the proposed grading operations. 
Specifications shall contain information covering construction and material requirements. 
(e)  Soil engineering report. The soil engineering report required by subsection (c) of this section shall include data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils; conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures and design criteria for corrective measures when necessary; and opinions and recommendations covering adequacy of sites to be developed by the proposed grading. Recommendations included in the report and approved by the building code administrator shall be incorporated in the grading plans or specifications. 
(f)  Engineering geology report. The engineering geology report required by subsection (c) of this section shall include an adequate description of the geology of the site, conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development, and opinions and recommendations covering the adequacy of sites to be developed by the proposed grading. Recommendations included in the report and approved by the building code administrator shall be incorporated in the grading plans or specifications. 
(g)  Issuance; modification of grading operations, project designs. The provisions of section 106 of the building code adopted in section 22-26 are applicable to grading permits. The building code administrator may require that grading operations and project designs be modified if delays occur which incur weather-generated problems not considered at the time the permit was issued. 
(Code 1966, § 7-58; Code 2001, § 22-639) 
Sec. 22-640. - Bonds. 
(a)  The building code administrator may require bonds in such form and amounts as may be deemed necessary to ensure that the work performed pursuant to this article, if not completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, will be corrected to eliminate hazardous conditions. 
(b)  In lieu of a surety bond, the applicant may file a cash bond or instrument of credit with the building code administrator in an amount equal to that which would be required in the surety bond. 
(Code 1966, § 7-59; Code 2001, § 22-640) 
Sec. 22-641. - Hazards. 
    Whenever the building code administrator determines that any existing excavation or embankment or fill on private property has become a hazard to life and limb or endangers property or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the excavation or fill is located or other person or agent in control of such property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the building code administrator, shall, within the period specified in the notice, repair or eliminate such excavation or embankment so as to eliminate the hazard and be in conformance with this article. 
(Code 1966, § 7-56; Code 2001, § 22-641) 
Sec. 22-642. - Cuts. 
(a)  Generally. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved soil engineering and/or engineering geology report, cuts shall conform to this section. 
(b)  Slope. The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. Cut slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical. 
(c)  Drainage and terracing. Drainage and terracing shall be provided as required by section 22-645. 
(Code 1966, § 7-60; Code 2001, § 22-642) 
Sec. 22-643. - Fills. 
(a)  Generally. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved soil engineering report, fills shall conform to this section. In the absence of an approved soil engineering report, this section may be waived for minor fills not intended to support structures. 
(b)  Fill location. Fill slopes shall not be constructed on natural slopes deeper than two to one or where the fill slope toes out within 12 feet horizontally of the top of existing or planned cut slopes. 
(c)  Preparation of ground. The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, noncomplying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable materials as determined by the soil engineer and, where the slopes are five to one or steeper, by benching into sound bedrock or other competent material. 
(d)  Fill material. Earth materials which have no more than minor amounts of organic substances and have no rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension greater than eight inches shall be used. 
(e)  Compaction. All fills shall be compacted to a minimum of 90 percent of maximum density as determined by state Highway Department Test No. 113E. Field density shall be determined in accordance with such test No. 113E or equivalent as approved by the building code administrator. 
(f)  Slope. The slope of fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. Fill slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical. 
(g)  Drainage and terracing. Drainage and terracing shall be provided and the area above fill slopes and the surfaces of terraces shall be graded and paved as required by section 22-645. 
(Code 1966, § 7-61; Code 2001, § 22-643) 
Sec. 22-644. - Setbacks. 
(a)  The tops and the toes of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from property boundaries as far as necessary for safety of the adjacent properties and to prevent damage resulting from water runoff or erosion of the slopes. 
(b)  The tops and the toes of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from structures as far as is necessary for adequacy of foundation support and to prevent damage as a result of water runoff or erosion of the slopes. 
(Code 1966, § 7-62; Code 2001, § 22-644) 
Sec. 22-645. - Drainage and terracing. 
(a)  Generally. Unless otherwise indicated on the approved grading plan, drainage facilities and terracing shall conform to this section. 
(b)  Excavation. Any excavation permitted under this article shall be designed in such a manner that drainage will be attained. No ponding or retention will be allowed. Drainage in connection with permitted excavation shall be designed to carry waters to the nearest practical drainageway as approved by the building code administrator. 
(c)  Terraces. Terraces at least six feet in width shall be established at not more than 30-foot vertical intervals to control surface drainage and debris. Suitable access shall be provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance. Swales or ditches on terraces shall have a minimum gradient of five percent and must be paved with reinforced concrete not less than three inches in thickness or an approved equal paving. Terraces shall have a minimum depth at the deepest point of one foot and a minimum paved width of five feet. A single runoff swale or ditch shall not collect runoff from a tributary area exceeding 13,500 square feet (projected) without discharging into a down drain. 
(d)  Subsurface drainage. Cut and fill slopes shall be provided with subsurface drainage as necessary for stability. 
(e)  Disposal. 
(1)  All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry waters to the nearest practicable drainageway approved by the building code administrator and/or other appropriate jurisdiction as a safe place to deposit such waters. If drainage facilities discharge onto natural ground, riprap may be required. At least a two-percent gradient toward approved drainage facilities from building pads will be required unless waived by the building code administrator for nonhilly terrain. 
(2)  Exception. The gradient from the building pad may be one percent where building construction and erosion control will be completed before hazardous conditions can occur. 
(Code 1966, § 7-63; Code 2001, § 22-645) 
Sec. 22-646. - Erosion control. 
(a)  Slopes. The faces of cut and fill slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control against erosion. This control may consist of effective planting. The protection for the slopes shall be installed as soon as practicable and prior to calling for final approval. Where cut slopes are not subject to erosion due to the erosion-resistant character of the materials, such protection may be omitted. 
(b)  Other devices. Where necessary, check dams, cribbing, riprap or other devices or methods shall be employed to control erosion and provide safety. 
(Code 1966, § 7-64; Code 2001, § 22-646) 
Sec. 22-647. - Grading inspection. 
(a)  Generally. All grading operations for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building code administrator. When required by the building code administrator, special inspection of grading operations and special testing shall be performed in accordance with subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  Grading designation. All grading in excess of 5,000 cubic yards shall be performed in accordance with the approved grading plan prepared by a civil engineer, and shall be designated as "engineered grading." Grading involving less than 5,000 cubic yards shall be designated "regular grading" unless the permittee, with the approval of the building code administrator, chooses to have the grading performed as engineered grading. 
(c)  Engineered grading requirements. 
(1)  For engineered grading it shall be the responsibility of the civil engineer who prepares the approved grading plan to incorporate all recommendations from the soil engineering and engineering geology reports into the grading plan. He shall also be responsible for the professional inspection and certification of the grading within his area of technical specialty. This responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, inspection and certification as to the establishment of the line, grade and drainage of the development area. The civil engineer shall act as the coordinating agent if the need arises for liaison between the other professionals, the contractor and the building code administrator. The civil engineer shall also be responsible for the preparation of revised plans and the submission of as-graded grading plans upon completion of the work. 
(2)  Soil engineering and engineering geology reports shall be required as specified in section 22-639. During grading, all necessary reports, compaction data and soil engineering and engineering geology recommendations shall be submitted to the civil engineer and the building code administrator by the soil engineer and the engineering geologist. 
(3)  The soil engineer's area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, the professional inspection and certification concerning the preparation of ground to receive fills; testing for required compaction; stability of all finish slopes; and the design of buttress fills, where required, incorporating data supplied by the engineering geologist. 
(4)  The engineering geologist's area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, professional inspection and certification of the adequacy of natural ground for receiving fills and the stability of cut slopes with respect to geological matters and the need for subdrains or other groundwater drainage devices. He shall report his findings to the soil engineer and the civil engineer for engineering analysis. 
(5)  The building code administrator shall inspect the project at the various stages of the work requiring certification and at any more frequent intervals necessary to determine that adequate control is being exercised by the professional consultants. 
(d)  Regular grading requirements. The building code administrator may require inspection and testing by an approved testing agency. The testing agency's responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, certification concerning the inspection of cleared areas and benches to receive fill and the compaction of fills. When the building code administrator has cause to believe that geological factors may be involved, the grading operation will be required to conform to engineered grading requirements. 
(e)  Notification of noncompliance. If, in the course of fulfilling his responsibility under this article, the civil engineer, the soil engineer, the engineering geologist or the testing agency finds that the work is not being done in conformance with this article or the approved grading plans, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the person in charge of the grading work and to the building code administrator. Recommendations for corrective measures, if necessary, shall be submitted. 
(f)  Transfer of responsibility for certification. If the civil engineer, the soil engineer, the engineering geologist or the testing agency of record is changed during the course of the work, the work shall be stopped until the replacement has agreed to accept the responsibility within the area of his technical competence for certification upon completion of the work. 
(Code 1966, § 7-65; Code 2001, § 22-647) 
Sec. 22-648. - Completion of work. 
(a)  Final reports. Upon completion of the rough grading work and at the final completion of the work performed pursuant to this article, the building code administrator may require the following reports and drawings and supplements thereto: 
(1)  An as-graded grading plan prepared by the civil engineer including original ground surface elevations, as-graded ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns and locations and elevations of all surface and subsurface drainage facilities. He shall provide certification that the work was done in accordance with the final approved grading plan. 
(2)  A soil grading report prepared by the soil engineer including locations and elevations of field density tests, summaries of field and laboratory tests and other substantiating data and comments on any changes made during grading and their effect on the recommendations made in the soil engineering investigation report. He shall provide certification as to the adequacy of the site for the intended use. 
(3)  A geological grading report prepared by the engineering geologist including a final description of the geology of the site including any new information disclosed during the grading and the effect of the information on recommendations incorporated in the approved grading plan. He shall provide certification as to the adequacy of the site for the intended use as affected by geological factors. 
(b)  Notification of completion. The permittee or his agent shall notify the building code administrator when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all work including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices and all erosion control measures have been completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan and the required reports have been submitted. 
(Code 1966, § 7-66; Code 2001, § 22-648) 
Sec. 22-649. - Grading permit limits in completed residential subdivisions. 
    A grading permit that involves fill on a lot in a completed residential subdivision shall be subject to the following limits: 
(1)  No more than one grading permit shall be issued for any lot in a completed residential subdivision in any five-year period. 
(2)  Each grading permit in a completed residential subdivision shall expire 180 days after issuance. 
(Ord. No. 12-2013, § 3(22-649), 3-19-2013) 
Secs. 22-650-22-675. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SWIMMING POOLS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Swimming pool enclosures, Texas Local Government Code § 214.101 et seq. 

Sec. 22-676. - Fences required; specifications. 
    Every person in possession of land within the city, either as owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant or licensee, upon which is situated a swimming pool, shall at all times maintain upon the lot or premises on which the swimming pool is located and completely surrounding the swimming pool, lot or premises a fence, wall or other solid structure designed to prevent small children from inadvertently wandering into the pool. Such fence or other solid structure shall not be less than four feet in height, with no openings therein, other than doors or gates, larger than six inches square. All such doors opening directly into such enclosure shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices designed to keep and capable of keeping such doors or gates securely closed at all times when not in actual use. Such latching device shall be attached to the upper quarter of the gate or door. However, the door of any dwelling occupied by human beings and forming any part of the enclosure need not be so equipped. It shall be unlawful to maintain any swimming pool in the city which is not fenced in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1966, § 7-1; Code 2001, § 22-676) 
Sec. 22-677. - Compliance with plans. 
    All plans submitted to the city for swimming pools to be constructed shall show compliance with the requirements of section 22-676, and the final inspection and approval of all pools constructed shall be withheld until all requirements of section 22-676 shall have been complied with by the owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant or licensee. 
(Code 1966, § 7-2; Code 2001, § 22-677) 
Secs. 22-678-22-699. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - RESIDENTIAL CODES FOR ONE- OR TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Residential building and rehabilitation codes, Texas Local Government Code § 214.211 et seq. 

Sec. 22-700. - Adopted. 
    The following portions of the 2015 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, published by the International Code Council, are adopted by reference as though they were copied fully in this section: Chapters 2 through 10, 44 and Appendices F, I and J. 
(Code 2001, § 22-700; Ord. No. 64-2002, § 1, 7-2-2002; Ord. No. 45-2007, § 5, 5-1-2007; Ord. No. 33-2011, § 5, 7-5-2011; Ord. No. 57-2015, § 5, 12-1-2015) 
State Law reference- Adoption of code, Texas Local Government Code § 214.212. 
Sec. 22-701. - Changes, deletions and amendments. 
    The following changes, deletions and amendments are made to the specified sections in the 2015 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings adopted in Section 22-700. Where an adopted section of the 2015 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings has not been changed, deleted, or amended by this ordinance, it is adopted as worded in the 2015 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. 
R302.5.1 Opening protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between the garage and residence shall be equipped with solid wood doors not less than 1 3/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, solid or honeycomb-core steel doors not less than 1 3/8 inches (35 mm) thick, or 20-minute fire-rated doors. 
R317.1 Location required. Protection of wood and wood based products from decay shall be provided in the following locations by the use of naturally durable wood or wood that is preservative-treated in accordance with AWPA U1 for the species, product, preservative and end use. Preservatives shall be listed in Section 4 of AWPA U1. 
1.  Wood joists of the bottom of a wood structural floor when closer than 18 inches (457 mm) or wood girders when closer than 12 inches (305 mm) to the exposed ground in crawl spaces or unexcavated area located within the periphery of the building foundation. 
2.  All wood framing members that rest on concrete or masonry exterior foundation walls and are less than 8 inches (203 mm) from the exposed ground. 
3.  The ends of wood girders entering exterior masonry or concrete walls having clearances of less than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) on tops, sides and ends. 
4.  Wood siding, sheathing and wall framing on the exterior of a building having a clearance of less than 6 inches (152 mm) from the ground or less than 2 inches (51 mm) measured vertically from concrete steps, porch slabs, patio slabs, and similar horizontal surfaces exposed to the weather. 
5.  Wood structural members supporting moisture-permeable floors or roofs that are exposed to the weather, such as concrete or masonry slabs, unless separated from such floors or roofs by an impervious moisture barrier. 
6.  Wood furring strips or other wood framing members attached directly to the interior of exterior masonry walls or concrete walls below grade except where an approved vapor retarder is applied between the wall and the furring strips or framing members. 
R703.8.3 Lintels. Masonry veneer shall not support any vertical load other than the dead load of the veneer above. Veneer above openings shall be supported on lintels of non-combustible materials. The lintels shall have a length of bearing not less than 4 inches (102 mm). Steel lintels shall be shop coated with a rust-inhibitive paint, except for lintels made of corrosion-resistant steel or steel treated with coatings to provide corrosion resistance. Construction of openings shall comply with Section R703.8.3.1. 
R703.8.3.1 Allowable span. The allowable span shall not exceed the values set forth in Table R703.8.3.1. 
(Code 2001, § 22-701; Ord. No. 64-2002, § 1, 7-2-2002; Ord. No. 75-2002, § 1, 9-3-2002; Ord. No. 99-2003, § 1, 11-4-2003; Ord. No. 45-2007, § 5, 5-1-2007; Ord. No. 33-2011, § 5, 7-5-2011; Ord. No. 57-2015, § 5, 12-1-2015) 
Secs. 22-702-22-709. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - EXISTING BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 22-710. - Adopted. 
    The following portions of the 2015 International Existing Building Code, published by the International Code Council, are adopted by reference as though they were copied fully in this section: Chapters 2-14, Appendix A, and Resource A. 
(Code 2001, § 22-710; Ord. No. 73-2008, § 1, 11-18-2008; Ord. No. 33-2011, § 6, 7-5-2011; Ord. No. 57-2015, § 6, 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 22-711. - Changes, deletions and amendments. 
    The following changes, deletions and amendments are made to the specified sections in the 2015 International Existing Building Code adopted in Section 22-710. Where an adopted section of the 2015 International Existing Building Code has not been changed, deleted, or amended by this ordinance, it is adopted as worded in the 2015 International Existing Building Code. Except where noted as deleted or amended, all definitions in the 2015 International Existing Building Code Section 202 are adopted as written. 
1401.2 Applicability. Structures existing prior to 1945. in which there is work involving additions, alterations or changes of occupancy shall be made to conform to the requirements of this chapter or the provisions of Chapters 5 through 13. The provisions of Sections 1401.2.1 through 1401.2.5 shall apply to existing occupancies that will continue to be, or are proposed to be, in Groups A, B, E, F, I-2, M, R and S. These provisions shall not apply to buildings with occupancies in Group H or I-1, I-3 or I-4. 
1401.4 Investigation and evaluation. For proposed work covered by this chapter, the building owner shall cause the existing building to be investigated and evaluated by a Registered Fire Protection Engineer in accordance with the provisions of Sections 1401.4 through 1401.9. 
(Code 2001, § 22-711; Ord. No. 33-2011, § 6, 7-5-2011; Ord. No. 57-2015, § 6, 12-1-2015) 
ARTICLE XIII. - RESIDENTIAL WATER CODE 

Sec. 22-712. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved. Acceptable to the code official. 
    Dwelling Unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
    Occupant. Any individual living or sleeping in a dwelling unit, or having possession of a space within a dwelling unit, including a tenant. 
    Owner. Any person, agent, firm, or corporation having legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
    Tenant. A person, corporation, partnership, or group, whether or not the legal owner, occupying a dwelling unit or portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 28-2016, § 1, 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 22-713. - Running potable water. 
(a)  The water supply system of a dwelling unit shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of hot and cold water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks. 
(b)  Owner and occupant shall each be responsible for the dwelling unit being connected to an approved water system. 
(c)  It is prima facie evidence that a person is an occupant of a dwelling unit if they are found to be in possession of the premises or are using the structure for purposes of shelter. A person is using the dwelling unit for the purpose of obtaining shelter if there is evidence the person has stayed inside the premises overnight. 
(d)  It is prima facie evidence that a person is a tenant of a dwelling unit if they have entered into a lease with the owner of the property in which the dwelling unit is located, and that lease is still in effect. 
(Ord. No. 28-2016, § 1, 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 22-714. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person who violates this article shall, upon conviction of such violation, be deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and subject to a fine as provided in section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 28-2016, § 1, 8-16-2016) 
Secs. 22-715-22-730. - Reserved. 
Chapter 26 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to regulate businesses, occupations, professions or trade, § 7(j). 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate businesses and occupations, Texas Local Government Code § 215.002 et seq.; businesses, professions and occupations, Texas Occupations Code § 1.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Permits generally. 
    All permits shall be issued by the city clerk, after payment of a fee established by separate ordinance. All applications shall be made out on forms furnished by the city clerk and verified under oath. All permits may be revoked by the city council. No deduction in the fee shall be made when the license or permit is terminated, either by revocation or by expiration, within less than a year after its issuance. All permits shall be publicly displayed in the place of business. 
(Code 1966, § 2-4; Code 2001, § 26-1; Ord. No. 94-2006, § 1, 12-5-2006) 
Secs. 26-2-26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT BOARD 

Sec. 26-31. - Establishment, composition and general duties. 
    There is established a Permit Board for the city, which shall be composed of the city clerk, who shall be chair of the board, and the chief of police. The Permit Board shall perform all duties incumbent upon it under this chapter. 
(Code 1966, §§ 8-4, 8-18, 8-153; Code 2001, § 26-31; Ord. No. 94-2006, § 1, 12-5-2006) 
Secs. 26-32-26-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOLICITORS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to regulate businesses, occupations, professions or trade, § 7(j). 
State Law reference- Regulation of sales and solicitation, Texas Occupations Code § 1801.001 et seq.; peddling of printed matter by deaf or mute persons, Texas Ann. Civ. St. Art. 9010. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aggressive manner means: 
(1)  Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching another person in the course of the solicitation without the person's consent; 
(2)  Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is: 
a.  Intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession; or 
b.  Intended to or reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(3)  Continuing to solicit a person within five feet of the person being solicited after the person has made a negative response; 
(4)  Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation; 
(5)  Using obscene or abusive language or gestures toward the person being solicited; 
(6)  Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that: 
a.  Is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession; or 
b.  Is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation. 
    Automated teller facility means the area comprised of one or more automatic teller machines, and any adjacent space that is made available to banking customers. 
    Automated teller machine means a device, linked to a bank's account records, which is able to carry out banking transactions. 
    Bank means a bank, savings bank, savings and loan association, credit union, trust company, or similar financial institution. 
    Bus means a vehicle operated by a transit authority for public transportation. 
    Check cashing business means a person in the business of cashing checks, drafts, or money orders for consideration. 
    Public area means an outdoor area to which the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, a sidewalk, street, highway, park, parking lot, alleyway, pedestrian way, or the common area of a school, hospital, apartment house, office building, transport facility, or shop. 
    Solicit means to request, by the spoken, written, or printed word, or by other means of communication an immediate or future donation or transfer of money or another thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value, and regardless of whether consideration is offered. This definition does not include a demand for payment for services rendered or goods delivered. 
    Solicitor means any individual, firm or corporation who, either by telephone or in person: 
(1)  Attempts to sell or take orders for the sale of goods, wares, services, merchandise or personal property, including tickets for shows and books of coupons which may be traded in for goods or services, for immediate or future delivery; or 
(2)  Collects or attempts to collect money, property or any item of value. 
(Code 1966, § 8-1; Code 2001, § 26-61; Ord. No. 94-2006, § 1, 12-5-2006; Ord. No. 21-2016, § 1, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 26-62. - Exemptions from article. 
    Section 26-93, section 26-98, and the fee requirement in section 26-94 shall not apply to sales or solicitations by members of any organization established for an educational, religious, or charitable function, but the organization must obtain a permit. 
(Code 1966, § 8-14; Code 2001, § 26-62; Ord. No. 94-2006, § 1, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 26-63. - Standing or stopping on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, who is selling or offering for sale goods, services, wares or merchandise from an automobile or other type of vehicle, to take a stand or stop or stand his vehicle on any public street or public right-of-way within the city for longer than ten minutes. 
(Code 1966, § 8-3; Code 2001, § 26-63; Ord. No. 94-2006, § 1, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 26-64. - Prohibitions against solicitation on streets, curbs and medians. 
    Within 300 feet of an intersection controlled by a traffic control signal that emits colored lights, as recognized by the Texas Transportation Commission, no person under the age of 16 shall be upon or go upon any street or roadway or shall be upon or go upon any shoulder of any street or roadway, nor shall any person be upon or go upon any median of any street or roadway for the purpose of soliciting any item of value, selling or distributing any material to any occupant of any motor vehicle, or advertising any good or service. 
(Code 2001, § 26-64) 
State Law reference- Soliciting on roadway, Texas Transportation Code § 552.007. 
Sec. 26-65. - Safety vest required. 
    Every person who goes upon any street or roadway, or upon any shoulder of any street or roadway, or upon any median of any street or roadway for the purpose of soliciting any item of value, selling or distributing any material to any occupant of any motor vehicle, or advertising any good or service, shall wear an ANSI 107-2204 Type 2 or Type 3 safety vest. 
(Code 2001, § 26-65; Ord. No. 94-2006, § 1, 12-5-2006; Ord. No. 27-2008, § 1, 5-6-2008) 
Sec. 26-66. - Offenses. 
    A person commits an offense if the person solicits: 
(a)  In an aggressive manner in a public area; 
(b)  In a bus, at a bus station or stop, or at a facility operated by a transportation authority for passengers; 
(c)  Within 25 feet of: 
(1)  An automated teller facility; 
(2)  The entrance or exit of a bank; or 
(3)  The entrance or exit of a check cashing business; or 
(d)  At a marked crosswalk; 
(e)  On either side of the street on a block where a school attended by minors or a child-care facility has an entrance or exit; or, 
(f)  The patio area of a bar or restaurant. 
(Ord. No. 21-2016, § 2, 7-19-2016) 
Secs. 26-67-26-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 26-91. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to go in or upon any private residence, public property, or any business, commercial, industrial or governmental establishment in the city without having been requested or invited so to do by the owner, occupant or lessee thereof, for the purpose of engaging in the business of solicitor as defined in section 26-61, without first securing a permit from the city clerk. However, this section shall not apply to a solicitor making sales to or taking orders from the owner or lessee for goods or services used in the business. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any solicitor in the city to engage in any solicitation as defined in section 26-61 by telephone to a private residence without first securing a permit from the city clerk. 
(Code 1966, § 8-2; Code 2001, § 26-91; Ord. No. 94-2006, § 1, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 26-92. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit required by this division shall make written application to the city clerk, on a form to be furnished by the city clerk. The application shall show the following: 
(1)  The full name and address of the applicant, and a copy of his driver's license or state identification, if an individual. 
(2)  The occupation in which the applicant desires to engage and for which he desires a permit. 
(3)  The description and license number of all vehicles to be used by the applicant. 
(b)  The application shall be signed by the applicant if an individual, by a partner if a partnership, by the president or vice-president if a corporation, and by an authorized officer if an association. 
(Code 1966, § 8-5; Code 2001, § 26-92; Ord. No. 94-2006, § 1, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 26-93. - Attachments to application. 
    There shall be attached to each application for a solicitor's permit the following: 
(1)  If the applicant is other than an individual, a list of all the employees who will be working as solicitors under this permit, giving their full names and copies of their driver's licenses. 
(2)  If, while a permit is in effect, the applicant desires to hire more employees as solicitors, the applicant shall furnish to the city clerk an additional list, containing the information described in subsection (1) of this section. Such new employees may not work under this permit until they are approved by the Permit Board. 
(3)  A reference letter or report from the Better Business Bureau or Chamber of Commerce of the county in which the applicant resides or the business is located. 
(Code 1966, § 8-6; Code 2001, § 26-93; Ord. No. 121-2003, § 2, 12-16-2003; Ord. No. 94-2006, § 1, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 26-94. - Fees; term. 
(a)  Each applicant for a solicitor permit shall be charged a fee established by separate ordinance. If the applicant is other than an individual, the applicant will be charged an additional fee for each employee working as a solicitor under the permit. All permits shall expire 90 days after the issuance date. 
(b)  Applicant may renew a permit within 15 days of the expiration of their permit for a renewal fee as set by separate ordinance, with a maximum of three renewals per calendar year. 
(Code 1966, § 8-9; Code 2001, § 26-94; Ord. No. 121-2003, § 1, 12-16-2003; Ord. No. 94-2006, § 1, 12-5-2006; Ord. No. 21-2016, § 3, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 26-95. - Consideration of application by Permit Board. 
    Upon the filing of an application for a solicitor's permit, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to circulate the application to the other members of the Permit Board for its consideration. The members of the board may consider the application either in a meeting or individually. The board must authorize or deny the issuance of the permit within ten days from the date the city clerk received the application. 
(Code 1966, § 8-7; Code 2001, § 26-95; Ord. No. 94-2006, § 1, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 26-96. - Issuance of permit. 
    If, upon consideration, it shall appear to the Permit Board or a majority thereof that the statements contained in the application for a solicitor's permit are true, that the applicant has the right, under the constitution and laws of this state and under this article, to engage in business, the Permit Board shall authorize the issuance of the permit by the city clerk. 
(Code 1966, § 8-8; Code 2001, § 26-96; Ord. No. 94-2006, § 1, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 26-97. - Contents. 
    Each solicitor's permit issued shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The date of issuance and date of expiration of the permit. 
(Code 1966, § 8-10; Code 2001, § 26-97; Ord. No. 94-2006, § 1, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 26-98. - Possession. 
    If the holder of a solicitor's permit is an individual, it shall be unlawful for him to engage in any activity for which the permit is granted unless he carries such permit on his person while so engaged. If the permit holder is other than an individual, it shall be unlawful for any of its employees to engage in activity as a solicitor unless he carries on his person while so engaged an identification card issued by the city clerk. 
(Code 1966, § 8-11; Code 2001, § 26-98; Ord. No. 94-2006, § 1, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 26-99. - Revocation. 
    After the solicitor's permit has been issued, the permit may be revoked by the Permit Board if: 
(1)  The Permit Board or other city official finds that the permit was obtained by false representation in the application. 
(2)  It shall appear to the Permit Board that the holder of such permit has violated any city ordinance or any state law in connection with any soliciting by such holder or in connection with the collection or attempted collection of any account due to the permit holder or his employee or in connection with the repossession or attempted repossession of goods sold by the permit holder or any other person employed by the employer of the permit holder. 
(3)  It is determined that the permit holder is guilty of fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business under the permit or that his employees carry on a pattern of fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on business under the permit. 
(Code 1966, § 8-12; Code 2001, § 26-99; Ord. No. 94-2006, § 1, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 26-100. - Appeals from findings of Permit Board. 
    If the applicant for a permit required under this division or the holder of such a permit is dissatisfied with any holding or finding of the Permit Board, he shall have the right to appeal to the city council by filing a written notice of such appeal with the Permit Board within ten days from the making and filing of such decision of the Permit Board. Upon the filing of such notice of appeal, the application for the permit and all papers possessed by the permit board in connection with such application and the permit shall be delivered to the city council. Such matters as may be in controversy shall be heard by the city council at its next regular meeting after the filing of the notice of appeal. The city council shall have the same powers and authority at such hearing on such appeal as is vested in the Permit Board by this article. 
(Code 1966, § 8-13; Code 2001, § 26-100; Ord. No. 94-2006, § 1, 12-5-2006) 
Secs. 26-101-26-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ITINERANT MERCHANTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-126. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Itinerant merchant means any person who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares, merchandise or personal property at any location on private property within the city and who, in furtherance of such purposes, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, or public room in a hotel or motel or any vacant lot or open space for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property or for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery. 
    Multiple vendor event means a show, exhibit or promotion containing at least five itinerant merchants for the purpose of engaging in temporary business at a fixed location under the sponsorship or promotion of one or more organizations. 
    Temporary means any such business for which documented agreements have not been made for the rental or lease of the premises for at least one month, in or upon which such business is to be operated or conducted. 
(Code 2001, § 26-126; Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, 1-5-2010) 
Sec. 26-127. - Exemptions from article. 
    This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  An individual who is licensed by the state as an auctioneer or associate auctioneer and who complies with all applicable provisions of Texas Occupations Code § 1802.001 et seq.; 
(2)  An entity conducting business at the Multi-Purpose Events Center Complex; or 
(3)  An entity with a residence or permanent office in the territorial limits of the city. 
(Code 2001, § 26-127; Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, 1-5-2010) 
Secs. 26-128-26-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 26-156. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an itinerant merchant as defined in section 26-126 to engage in such business within the city without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk. Such permit shall be posted at each location specified in the application and in such a place as to be visibly seen by traffic and/or passersby. 
(b)  The issuance of a permit under this division does not authorize the holder to go on private property for the purpose of engaging in his business, when he has notice that his entrance is forbidden or he has received notice to depart. 
(Code 2001, § 26-156; Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, 1-5-2010) 
Sec. 26-157. - Permit application; required information. 
(a)  Any individual, firm, association or corporation desiring a permit required by this division shall make written application to the city clerk, on a form to be furnished by the city clerk. The application shall show the following: 
(1)  Full name of applicant; 
(2)  Date of birth of individual applicant or individual applying on behalf of non-individual applicant; 
(3)  Address of applicant or address of headquarters of non-individual applicant; 
(4)  If applicant is not an individual, the state in which the entity is organized; 
(5)  Social security number or driver's license number of individual applicant or the employer's identification number of non-individual applicant; 
(6)  Valid copy of sales and use tax permit issued by the state comptroller or sworn certification by applicant that the item sold is exempt from sales and use tax; 
(7)  The occupation in which the applicant desires to engage and for which he desires a permit; 
(8)  A full and complete description of the goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property or the services which the applicant desires to sell. The description shall give in detail the grade and character of the property or services to be sold. Further description as to grade and quality, depending on the nature of the property, may be required by the city clerk; 
(9)  The description and license number of all vehicles to be used by the applicant; and 
(10)  The address where the temporary business will be conducted. 
(b)  The application shall be signed by the applicant if an individual, by a partner if a partnership, by the president or vice-president if a corporation, and by an authorized officer if an association. 
(Code 2001, § 26-157; Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, 1-5-2010) 
Sec. 26-158. - Attachments to application. 
    There shall be attached to each application for a permit required by this division the following: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual working for a company, a certificate or letter from the president, vice-president, general manager, sales manager, assistant sales manager or district or area manager of the company, stating that the applicant is an employee and/or agent of such company. 
(2)  If the applicant is other than an individual, the applicant shall furnish to the city clerk a list containing the name and permanent address of each employee working under the permit. 
(3)  A reference letter or report from the Better Business Bureau or Chamber of Commerce of the county in which the applicant resides or the business is located. 
(Code 2001, § 26-158; Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, 1-5-2010) 
Sec. 26-159. - Multiple vendor events. 
    The sponsoring organization of a multiple vendor event shall complete an application as required in sections 26-157 and 26-158. In addition, the sponsoring organization shall, within three days from the completion of the event, furnish the city clerk with a complete list of the name, permanent address, taxpayer number (or certification of exemption) and type of product sold by each merchant operating under the permit of the sponsoring organization. 
(Code 2001, § 26-159; Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, 1-5-2010) 
Sec. 26-160. - Fees; term. 
(a)  Each applicant for an itinerant merchant permit shall be charged a fee established by separate ordinance, regardless of the term of the permit. Itinerant merchants having more than one location shall be charged an additional fee for each additional location as established by separate ordinance and adopted by city council. 
(b)  Every permit shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it was issued. 
(Code 2001, § 26-160; Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, 1-5-2010) 
Sec. 26-161. - Issuance. 
    If, upon consideration, it shall appear to the city clerk that the statements contained in the application for the permit required under this division are true and that the applicant has the right, under the laws of this state and city, to engage in the requested business, then the city clerk shall issue the permit. 
(Code 2001, § 26-161; Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, 1-5-2010) 
Sec. 26-162. - Change of location. 
    An itinerant merchant shall not be permitted to move to any location other than that which is specified in the original application without having first provided written notice to the city clerk. 
(Code 2001, § 26-162; Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, 1-5-2010) 
Sec. 26-163. - Contents. 
    Each permit issued under this division shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  If an individual, a physical description of the applicant. 
(3)  The type of permit, whether for a solicitor or itinerant merchant. 
(4)  The date of issuance and date of expiration of the permit. 
(Code 2001, § 26-163; Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, 1-5-2010) 
Sec. 26-164. - Revocation. 
    After the permit required under this division has been issued, the permit may be revoked by the city clerk if: 
(1)  The city clerk or other city official finds that the permit was obtained by false representation in the application. 
(2)  It shall appear to the city clerk that the holder of such permit has violated any city ordinance or any state law in connection with the collection or attempted collection of any account due to such permit holder or his employee or in connection with the repossession or attempted repossession of goods sold by the permit holder or any other person employed by the employer of the permit holder. 
(3)  It is determined that the permit holder is guilty of fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business under the permit or that his employees carry on a pattern of fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on business under the permit. 
(Code 2001, § 26-165; Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, 1-5-2010) 
Sec. 26-165. - Appeals of findings of city clerk. 
    If the applicant for a permit required under this division or the holder of such a permit is dissatisfied with any holding or finding of the city clerk, he shall have the right to appeal to the city council by filing a written notice of such appeal with the city clerk within ten days from the making and filing of such decision of the city clerk. Upon the filing of such notice of appeal, the application for the permit and all papers possessed by the city clerk in connection with such application and the permit shall be delivered to the city council. Such matters as may be in controversy shall be heard by the city council within 30 days after the filing of the notice of appeal. The city council shall have the same powers and authority at such hearing on such appeal as is vested in the city clerk by this article. 
(Code 2001, § 26-166; Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, 1-5-2010) 
Secs. 26-166-26-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SECONDHAND GOODS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Pawnshops, Texas Finance Code § 371.001 et seq.; junkyards, Texas Transportation Code § 396.001 et seq.; secondhand metal recycling dealers, Texas Occupations Code § 1956.001 et seq.; authority to adopt chapter, Texas Occupations Code § 1956.003; crafted precious metals, dealer purchase and disposition, Texas Occupations Code § 1956.051 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 26-196-26-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - METAL RECYCLING ENTITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Secondhand metals recyclers/metal recycling entities, Texas Occupations Code § 1956.001 et seq. 

Sec. 26-221. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aluminum material means a product made from aluminum, an aluminum alloy, or an aluminum byproduct. The term "aluminum material" includes an aluminum beer keg, but does not otherwise include an aluminum can used to contain a food or beverage. 
    Bronze material means: 
(1)  A cemetery vase, receptacle, or memorial made from bronze; 
(2)  Bronze statuary; or 
(3)  Material that is readily identifiable as bronze. 
    Copper or brass material means: 
(1)  Insulated or noninsulated copper wire or cable of the type used by public utilities or common carriers that contains copper, or an alloy of copper or zinc; 
(2)  A copper or brass item of a type commonly used in construction or by a public utility; or 
(3)  Copper pipe or copper tubing. 
    Metal recycling entity means a business that is operated from a fixed location and is predominantly engaged in: 
(1)  Performing the manufacturing process by which scrap, used, or obsolete ferrous or nonferrous metal is converted into raw material products consisting of prepared grades and having an existing or potential economic value, by a method that in part requires the use of powered tools and equipment, including processes that involve processing, sorting, cutting, classifying, cleaning, baling, wrapping, shredding, shearing, or changing the physical form of that metal; 
(2)  The use of raw material products described under subsection (1) of this definition in the manufacture of producer or consumer goods; or 
(3)  Purchasing or otherwise acquiring scrap, used, or obsolete ferrous or nonferrous metals for the eventual use of the metal for the purposes described by subsection (1) or (2) of this definition. 
    Passport means a passport issued by the United States or issued by another country and recognized by the United States. 
    Personal identification certificate means a personal identification card issued by the state Department of Public Safety under Texas Transportation Code § 521.101 or an analogous card or certificate issued by another state. 
    Personal identification document means: 
(1)  A legally issued driver's license issued by a state in the United States; 
(2)  A United States military identification card; or 
(3)  A personal identification certificate issued by the department under Texas Transportation Code § 521.101, or a corresponding card or certificate issued by another state. 
    Regulated material means aluminum material, bronze material, copper or brass material or regulated metal. 
    Regulated metal means: 
(1)  Manhole covers; 
(2)  Guardrails; 
(3)  Metal cylinders designed to contain compressed air, oxygen, gases, or liquids; 
(4)  Beer kegs made from metal other than aluminum; 
(5)  Historical markers or cemetery vases, receptacles, or memorials made from metal other than aluminum; 
(6)  Unused rebar; 
(7)  Street signs; 
(8)  Drain gates; 
(9)  Safes; 
(10)  Communication, transmission, and service wire or cable; 
(11)  Condensing or evaporator coils for central heating or air conditioning units; 
(12)  Utility structures, including the fixtures and hardware; 
(13)  Aluminum or stainless steel containers designed to hold propane for fueling forklifts; 
(14)  Metal railroad equipment, including tie plates, signal houses, control boxes, signs, signals, traffic devices, traffic control devices, traffic control signals, switch plates, e-clips, and rail tie functions; 
(15)  Catalytic converters not attached to a vehicle; 
(16)  Fire hydrants; 
(17)  Metal bleachers or other seating facilities used in recreational areas or sporting arenas; 
(18)  Any metal item clearly and conspicuously marked with any form of the name, initials, or logo of a governmental entity, utility, cemetery, or railroad; 
(19)  Insulated utility, communications, or electrical wire that has been burned in whole or in part to remove the insulation; 
(20)  Backflow valves; and 
(21)  Metal in the form of commonly recognized products of the industrial metals recycling process, including bales, briquettes, billets, sows, ingots, pucks, and chopped or shredded metals. 
(Code 2001, § 26-221) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Occupations Code § 1956.001. 
Sec. 26-222. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person owns or operates a metal recycling entity and does not hold a license or permit required by the city. An offense under this subsection is a Class B misdemeanor unless it is shown on the trial of the offense that the person has been previously convicted under this subsection, in which event the offense is a Class A misdemeanor. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties imposed under this section, a court, on the conviction of a metal recycling entity for an offense under subsection (a) of this section, may order that the dealer cease from engaging in business as a metal recycling entity for a period not to exceed 30 days from the date of the order for each violation that forms the basis of the conviction. 
(Code 2001, § 26-222) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Occupations Code § 1956.003(f). 
Sec. 26-223. - Applicability. 
    This division does not apply to: 
(1)  A purchase of a regulated material from a public utility or a manufacturing, industrial, commercial, retail or other seller that sells regulated materials in the ordinary course of the seller's business; 
(2)  A purchase of regulated material by a manufacturer whose primary business is the manufacture of iron and steel products made from melting scrap iron and scrap steel; or 
(3)  The transport or hauling of recyclable materials to or from the metal recycling entity. 
(Code 1966, § 8-165; Code 2001, § 26-223) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Occupations Code § 1956.002. 
Sec. 26-224. - Civil penalty. 
(a)  A person who owns or operates a metal recycling entity and does not hold a license or permit required by the city as authorized under Texas Occupations Code § 1956.003(b) is subject to a civil penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each violation. In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the court shall consider: 
(1)  Any other violations by the person; and 
(2)  The amount necessary to deter future violations. 
(b)  A city attorney may institute an action to collect the civil penalty provided by this section. 
(c)  Each day a violation occurs or continues to occur is a separate violation. 
(d)  The city attorney may recover reasonable expenses incurred in obtaining a civil penalty under this section, including court costs, reasonable attorney's fees, investigative costs, witness fees, and deposition expenses. 
Sec. 26-225. - Permit required to purchase, advertise secondhand metals. 
    It shall be unlawful for a metal recycling entity to purchase or to advertise that he is a purchaser or that he will purchase secondhand metals without first securing a permit from the city clerk. 
(Code 1966, § 8-152; Code 2001, § 26-251) 
Sec. 26-226. - Application. 
(a)  Any individual, firm, association or corporation desiring a permit required by this division shall make written application to the city clerk, on a form to be furnished by the city clerk. The application shall show the following: 
(1)  The full name and post office address of the applicant, and his social security number if an individual. 
(2)  The city, county and state in which the applicant permanently resides or, if the applicant is other than an individual, in which the applicant has its principal place of business. 
(3)  If the applicant is an individual, the date of birth, height, weight, color of hair and color of eyes of the applicant. 
(4)  Whether the applicant or his employees have ever been convicted of a felony or a Class A or Class B misdemeanor. 
(b)  The application shall be signed by the applicant if an individual, by a partner if a partnership, by the president or vice-president if a corporation, and by an authorized officer if an association. 
(Code 1966, § 8-154; Code 2001, § 26-252) 
Sec. 26-227. - Attachments. 
    The following shall be attached to each application for a permit required under this division: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual working for a company, a certificate or letter from the president, vice-president, general manager, sales manager, assistant sales manager or district or area manager of the company, stating that the applicant is an employee and/or agent of such company. 
(2)  If the applicant is other than an individual, a list of all employees who will be working under this permit, giving their full names and addresses; their social security and/or driver's license numbers; the city, county and state in which each resides permanently; and the date of birth, height, weight, color of hair and color of eyes of each of them. 
(3)  If, while a permit is in effect, the applicant desires to hire more employees, the applicant shall furnish to the city clerk an additional list, containing the information described in subsection (2) of this section. Such new employees may not work under this permit until they are approved by the Permit Board. 
(Code 1966, § 8-155; Code 2001, § 26-253) 
Sec. 26-228. - Fee; expiration; sale, transfer or assignment. 
(a)  Each applicant for a permit required under this subdivision shall be charged a fee established by separate ordinance, regardless of the term of the permit. 
(b)  Each permit shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued. 
(c)  No permit may be sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Code 1966, § 8-158; Code 2001, § 26-254) 
Sec. 26-229. - Consideration of application by Permit Board. 
    Upon the filing of an application for a permit required under this division, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to circulate the application to the other members of the Permit Board for its consideration. The members of the board may consider the application either in a meeting or individually. 
(Code 1966, § 8-156; Code 2001, § 26-255) 
Sec. 26-230. - Issuance. 
    If, upon consideration, it shall appear to the Permit Board or a majority thereof that the statements contained in the application for the permit required under this division are true, that the applicant has the right, under the constitution and laws of this state and under this division, to engage in business, and that the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or a Class A or Class B misdemeanor, the Permit Board shall authorize the issuance of the permit by the city clerk. 
(Code 1966, § 8-157; Code 2001, § 26-256) 
Sec. 26-231. - Contents of permit. 
    Each permit issued under this division shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  If an individual, a physical description of the applicant. 
(3)  The date of issuance and date of expiration of the permit. 
(Code 1966, § 8-159; Code 2001, § 26-258) 
Sec. 26-232. - Display; contents of advertisements. 
    The permit issued under this division by the city shall be prominently displayed at the location where regulated items are purchased. All advertisements soliciting secondhand metals shall prominently state that the purchaser is licensed by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 8-160; Code 2001, § 26-259) 
Sec. 26-233. - Revocation. 
    After the permit required under this division has been issued, the permit may be revoked by the Permit Board if: 
(1)  The Permit Board or other city official finds that the permit was obtained by false representation in the application. 
(2)  It shall appear to the Permit Board that the holder of the permit has violated any city ordinance or any state law in connection with any purchase or sale by such holder or in connection with the collection or attempted collection of any account due to such permit holder or his employee or in connection with the repossession or attempted repossession of goods sold by such permit holder or any other person employed by the employer of the permit holder. 
(3)  It is determined that the permit holder is guilty of fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business under the permit or that his employees carry on a pattern of fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on business under the permit. 
(Code 1966, § 8-161; Code 2001, § 26-260) 
Sec. 26-234. - Appeal of findings of Permit Board. 
    If the applicant for a permit required under this division or the holder of such a permit is dissatisfied with any holding or finding of the Permit Board, he shall have the right to appeal to the city council by filing a written notice of such appeal with the Permit Board within ten days from the making and filing of the decision of the Permit Board. Upon the filing of the notice of appeal, the application for the permit and all papers possessed by the Permit Board in connection with the application and the permit shall be delivered to the city council. Such matters as may be in controversy shall be heard by the city council at its next regular meeting after the filing of the notice of appeal. The city council shall have the same powers and authority at such hearing on such appeal as is vested in the Permit Board. 
(Code 1966, § 8-162; Code 2001, § 26-261) 
Sec. 26-235. - Records. 
(a)  Each metal recycling entity shall keep an accurate electronic record or accurate and legible written record of any purchase of any regulated material made in the course of the entity's business from an individual. 
(b)  The record must be in English and must include the following: 
(1)  The place and date of each purchase; 
(2)  The name and address of the seller in possession of the regulated material purchased or obtained; 
(3)  The identifying number of the seller's personal identification document; 
(4)  A description made in accordance with the custom of the trade of the type and quantity of regulated material purchased; 
(5)  The information required by Texas Occupations Code § 1956.032(a)(2) and (3), or similar provision of this article; 
(6)  As applicable: 
a.  The identifying number of the seller's air conditioning and refrigeration contractor license displayed under Texas Occupations Code § 1956.032(a)(4)(A), or similar provision of this article; 
b.  A copy of the seller's air conditioning and refrigeration technician registration displayed under Texas Occupations Code § 1956.032(a)(4)(B), or similar provision of this article; 
c.  A copy of the documentation described by Texas Occupations Code § 1956.032(a)(4)(C), or similar provision of this article; or 
d.  A copy of the documentation described by Texas Occupations Code § 1956.032(a)(4)(D), or similar provision of this article; 
(7)  If applicable, a copy of the documentation described by Texas Occupations Code § 1956.032(a)(5), or similar provision of this article; 
(8)  A copy of the documentation described by Texas Occupations Code § 1956.032(g), or similar provision of this article; and 
(9)  A signed statement by the seller that states the seller's right of legal ownership or right to sell the regulated material offered for sale. 
(Code 1966, § 8-166; Code 2001, § 26-286) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Occupations Code § 1956.033. 
Sec. 26-236. - Identification and statement of seller. 
(a)  The metal recycling entity shall require a person attempting to sell a regulated material to the metal recycling entity to: 
(1)  Display to the metal recycling entity the person's personal identification document. 
(2)  Provide to the metal recycling entity the make, model, color, and license plate number of the motor vehicle used to transport the regulated material and the name of the state issuing the license plate. 
(3)  Either: 
a.  Present written documentation evidencing that the person is the legal owner or is lawfully entitled to sell the regulated material; or 
b.  Sign a written statement provided by the metal recycling entity that states that the person is the legal owner of or is lawfully entitled to sell the regulated material offered for sale. 
(4)  If the regulated material includes condensing or evaporator coils for central heating or air conditioning units, display to the metal recycling entity: 
a.  The person's air conditioning and refrigeration contractor license issued under Texas Occupations Code ch. 1302, subch. F or G; 
b.  The person's air conditioning and refrigeration technician registration issued under Texas Occupations Code ch. 1302, subch. K; 
c.  A receipt, bill of sale, or other documentation showing that the seller purchased the coils the seller is attempting to sell; or 
d.  A receipt, bill of sale, or other documentation showing that the seller has purchased a replacement central heating or air conditioning unit. 
(5)  If the regulated material includes insulated communications wire that has been burned wholly or partly to remove the insulation, display to the metal recycling entity documentation acceptable under the commission rules adopted under subsection (h) of this section that states that the material was salvaged from a fire. 
(b)  A person required by the city to prepare a signed statement consisting of the information required by subsection (a)(3) of this section may use the statement required by the city to comply with subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
(c)  The metal recycling entity or the entity's agent shall visually verify the accuracy of the identification presented by the seller at the time of the purchase of regulated material and make a copy of the identification to be maintained by the entity in the entity's records, except as otherwise provided by subsection (f) of this section. 
(d)  The metal recycling entity or the entity's agent for recordkeeping purposes may photograph the seller's entire face, not including any hat, and obtain the name of the seller's employer. 
(e)  The metal recycling entity or the entity's agent for recordkeeping purposes may take a photograph of the motor vehicle of the seller in which the make, model, and license plate number of the motor vehicle are identifiable in lieu of the information required under subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
(f)  The metal recycling entity is not required to make a copy of the identification as required under subsection (c) of this section or collect the information required under subsection (a)(3) of this section if: 
(1)  The seller signs the written statement as required under subsection (a)(3) of this section; 
(2)  The seller has previously provided the information required under subsection (a) of this section; and 
(3)  The previously provided information has not changed. 
(g)  Notwithstanding Texas Occupations Code § 1956.002, the metal recycling entity shall verify the registration of a person attempting to sell regulated material who represents that the person is a metal recycling entity as follows: 
(1)  By using the database described by Texas Occupations Code § 1956.016; or 
(2)  By obtaining from the person a copy of the person's certificate of registration issued under Texas Occupations Code § 1956.022 in addition to the information required under subsection (a) of this section. 
(h)  The state Public Safety Commission shall adopt rules establishing the type of documentation that a seller of insulated communications wire described by subsection (a)(5) of this section must provide to a metal recycling entity to establish that the wire was salvaged from a fire. 
(Code 2001, § 26-287) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Occupations Code § 1956.032. 
Sec. 26-237. - Offenses. 
    If conduct that constitutes an offense under this section also constitutes an offense under any other law, the actor may be prosecuted under this section or the other law. 
(Code 2001, § 26-288) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Occupations Code § 1956.040. 
Sec. 26-238. - Photograph or recording requirement for regulated metal transaction. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements of sections 26-286 and 26-287, for each purchase by a metal recycling entity of an item of regulated metal, the entity shall obtain a digital photograph or video recording that accurately depicts the seller's entire face and each type of regulated metal purchased. 
(b)  A metal recycling entity shall preserve a photograph or recording required under subsection (a) of this section as follows: 
(1)  For a video recording, until the 91st day after the date of the transaction; and 
(2)  For a digital photograph, until the 181st day after the date of the transaction. 
(c)  The photograph or recording must be made available for inspection as provided by Texas Occupations Code § 1956.035 or similar provision of this article not later than 72 hours after the time of purchase. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Texas Occupations Code § 1956.0331. 
Sec. 26-239. - Preservation of records. 
    Each metal recycling entity shall preserve the records required by sections 26-235 and 26-236 until the second anniversary of the date the record was made. The records must be kept in an easily retrievable format and must be available for inspection as provided by section 26-240 not later than 72 hours after the time of purchase. 
(Code 1966, § 8-166(c); Code 2001, § 26-289) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Occupations Code § 1956.034. 
Sec. 26-240. - Inspections; mailing of reports. 
(a)  On request, a metal recycling entity shall permit any police officer to inspect, during the usual and customary business hours of the entity, a record required under sections 26-235 and 26-236, a digital photograph or video recording required by section 22-237 and any regulated materials in the possession of the entity. 
(b)  The police officer shall identify himself as a police officer of the city or if the person is another authorized representative of the city, inform the entity of the person's status and display to the entity an identification document or other appropriate documentation establishing the person's status as a representative of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 8-166(d); Code 2001, § 26-290(a)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Occupations Code § 1956.035. 
Sec. 26-241. - Placement of items on hold. 
(a)  A metal recycling entity may not dispose of, process, sell, or remove from the premises an item of regulated metal unless: 
(1)  The entity acquired the item more than: 
a.  Eight days, excluding weekends and holidays, before the disposal, processing, sale, or removal, if the item is a cemetery vase, receptacle, or memorial made from a regulated material other than aluminum material; or 
b.  72 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, before the disposal, processing, sale, or removal, if the item is not an item described by subsection (a)(1)a of this section; or 
(2)  The entity purchased the item from a manufacturing, industrial, commercial, retail, or other seller that sells regulated material in the ordinary course of its business. 
(b)  A police officer who has reasonable suspicion to believe that an item of regulated material in the possession of a metal recycling entity is stolen may place the item on hold by issuing to the entity a written notice that: 
(1)  Specifically identifies the item alleged to be stolen and subject to the hold; and 
(2)  Informs the entity of the requirements of subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  On receiving the notice, the entity may not, except as provided by subsection (e) of this section, process or remove from the entity's premises the identified item before the 60th day after the date the notice is issued unless the hold is released at an earlier time in writing by a peace officer of this state or a court order. 
(d)  After the holding period expires, the entity may dispose of the item unless disposition violates a court order. 
(e)  If a hold is placed on a purchase of regulated material, a metal recycling entity may not dispose of, process, sell, or remove from the premises any item from the purchased material unless the hold on the material is released. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Occupations Code § 1956.037. 
Sec. 26-242. - Notice to hold items. 
(a)  If a police officer has reasonable suspicion to believe that certain items consisting or composed of regulated materials and in the possession of a metal recycling entity are stolen, the officer may place the items on hold as provided by this section. If the officer places the items on hold, the officer shall issue a hold notice to the dealer. 
(b)  The hold notice must be in writing, and must: 
(1)  Specifically identify the items alleged to be stolen and subject to the hold; and 
(2)  Inform the dealer of the requirements imposed under subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  On receipt of a hold notice under this section, a metal recycling entity may not process or remove from the dealer's premises the items subject to the hold, or any part of those items, until the expiration of the tenth day after the date on which the notice is issued, unless the hold is released at an earlier time in writing by a police officer of this state or an order of a court of competent jurisdiction. At the expiration of the holding period, the hold is automatically released and the dealer may dispose of the regulated material unless another disposition of the material has been ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 2001, § 26-291) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Occupations Code § 1956.031. 
Sec. 26-243. - Notice to sellers. 
(a)  A metal recycling entity must at all times maintain in a prominent place in the dealer's place of business, in open view to a seller of a regulated material, a notice in two-inch lettering that: 
(1)  Includes the following language: "A person attempting to sell any regulated material must present sufficient identification required by state law. Warning: State law provides a criminal penalty for a person who intentionally provides a false document of identification or other false information to a metal recycling entity while attempting to sell any regulated material;" and 
(2)  States the metal recycling entity's usual business hours. 
(b)  The notice required by this section may be contained on a sign that contains another notice if the metal recycling entity is required to display another notice under applicable law. 
(Code 2001, § 26-292) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Occupations Code § 1956.031. 
Sec. 26-244. - Hours for purchasing material. 
(a)  Subject to subsection (b) of this section, the city establishes the hours during which a metal recycling entity may purchase regulated materials. 
(b)  A metal recycling entity may not purchase from the general public regulated material: 
(1)  More than 15 consecutive hours in one day; or 
(2)  Later than 9:00 p.m. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Occupations Code § 1956.039. 
Secs. 26-245-26-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CRAFTED PRECIOUS METALS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Crafted precious metals dealers, Texas Occupations Code § 1956.051 et seq. 

Sec. 26-321. - Applicability. 
    This division applies only to the sale of crafted precious metal to dealers as governed by the Texas Occupations Code. 
Sec. 26-322. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for such purchaser of crafted precious metals to purchase or to advertise that he is a purchaser or that he will purchase crafted precious metals without first securing a permit from the city clerk. All employees of such purchaser of crafted precious metals shall also possess a valid employee permit if the employee purchases crafted precious metals on behalf of his employer. 
Sec. 26-323. - Permit application; required information. 
(a)  Any individual, firm, association or corporation desiring a permit required by this division shall make written application to the city clerk, on a form to be furnished by the city clerk. The application shall show the following: 
(1)  The full name and post office address of the applicant, and a copy of applicant's certificate of registration issued by the office of the Consumer Credit Commissioner of the state. 
(2)  A list of each location in the city at which the person will conduct business as a crafted precious metals dealer. For each temporary location, the dealer must provide the approximate dates and hours of operation in the temporary location and the name of the person responsible for on-site operations and compliance with applicable laws. 
(3)  If the applicant is an individual, the date of birth, height, weight, color of hair and color of eyes of the applicant. 
(4)  Whether the applicant or his employees have ever been convicted of a felony or a Class A or Class B misdemeanor. 
(b)  The application shall be signed by the applicant if an individual, by a partner if a partnership, by the president or vice-president if a corporation, and by an authorized officer if an association. 
(c)  An applicant does not qualify for a permit: If the applicant has been convicted of a felony offense less than five years from the date of application. 
Sec. 26-324. - Attachments to application. 
    There shall be attached to each application for a permit required under this division the following: 
(1)  If the applicant is other than an individual, a list of all employees who will be working for the applicant, giving their full names and addresses; their social security and/or driver's license numbers; the city, county and state in which each resides permanently; and the date of birth, height, weight, color of hair and color of eyes of each of them. 
(2)  If, while a permit is in effect, the applicant desires to hire more employees, the applicant shall furnish to the city clerk an additional list containing the information described in subsection (1) of this section. Such new employees may not work until they obtain a permit approved by the permit board. 
Sec. 26-325. - Fee; expiration; sale, transfer or assignment. 
(a)  Each applicant for a permit required under this division shall be charged a fee set by separate ordinance. The application fee for an employee permit shall also be set by city council. 
(b)  Each permit shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued. 
(c)  No permit may be sold, transferred or assigned. 
Sec. 26-326. - Issuance. 
    If, upon consideration, it shall appear to the city clerk that the statements contained in the application for the permit required under this division are true, that the applicant is registered as a dealer of crafted precious metals with the Finance Commission of the state, and has met all the requirements under this division, the city clerk shall issue the permit. 
Sec. 26-327. - Contents. 
    Each permit issued in this division shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  If an individual, a physical description of the applicant. 
(3)  The date of issuance and date of expiration of the permit. 
Sec. 26-328. - Display; contents of advertisements. 
    The permit issued under this division by the city shall be prominently displayed at the location where regulated items are purchased. All advertisements soliciting crafted precious metals shall prominently state that the purchaser is licensed by the city. 
Sec. 26-329. - Revocation. 
    After the permit required under this division has been issued, the permit may be revoked by the Permit Board if the Permit Board finds that: 
(1)  The permit was obtained by false representation in the application; 
(2)  The holder of the permit has violated any city ordinance or any state law in connection with any purchase or sale by the holder, or in connection with the collection or attempted collection of any account due to the permit holder or his employee, or in connection with the repossession or attempted repossession of goods sold by the permit holder or any other person employed by the employer of the permit holder; or 
(3)  The permit holder is guilty of fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business under the permit or that his employees carry on a pattern of fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on business under the permit. 
Sec. 26-330. - Appeal of findings of Permit Board. 
    If the applicant for a permit required under this division or the holder of such a permit is dissatisfied with any holding or finding of the Permit Board, he shall have the right to appeal to the city council by filing a written notice of such appeal with the Permit Board within ten days after the Permit Board issues its decision. Upon the filing of the notice of appeal, the application for the permit and all papers possessed by the Permit Board in connection with the application and the permit shall be delivered to the city council. Such matters as may be in controversy shall be heard by the city council at its next regular meeting after the filing of the notice of appeal. The city council shall have the same powers and authority at such hearing on such appeal as is vested in the Permit Board. 
Sec. 26-331. - Preservation and identifying information. 
(a)  A purchaser shall not purchase or have in his possession any item of crafted precious metal from which a manufacturer's identification number or brand has been removed or obliterated. 
(b)  If a police officer finds any crafted precious metal in the possession of any regulated purchaser, from which the manufacturer's identification number or brand has been removed or obliterated, he may seize such property and hold it at the Police Department for 30 days. At the time of the seizure of such property, the police officer shall issue the owner a receipt for the property notifying him that the property may be redeemed in 30 days at the Police Department unless it is otherwise required by law to be held. 
(c)  A dealer may not melt, deface, alter, or dispose of crafted precious metal that is the subject of a report required by Texas Occupations Code § 1956.001 et seq. before the 21st day after the date the report is filed unless: 
(1)  The peace officer to whom the report is submitted, for good cause, authorizes disposition of the metal; or 
(2)  The dealer is a pawnbroker and the disposition is the redemption of pledged property by the pledger. 
(d)  A dealer is required to take digital color photographs of each item of crafted precious metal that is the subject of a report required by Texas Occupations Code § 1956.001 et seq. and that is purchased by the dealer. The photograph shall clearly show each item purchased and a copy of the photo shall be turned over to the Police Department as part of the required report. 
(e)  A dealer is required, as part of his report to the Police Department, to document in writing any engravings on crafted precious metal items purchased by the dealer. 
Sec. 26-332. - Purchase, possession of items from which manufacturer's identification number or brand removed or obliterated. 
(a)  A purchaser shall not purchase or have in his possession any item of crafted precious metal from which a manufacturer's identification number or brand has been removed or obliterated. 
(b)  If a police officer finds any crafted precious metal in the possession of any regulated purchaser, from which the manufacturer's identification number or brand has been removed or obliterated, he may seize such property and hold it at the police department for 30 days. At the time of the seizure of such property, the police officer shall issue the owner a receipt for the property notifying him that the property may be redeemed in 30 days at the police department unless it is otherwise required by law to be held. 
(Code 1966, § 8-167; Code 2001, § 26-393) 
Secs. 26-333-26-420. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FOOD AND FOOD VENDORS AND ESTABLISHMENTS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 53-2015, § 1, adopted Nov. 17, 2015, amended Div. 1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 1, §§ 26-421-26-424, pertained to simimlar subject matter, and derived from Code 1002, §§ 26-421-26-424; Ord. No. 81-2009, § 1, adopted Nov. 3, 2009; and Ord. No. 04-2015, § 1, adopted Jan. 6, 2015. 
State Law reference- Food and food establishments, Texas Health and Safety Code § 433.001 et seq.; regulations regarding food service establishments, retail food stores, mobile food units and roadside food vendors, Texas Health and Safety Code § 437.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-421. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Food means a raw, cooked or processed edible substance, ice, beverage or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption, or chewing gum. 
    Food establishment: 
(1)  Means an operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends, or otherwise provides food for human consumption: 
a.  Such as a restaurant; retail food store; satellite or catered feeding location; catering operation if the operation provides food directly to a consumer or to a conveyance used to transport people; market; vending location; (machine) self-service food market, conveyance used to transport people; institution; or food bank; and 
b.  That relinquishes possession of food to a consumer directly, or indirectly through a delivery service such as home delivery of grocery orders or restaurant takeout orders, or delivery service that is provided by common carriers. 
(2)  Includes: 
a.  An element of the operation such as a transportation vehicle or a central preparation facility that supplies a vending location or satellite feeding location unless the vending or feeding location is permitted by the regulatory authority; and 
b.  An operation that is conducted in a mobile, stationary, temporary, or permanent facility or location; where consumption is on or off the premises; and regardless of whether there is a charge for the food. 
(3)  Does not include: 
a.  An establishment that offers only prepackaged foods that are not time/temperature control for safety food; 
b.  A produce stand that only offers whole, uncut fresh fruits and vegetables; 
c.  A food processing plant; 
d.  A cottage food production operation as defined by Texas Health and Safety Code § 437.001; 
e.  An area where food that is prepared in a cottage food production operation is sold or offered for human consumption; 
f.  A "bed and breakfast limited" facility as that phrase is defined by 25 Texas Administrative Code § 228.2; if the consumer is informed by statements contained in published advertisements, mailed brochures, or placards posted at the registration area that the food is prepared in a kitchen that is not regulated and inspected by the Wichita City/County Public Health District; or 
g.  A private home that receives catered or home-delivered food. 
    Frozen dessert(s) means soft serve and frozen yogurt. 
    Frozen dessert pre-mix means any raw dairy-based product used to create a frozen dessert. 
    Frozen yogurt means a food produced by the bacterial fermentation of milk and served frozen or partially frozen. 
    Highly susceptible population means persons who are more likely than other people in the general population to experience foodborne disease because they are: 
(1)  Immunocompromised; preschool age children, or older adults; and 
(2)  Obtaining food at a facility that provides services such as custodial care, health care, or assisted living, such as but not limited to a child or adult day care center, kidney dialysis center, hospital or nursing home, or nutritional or socialization services such as a senior center. 
    Imminent hazard to public health means a significant threat or danger to health that is considered to exist when there is evidence sufficient to show that a product, practice, circumstance, or event creates a situation that requires immediate correction or cessation of operation to prevent illness based on: 
(1)  The number of potential illnesses, and 
(2)  The nature, severity, and duration of the anticipated illnesses. 
    Laboratory means a biological, physical or chemical laboratory which is under the supervision of the state or local health authority. 
    Mobile food unit (MFU) [means] a vehicle mounted, self or otherwise propelled, self-contained food service operation, designed to be readily movable (including, but not limited to catering trucks, trailers, push carts, and roadside vendors) and used to store, prepare, display, serve or sell food. Mobile units must completely retain their mobility at all times. A mobile food unit does not mean a stand or a booth. A roadside food vendor is classified as a MFU. 
    Mobile food unit operation means the business of a mobile food unit or mobile food pushcart. 
    Mobile food pushcart [means] a non-self-propelled mobile food unit limited to serving foods requiring a limited amount of preparation as authorized by the regulatory authority and is readily movable by one or two persons. A pushcart is classified as a mobile food unit. A pushcart does not include non-self-propelled units owned and operated within a retail food store. This type of mobile unit requires the support of a central preparation facility. 
    Outdoor food court means a lot or parcel of land established to provide facilities allowing two or more mobile food units to be parked on the property for the purpose of vending to the public on that property. 
    Person in charge (PIC) [means] the individual present at a food establishment who is responsible for the operation at the time of inspection. 
    Process means the method or amount of preparation of food utilized by a food establishment before the food is provided to the individual who will consume it. 
    Regulatory authority means the city-county public health district. 
    Soft serve means a food similar to ice cream which is created by the combination of air and dairy-based ingredients in a machine at the point of sale. 
    State rules means the state rules found at 25 Texas Administrative Code, §§ 228.1, 228.2, 228.31-228.45, 228.61-228.83, 228.101-228.125, 228.141-228.154, 228.171-228.186, 228.201-228.213, 228.221-228.225, 228.241-228.257, and 228.271-228.278. These rules are also known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
    Vend and vending mean to sell, serve or otherwise provide food for human consumption. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 1, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-422. - Rules of state board of health adopted. 
    The city adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules or the rules as amended by the state Board of Health found in 25 Texas Administrative Code, §§ 228.1, 228.2, 228.31-228.45, 228.61-228.83, 228.101-228.125, 228.141-228.154, 228.171-228.186, 228.201-228.213, 228.221-228.225, 228.241-228.257, and 228.271-228.278. regarding the regulation of food establishments. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 1, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-423. - Cleaning standards for commercial cooking equipment adopted. 
    All food equipment in use for commercial cooking within the city must be certified or classified for sanitation by an American National Standards Institute (ANSI)-accredited certification program. Standards applicable to the materials, design and construction of commercial cooking equipment shall apply only to equipment installed after December 3, 2009. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 1, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-424. - Compliance with applicable laws required. 
    All persons who manage, operate, accept employment in, or are employed in any food establishment shall comply with all applicable federal and state statutes and regulations and with all applicable sections of this Code and city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 1, 11-17-2015) 
Secs. 26-425-26-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 53-2015, § 2, adopted Nov. 17, 2015, amended Div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 26-476-26-483, 26-511-26-516, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 2001, §§ 26-476-26-483, 26-511-26-516; Ord. No. 81-2009, § 1, adopted Nov. 3, 2009; and Ord. No. 04-2015, §§ 2, 3, adopted Jan. 6, 2015. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 26-451-26-475. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Permit 

Sec. 26-476. - Permit required. 
    A person may not operate a food establishment without a valid, current permit issued by the regulatory authority. Permits are not transferable from one person to another or from one location to another location, except as otherwise permitted by this division. A valid permit must be posted per section 26-479 in or on every food establishment regulated by this division. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 2, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-477. - Application and renewal. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment, and any information required by section 26-480. The application must be submitted with the applicable fee. An incomplete application will not be accepted. 
(b)  Failure to provide all required information or falsifying information required may result in denial or revocation of the permit. 
(c)  All permits issued under this subdivision shall remain in force for one year from the date of issuance unless revoked or suspended by the regulatory authority. Permit fees shall be paid to the regulatory authority at the time of application for initial permits and 15 days prior to permit expiration for renewal permits. All permit holders, including nonprofits, that submit renewal applications or fees after the permit expires will be assessed a late charge. A complete application with updated information is required for each renewal permit. Any changes to the physical facility, menu or equipment must be reported to the regulatory authority when renewing permits. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 2, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-478. - Inspection. 
    Prior to the approval of an initial food establishment permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory authority shall inspect the proposed food establishment to determine compliance with applicable laws and state rules. A food establishment that does not comply with applicable laws and state rules will be denied a permit or the renewal of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 2, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-479. - Compliance required; posting; term; fee. 
(a)  Only persons who comply with the requirements of this division shall be entitled to receive and retain a permit required by this subdivision. Such permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place in public view in or on the food establishment. All permits issued under this subdivision remain in force one year from the date of issuance unless revoked or suspended. 
(b)  The following permits will be issued under this subdivision: 
(1)  Process 1: Low to moderate risk. This process involves food sale with or without preparation and includes no cooking. Generally, the steps in this process are: Receive ? Store ? Prepare ? Hold ? Serve ? Vend. 
(2)  Process 2: High risk. This process involves food preparation for same day service. Generally, the steps in this process are: Receive ? Store ? Prepare ? Cook ? Hold ? Serve. 
(3)  Process 3: Very high risk. This process involves complex food preparation. Generally, the steps in this process are: Receive ? Store ? Prepare ? Cook ? Cool ? Reheat ? Hot Hold ? Serve. Additionally, this process permit is required for: 
(i)  Any prepared foods that require a Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point Plan as defined by 25 Texas Administrative Code § 228.2 (64). 
(ii)  Any foods prepared for highly susceptible populations; or 
(iii)  Foods determined by the health district to be very high risk. 
(4)  Temporary events. These events last no more than seven consecutive days and applicants are limited to seven temporary event permits per year. No annually permitted establishment shall allow temporary event food vending at their site unless a temporary event application has been submitted to the regulatory authority. 
(5)  Seasonal permit. Any facility which operates for a period of no more than six consecutive months out of a 12-month period from January to December and has a limited menu that does not offer very high risk foods may apply for a seasonal permit instead of a Process 1 or 2 permit. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 2, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-480. - Review of plans. 
(a)  Whenever a food establishment is constructed or more than 20 percent of its square footage is remodeled or whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, plans and specifications properly prepared for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the City of Wichita Falls Building Inspection Division for dissemination to the regulatory authority for review before work is begun, except mobile food units which shall submit plans directly to the regulatory authority. If the structure is over 2,500 square feet or the cost of the structure exceeds $50,000.00, the plans must be submitted by an architect or engineer. The submitted plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans and construction of materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. Every commissary shall additionally submit plans showing refrigerated and dry storage areas reserved for mobile unit use. Food establishments that have been closed and are being reopened under new management as the same type of establishment shall be required to submit new equipment specifications and a floor plan of the food establishment. The regulatory authority shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet the requirements of the rules adopted by this division. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling or conversion. 
(b)  Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a permit denial, suspension, or revocation. 
(c)  The regulatory authority may collect fees in consideration of reviewing plans as established by separate ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 2, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-481. - Suspension. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing, suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. A supervisor at the regulatory authority will confirm the hazard before suspension is effective when possible. Suspension is effective upon service of the written notice required by this subdivision. When a permit is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if the reason for suspension no longer exists. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge of the food establishment at the time of suspension shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended. Opportunity for a hearing will be provided if the holder of the permit files a written request with the regulatory authority within ten days of receipt of written notice of suspension. Whenever a permit is suspended and a request for hearing made, the holder of the permit shall be afforded a hearing within 20 days of the receipt by the regulatory authority of a request for a hearing. If no written request for a hearing is filed within ten days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 2, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-482. - Revocation of permit. 
    The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a food establishment permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this division or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge of the food establishment at the time of revocation, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation. The permit shall be revoked at the end of ten days following service of such notice unless the holder of the permit files a written request for a hearing with the regulatory authority within such ten-day period. If no request for a hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 2, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-483. - Service of notice; conduct of hearings. 
(a)  A notice as required in this subdivision is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge of the food establishment at the time of the notice or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(b)  The regulatory authority shall conduct the hearings provided for in this subdivision at a time and place designated by the regulatory authority. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make final findings and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. The regulatory authority shall furnish a written report of the hearing decision to the holder of the permit. 
(c)  The regulatory authority may charge re-inspection fees for compliance inspections scheduled as a result of a revocation hearing that may require additional inspections. Fee amounts will be set by separate ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 2, 11-17-2015) 
Secs. 26-484-26-510. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Frozen Dessert Regulations 

Sec. 26-511. - Frozen dessert standards. 
(a)  All frozen desserts must meet the following standards: 
(1)  Maximum temperature: 41 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  Maximum total coliform: 150/ml. 
(b)  All soft serve must meet the following standard: Maximum standard plate count: 200,000/ml. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 2, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-512. - Frozen dessert certification required. 
(a)  Every food establishment that prepares, serves, provides, sells, displays or stores for future sale, or offers for sale frozen desserts for human consumption must have a frozen dessert certification in addition to its permit, regardless of permit category. 
(b)  In order to receive and maintain a frozen dessert certification: 
(1)  One employee from each mobile, stationary, temporary, seasonal or permanent facility or location must attend and successfully complete frozen dessert training. Such training is good for two years. The regulatory authority will provide frozen dessert training four times a year to provide instruction in general operation, cleaning and maintenance procedures. 
(2)  At least one sample of any frozen dessert pre-mix and one sample of any final frozen dessert product shall be sampled annually by the regulatory authority from each machine operated by a food establishment. Each sample will be submitted to an approved laboratory for analysis of its content. 
(3)  If any samples collected from a food establishment are not within the standards established in section 26-511, additional samples will be collected and an inspection of the equipment and facility will be conducted to determine the reason for the violation of the standards. No food establishment shall adopt any procedures that would result in repeated failures of the first samples collected for any annual inspection. Two consecutive frozen dessert samples determined by laboratory analysis to be above the limits of the standards will result in suspension of the permit to operate the food establishment or suspension of the frozen dessert certification. A resample and inspection fee will be charged for each consecutive inspection and sample tested after a permit or certification has been suspended. 
(c)  The certification shall be posted in a conspicuous place in public view. 
(d)  All certifications issued under this subdivision shall remain in force for one year from the date of issuance unless revoked or suspended. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 2, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-513. - Suspension, revocation and reinstatement of frozen dessert certification. 
(a)  A frozen dessert certification issued under this subdivision may be suspended or revoked by the regulatory authority upon the violation by the holder of any of the terms of this article. 
(b)  Any person or food establishment whose frozen dessert certification has been suspended or revoked shall immediately discontinue the preparation, service, provision, sale, display or storage for future sale of frozen dessert until the defects that caused the suspension have been corrected and the certification reinstated. Following correction, the applicant may request reinstatement of the certification by the regulatory authority. The regulatory authority may require the certification holder to demonstrate proper cleaning procedures and maintenance of the frozen dessert equipment before reinstating the certification. 
(c)  Notice of suspension or revocation, and the conduct of hearing for any suspension or revocation of a frozen dessert certification shall be conducted under the procedures established in sections 26-481 through 26-483. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 2, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-514. - Labeling. 
    All frozen dessert products and frozen dessert pre-mix not sold at the point of manufactured origin must be properly labeled according to current Food and Drug Administration guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 2, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-515. - Vending without certification. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to prepare, serve, provide, sell, display or store for future sale, or offer for sale frozen desserts at a food establishment that does not hold a current frozen dessert certification. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 2, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-516. - Possession or receiving from manufacturer without certification. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to receive into the city for sale or to offer for sale in the city or to have in storage for future sale ice cream mix or frozen dessert pre-mix without first applying for all required permits and certifications from the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 2, 11-17-2015) 
Subdivision IV. - Dog Patio Permit 

Sec. 26-517. - Permit required. 
    A person shall not allow dogs on the food establishment patio unless the food establishment has a current valid dog patio permit issued by the Wichita Falls Health District. Permits are not transferrable except as otherwise permitted by this article. A valid permit must be posted per section 26-479 in or on every food establishment regulated by this division. 
(Ord. No. 31-2016, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 26-518. - Term and limitations. 
    A permit granted under this section is for one year to run concurrent with the food establishment permit codified in section 26-476. The permit may be revoked by the director or terminated by the food establishment. The permit may be renewed per the application process set out in section 26-519 below. 
(Ord. No. 31-2016, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 26-519. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a food establishment that allows dogs on the patio must make written application for a dog patio permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment, and any information required by section 26-480. The application must be submitted with the applicable fee. An incomplete application will not be accepted. 
(b)  Failure to provide all required information or falsifying information required may result in denial or revocation of the permit. 
(c)  All permits issued under this subdivision shall remain in force for one year from the date of issuance unless revoked or suspended by the regulatory authority. Permit fees shall be paid to the regulatory authority at the time of application for initial permits and 15 days prior to permit expiration for renewal permits. All permit holders, including nonprofits, that submit renewal applications or fees after the permit expires will be assessed a late charge. A complete application with updated information is required for each renewal permit. Any changes to the physical facility or other change that may affect the patio area where dogs are allowed must be reported to the regulatory authority when renewing permits. 
(Ord. No. 31-2016, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 26-520. - Revocation of permit. 
    The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a dog friendly patio permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this subdivision or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge of the food establishment that holds the dog friendly patio permit at the time of revocation, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation. The permit shall be revoked at the end of ten days following service of such notice unless the holder of the permit files a written request for a hearing with the regulatory authority within such ten-day period. If no request for a hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 31-2016, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 26-521. - Suspension. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing, suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. A supervisor at the regulatory authority will confirm the hazard before suspension is effective when possible. Suspension is effective upon service of the written notice required by this subdivision. When a permit is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if the reason for suspension no longer exists. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge of the food establishment at the time of suspension shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended. Opportunity for a hearing will be provided if the holder of the permit files a written request with the regulatory authority within ten days of receipt of written notice of suspension. Whenever a permit is suspended and a request for hearing made, the holder of the permit shall be afforded a hearing within 20 days of the receipt by the regulatory authority of a request for a hearing. If no written request for a hearing is filed within ten days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(Ord. No. 31-2016, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 26-522. - Service of notice; conduct of hearings. 
(a)  A notice as required in this subdivision is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge of the food establishment at the time of the notice or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(b)  The regulatory authority shall conduct the hearings provided for in this subdivision at a time and place designated by the regulatory authority. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make final findings and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. The regulatory authority shall furnish a written report of the hearing decision to the holder of the permit. 
(c)  The regulatory authority may charge re-inspection fees for compliance inspections scheduled as a result of a revocation hearing that may require additional inspections. Fee amounts will be set by separate ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 31-2016, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 26-523. - Inspection. 
    Prior to the approval of an initial dog patio permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory authority may inspect the proposed food establishment to determine compliance with applicable laws, state rules, and Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances. A food establishment that holds a dog friendly patio permit that does not comply with applicable laws will be denied a permit or the renewal of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 31-2016, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 26-524. - Compliance requirements of dog friendly patio permit holders. 
(a)  Pursuant to § 228.186(o) of the Texas Food Establishment Rules (TFER) which prohibits animals on the premises of a food establishment, The Wichita Falls Health District may grant a dog friendly patio permit to a food establishment in order to allow dogs to be present in the outdoor patio area of a food establishment. The food establishment shall comply with the following conditions to ensure that a health hazard or nuisance will not result from the modification or waiver: 
1.  The dog patio permit authorizes a food establishment to allow dogs to be present only in the food establishment's designated outdoor patio area. 
2.  A separate entrance must be provided from the outside of the food establishment to the outdoor patio so that a dog will have direct access to the patio without entering the interior of the food establishment or any playground area of the food establishment. 
3.  An approved sign shall be posted at the front entrance of the food establishment so that it is easily visible to the public. The sign must state: "DOG FRIENDLY PATIO: DOG ACCESS TO OUTDOOR PATIO ONLY." The sign shall also include "To report violations, contact Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public Health District at 940-761-7820." 
4.  Doors at all entrances to the outdoor patio from the interior of the food establishment must be equipped with self-closing devices and kept closed when not in use. 
5.  No food preparation may be performed in the outdoor patio area, except that a beverage glass may be filled on the patio from a pitcher or other container that has been filled or otherwise prepared inside the food establishment. 
6.  Hand sanitizer shall be available to customers and employees in the outdoor patio. 
7.  The outdoor patio must be continuously maintained free of visible dog hair, dog dander, and other dog-related waste or debris. The outdoor patio must be cleaned with animal friendly chemicals at the beginning of each shift during which food or beverages will be served. Waste created from a dog's bodily functions must be removed and cleaned with animal friendly chemicals immediately after each occurrence. Appropriate materials for this purpose shall be kept near the designated outdoor area. All dog waste shall be placed in insect and rodent proof containers located adjacent to the patio and must be disposed of outside of the food establishment in an approved covered waste receptacle. Equipment used to clean the outdoor patio must be kept outside of the food establishment. 
8.  While on duty, wait staff, bus staff, or other food handlers at the food establishment may not pet or have contact with any dog. 
9.  A dog must be kept on a non-retractable leash no longer than six feet in length and remain in the control of the customer while in the outdoor patio area. 
10.  The dog must have proof of current rabies vaccination. The dog must also have a current license issued by the local jurisdiction where the dog resides. Contact the Wichita Falls Animal Services at 940-761-7824 for information about a City of Wichita Falls Dog License. 
11.  Any bite or scratch from a dog shall be reported to Wichita Falls Animal Services at 940-761-7824. 
12.  A dog is not allowed on a seat, table, countertop, or any other surface that customers use in the outdoor patio area. 
13.  A dog is not allowed to have contact with any dishes or utensils used for food service or preparation at the food establishment. 
14.  Food establishment personnel may not serve any food to the dog. Kibble, biscuits, and edible treats may be given to the dog by the customer. Water for dogs shall be provided by the food establishment in a disposable container. 
(b)  The health district may collect an annual fee for review and enforcement of the dog variance permit which will run concurrent with the retail food establishment permit. 
(Ord. No. 31-2016, § 1, 9-6-2016) 
Secs. 26-525-26-544. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FOOD HANDLER'S TRAINING CERTIFICATE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 53-2015, § 3, adopted Nov. 17, 2015, amended Div. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 3, §§ 26-545-26-550, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 2001, §§ 26-545-26-549; Ord. No. 81-2009, § 1, adopted Nov. 3, 2009; and Ord. No. 04-2015, § 4, adopted Jan. 6, 2016. 

Sec. 26-545. - Food handler's training certificate required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to accept employment in any food establishment without securing a food handler's training certificate. It shall be unlawful for any person operating or managing any food establishment to employ or retain any person or allow any person to work as a food handler unless that person has obtained either a current temporary receipt issued under section 26-548 or a current food handler's training certificate. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 3, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-546. - Application and administration. 
    The regulatory authority may administer a food handler's training certificate and food protection manager's certificate program. Any person who is required to have certificate under this division shall attend and successfully complete a training approved by the regulatory authority, Texas Department of State Health Services or a course accredited by the American National Standards Institute. 
    It is the responsibility of the person in charge of the food establishment to keep a certificate of completion of the training course for all employees of the food establishment available on site for compliance review by the inspector. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 3, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-547. - Temporary receipt; issuance. 
(a)  When an applicant for a certificate required by this division makes application to the regulatory authority, a temporary receipt, valid for 30 calendar days, will be issued to the applicant to allow the applicant to continue employment at a food establishment while completing the food handler's training certificate course. Applicants are limited to one successive temporary receipt. If an applicant has not successfully completed the food handler's training course by the time the temporary receipt expires, the applicant cannot continue employment as a food handler. 
(b)  Upon successful completion of the training course, the regulatory authority will issue a food handler's training certificate, which shall expire two years from the date of the food handler's certificate application. Permanent food handler's cards previously granted by the regulatory authority will be honored. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 3, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-548. - Food handler's training certificate training courses accepted. 
    The regulatory authority shall accept training issued by all companies or programs approved by the Texas Department of State Health Services under 25 Texas Administrative Code § 228.33. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 3, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-549. - Fee. 
    A fee shall be charged by the health district for completing the food handler's training certificate. There shall be a charge for replacement cards. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 3, 11-17-2015) 
Secs. 26-550-26-569. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 53-2015, § 4, adopted Nov. 17, 2015, amended Div. 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 4, §§ 26-570-26-575, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 04-2015, § 5, adopted Jan. 6, 2015. 

Sec. 26-570. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  No person shall operate a mobile food unit who does not possess a valid, current mobile food unit permit from the regulatory authority as provided in this article. The permit for a mobile food unit shall specify the type of food to be vended, the manner in which the food is to be vended, and include a description of any vehicle or pushcart to be used in the food vending operation. 
(b)  A person seeking a mobile food unit permit from the regulatory authority shall make application on a form provided by the regulatory authority, and shall provide all of the information listed in the following subsections as part of the application: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner and operator; 
(2)  A copy of a current driver's license of the owner and operator, if the mobile food unit is to be powered by a motor or towed; 
(3)  If the applicant represents a corporation, limited liability company, association, or partnership, the names and addresses of the persons responsible for the entity's operations; 
(4)  The name under which the mobile food unit will be operated; 
(5)  A description of the type of food or the specific foods to be vended; 
(6)  The manner of mobile food vending operation to be conducted; 
(7)  A description of all vehicles to be used in the mobile food unit operation along with the license or registration and vehicle identification number of said vehicles, and a copy of the current certificate of liability for all said vehicles; 
(8)  The address and food establishment permit number of the central preparation facility for all vehicles to be used in the mobile food unit operation; and 
(9)  Any other information required by the regulatory authority as it pertains to the safe operation of the mobile food unit. 
(c)  Upon receiving a proper application for a mobile food unit permit, the regulatory authority shall inspect the location, food, equipment, vehicles and other reasonable matters concerning the mobile food unit operation and shall issue a permit and a sticker only if: 
(1)  The application complies with subsection (b); and 
(2)  The inspection reveals compliance with the applicable requirements of all federal and state statutes and regulations, and city ordinances governing the proposed mobile food unit operation. 
(d)  Fees shall be determined by the risk process level appropriate for the establishment and be in addition to any central preparation facility fees. 
(e)  A valid permit sticker shall be displayed by a mobile food unit. 
(f)  Mobile food unit permits shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance unless suspended or revoked. 
(g)  Mobile food unit permits shall not be transferred or assigned and shall be considered revoked should the character of the food vending operation be changed from that specified in the permit. 
(h)  Every mobile food unit permit shall be renewed each year in like manner as the original permit application. 
(i)  The regulatory authority shall make routine, unannounced inspections of mobile food units, mobile food pushcarts, outdoor food courts, and commissaries when applicable, to determine whether or not the operation is being conducted in such a manner as to comply with the conditions of the permit, the provisions of this article, other applicable city ordinances and state and federal statutes, regulations and rules. 
(j)  The regulatory authority may take and retain samples of food and other substances used in the preparation of food and examine it for the detection of unwholesome and deleterious qualities. The regulatory authority may condemn and forbid the sale of or cause to be removed or destroyed, any food which is adulterated, tainted, diseased, fermented, decaying or otherwise unwholesome, unclean or deleterious to health. The owner, operator or other person in charge of such food shall immediately and in the presence of the regulatory authority, destroy such adulterated, tainted, diseased, fermented, decaying or otherwise unwholesome, unclean food as directed by the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 4, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-571. - Operation requirements and restrictions. 
    Mobile food units are subject to the following requirements and restrictions unless specifically addressed otherwise: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to operate any mobile food unit handling time/temperature control food for safety (TCS) as defined by Chapter 25 of the Texas Administrative Code, Section 228.2(144) unless the mobile food unit is commercially manufactured. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for a person to vend on any portion of city streets where the speed limit exceeds 30 miles per hour or on four-lane divided roadways. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for a person to vend from a mobile food unit within an "active school crossing zone" as defined by the Texas Transportation Code. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for a person to vend from a mobile food unit unless the mobile food unit is lawfully parked or stopped. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for a person to vend from the side of the mobile food unit facing moving traffic. Mobile food units shall vend from as near as possible to the curb or edge of the street. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for a person to vend from a mobile food unit to a person standing in the roadway. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for a person to stop a mobile food unit on the left side of a one-way street to vend. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful for a person to vend from a mobile food unit on a street unless there is a clear view of the mobile food unit for a distance of 200 feet in each direction. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a mobile food unit to set up, maintain or provide service to any tables, chairs or benches for customer seating outside or within 20 feet of a mobile food unit. This prohibition does not apply to approved outdoor food courts. 
(10)  It shall be unlawful for a person to make any alteration, removal, attachments, placement or change in, under or upon a mobile food unit that would prevent or otherwise reduce ready mobility. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 4, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-572. - Sanitation requirements for all mobile food units. 
    Mobile food units (including mobile food pushcarts) shall comply with the following requirements. These requirements pertain to all such establishments unless specifically addressed otherwise: 
(1)  Mobile food units shall comply with all sanitation and construction regulations as outlined in 25 Texas Administrative Code Rule 228.221 as adopted in this chapter unless specifically addressed in this section. 
(2)  A mobile food unit shall be operated from a central preparation facility and shall report to the central preparation facility each day of operation for all cleaning and servicing operations. The mobile food unit shall acquire needed supplies from the central preparation facility or other approved source. The mobile food unit shall provide documentation of each visit to the central preparation facility and shall have that documentation available for inspection. Mobile food units dispensing fresh fish and shrimp, prepackaged novelty ice cream, whole, uncut fruit and vegetables and individual portion size nonperishable foods such as pickles, candy, peanuts and including snow cones/shaved ice/raspas are exempt from this provision. 
(3)  Certain foods shall require additional equipment or sanitation procedures to ensure safety: 
a.  Mobile food units that sell snow cones, shaved ice, or raspas shall provide a gravity fed hand washing system, soap, and paper towels at the establishment. Such establishments shall be designed so as to enable the operator of the unit to protect the equipment, syrup, ice and utensils used in the operation of the unit from dust, insects and rodents while the unit is in transit or overnight storage. 
b.  Mobile food units or mobile food pushcarts that sell shrimp, fish, shellfish, or crustacea shall ensure that all such products are safe for human consumption, from an approved source, in sound condition, and free from spoilage, filth, or any other type of contamination. Shrimp shall be maintained at 41° Fahrenheit or below, and stored in either a mechanical refrigeration unit, or in ice in a clean and sanitized container with a lid. Ice must be from an approved source. Additionally, the establishment must install a three-compartment sink, plumbed with hot (minimum 110° F) and cold running water under pressure, for the purpose of cleaning and sanitizing the food contact surfaces of equipment and utensils. A hand wash sink "equipped to provide water at a temperature of at least 100° F through a mixing valve or combination faucet" shall also be provided and furnished with soap and paper towels. 
(4)  Liquid waste resulting from any mobile vending operation shall be stored in permanently installed retention tanks of at least 15 percent larger capacity than the water supply tank but of no less than 30 gallon capacity and shall be drained and thoroughly flushed during servicing operations. All liquid waste shall be discharged to an approved sanitary sewage disposal system at the central preparation facility. 
(5)  All food that requires packaging or advance preparation by the mobile food unit shall be processed in the central preparation facility. 
(6)  Mobile food units which are parked and engaged in operations shall provide waste containers for customers sufficient to handle the volume of waste generated by the mobile food unit. Waste containers shall be emptied or disposed of at the central preparation facility. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 4, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-573. - Sanitation requirements for mobile food units with facilities to prepare food. 
    Mobile food units preparing and vending food on-site, commonly referred to in the trade as "hot trucks," shall comply with the following additional requirements: 
(1)  A mobile food unit servicing area shall be provided at the central preparation facility, and shall include at least overhead protection for any supplying, cleaning or servicing operation. Within this servicing area, there shall be a location provided for the flushing and the draining of liquid waste separate from the location provided for water servicing and for the loading and the unloading of food and related supplies. 
(2)  The central preparation facility will provide a date/time device, with associated means to record the date and time, and require each mobile food unit that is serviced to document the date and time of arrival and departure from the central preparation facility. The mobile food unit will make available for inspection the record of the date and time of the servicing at the central preparation facility. 
(3)  Approved water storage facilities for potable water shall be provided on the mobile food unit and shall be of sufficient capacity (minimum 25 gallons) to furnish enough water for food preparation, utensil cleaning and sanitizing, and hand washing. The water inlet shall be located in such a position that it will not be contaminated by waste discharge, road dust, oil or grease and it shall be kept capped when not being used to fill the storage facility. The water inlet shall be provided with a transition connection of a size or type that will prevent its use for any other service. All water and gas distribution pipes or tubing shall be constructed and installed in accordance with public health and plumbing standards as set out by the ordinances of the city. The water for said operations shall be from an approved source. 
(4)  Either of the following shall be provided by the mobile food unit for its operations: 
a.  A heating device of sufficient capacity to produce 110° Fahrenheit hot water; or 
b.  An instantaneous heater capable of producing 110° Fahrenheit hot water. 
(5)  All operations related to the preparation of food shall be carried on from within the mobile food unit. 
(6)  Any additional equipment or the arrangement thereof other than approved when the permit was issued shall be prohibited unless approved in advance by the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 4, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-574. - Sanitation requirements for mobile food pushcarts. 
    In addition to those requirements applicable to all mobile food units, the following requirements shall be met by mobile food pushcarts: 
(1)  All equipment utilized in the mobile food pushcart shall have prior approval of the regulatory authority. 
(2)  Snow cone, shaved ice, and raspa vendors shall provide a gravity fed hand washing station on the mobile food pushcart. Soap and paper towels are to be provided. Waste water from hand washing is to be collected in a sealable container and disposed of in a sanitary sewer. 
(3)  Any additional equipment or the arrangement thereof other than approved when the permit was issued shall be prohibited unless approved in advance by the regulatory authority. 
(4)  The mobile food pushcart shall be located in clean surroundings, on concrete, brick or equally impervious ground and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for a mobile food pushcart to operate on the public streets and city parks. 
(6)  The mobile food unit pushcart shall be cleaned and serviced at the central preparation facility at the beginning of each day and shall be stored inside a building when not in operation. The mobile food unit shall acquire needed supplies from the central preparation facility or other approved source. The mobile food unit shall provide documentation of each visit to the central preparation facility and shall have that documentation available for inspection. 
(7)  Each mobile food pushcart vending food in storage containers open to the air shall: 
a.  Provide only single service articles for use by consumers; and 
b.  Set aside a separate space for non-food related items. 
(8)  Each mobile food pushcart shall have a stainless steel hand wash lavatory and a stainless steel sink with a minimum of two compartments when utensil washing is required. Both must provide adequate amounts of hot and cold water under pressure, and access shall be provided to a supply of paper towels, soap, and detergent. Each mobile food pushcart shall also have adequate drain board space. This subsection does not apply to mobile food hand-cards vending only prepackaged food products. 
(9)  Each mobile food pushcart shall provide and have available for the public a fly proof, lidded trash container for the disposal of refuse. Such trash container may be either on the mobile food pushcart or located conveniently nearby. 
(10)  Each mobile food pushcart employing butane or propane tanks shall comply with any and all applicable fire department regulations. Ground fault interrupters may be required by the fire department as a safety feature to prevent electrical shock. Each mobile food pushcart subject to these requirements shall be equipped with an approved fire extinguisher with a 2A 10BC rating. 
(11)  When the mobile food pushcart is operated outside, a cleanable canopy shall extend over the mobile food pushcart and cover its top surface. 
(12)  No advertising shall be permitted on any mobile food pushcart except for the posting of prices, the identification of the name of the product, and the name of the vendor. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 4, 11-17-2015) 
Sec. 26-575. - Operation requirements and restrictions for outdoor food courts. 
(a)  Outdoor food courts shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The property must comply with all provisions of Appendices A and B of this Code; 
(2)  All outdoor food courts that provide overnight connections must have an adequately sized and permitted grease trap. 
(3)  All mobile food units that are unable to comply with the requirements of this subsection shall be removed from the property overnight and serviced by an approved central preparation facility prior to its next day of operation; and 
(4)  A restroom equipped with flush type toilets and properly plumbed to a sanitary sewage system with sufficient capacity to meet the needs of the outdoor food court's mobile food units and customers shall be available on the outdoor food court premises. Restrooms shall be equipped with hand sinks, soap, hot and cold water and either hand towels or forced air hand dryers. 
(b)  Permanent pavilions and seating areas for customers may be provided at an outdoor food court. 
(c)  If the outdoor food court provides adequate central preparation facility and storage for the mobile food units as determined by the health district, those mobile food units may be exempt from the central preparation facility requirements of this article during such time as they remain on the outdoor food court premises. 
(Ord. No. 53-2015, § 4, 11-17-2015) 
Secs. 26-576-26-690. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PRIVATE SOLID WASTE HAULERS 

Sec. 26-691. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Clean wood materials means wood or wood materials, including stumps, roots, or vegetation with intact root ball; sawdust; pallets; and manufacturing rejects. The term "clean wood materials" does not include wood that has been treated, coated or painted by materials such as, but not limited to, paints, varnishes, wood preservatives, or other chemical products. The term "clean wood materials" also does not include demolition material, where the material is contaminated by materials such as, but not limited to, paint or other chemicals, glass, electrical wiring, metal and sheetrock. 
    Contract hauler means any person who is being paid for hauling municipal solid waste for another establishment. 
    Garbage means solid waste consisting of putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, handling, and sale of produce and other food products. 
    Municipal solid waste means solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community, commercial, institutional, and recreational activities, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, and all other solid waste other than industrial solid waste as defined in state law. 
    Private hauler means an individual owning his own vehicle hauling municipal solid waste from commercial establishments. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum or similar materials collected from any premises within the city limits. 
    Source-separated compostable organics means organic materials that at the point of generation have been separated, collected and transported separately from non-organic materials and that are compostable at the city's composting operation. The term "source-separated compostable organics" may include materials such as, but not limited to, yard trimmings, clean wood materials, paper, manure, vegetative material and water treatment sludge. Materials must be compostable by the city using the permits and equipment available at the time of delivery. The sanitation superintendent will have the final determination of which materials qualify. Contamination by foreign objects will disqualify that load from consideration. 
    Type I landfill means the standard landfill for disposal of municipal solid waste. 
    Vehicle means every device in or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public street or highway. 
    Yard waste means leaves, grass clippings and yard debris, brush, including clean woody vegetative material that results from landscaping maintenance and land clearing operations. The term "yard waste" does not include stumps, roots, or shrubs with intact root balls. 
(Code 1966, § 17-57; Code 2001, § 26-691) 
Sec. 26-692. - Enforcement. 
    The director of the Department of Public Works shall enforce this article and shall have the power to make inspections to determine whether or not municipal solid waste is being properly collected, transported and disposed of in a sanitary manner. 
(Code 1966, § 17-65; Code 2001, § 26-692) 
Sec. 26-693. - Access to transfer station. 
    All private haulers and contract haulers of municipal solid waste who are properly licensed by the city shall have access to the transfer station tipping floor with the following exceptions: 
(1)  No detachable container with a volume in excess of 12 cubic yards shall be emptied from the transfer station tipping floor. 
(2)  Trailers exceeding 20 feet in length will not be parked on or driven across the tipping floor. 
(Code 1966, § 17-66; Code 2001, § 26-693) 
Sec. 26-694. - Vehicle requirements. 
    Any vehicle for solid waste collection by a private hauler will be required to have a completely enclosed bed or body with a solid bottom and sides, equipped with a top or cover which will permit the complete enclosure of the contents of the bed or body. Such cover or top shall be used at any time the vehicle is transporting municipal solid waste over city streets and alleys. 
(Code 1966, § 17-60; Code 2001, § 26-694) 
Secs. 26-695-26-755. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - WRECKER BUSINESSES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Towing and Booting Act, Texas Occupations Code § 2308.001 et seq. 

Sec. 26-756. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accident means any occurrence which renders a vehicle wrecked or disabled, as defined in this section. 
    Chief of police means the chief of police for the city or the person designated by him to act in his stead for the purposes of this article. 
    City permit means authorization granted to a towing company by the city under this article to tow vehicles within the city. 
    City permit holder means any entity possessing a current, valid city permit to tow vehicles within the city. 
    Consent tow means any tow of a vehicle in which the tow truck is summoned by the owner or operator of the vehicle or by a person who has possession, custody, or control of the vehicle. The term "consent tow" does not include an incident management tow or a private property tow. 
    Disabled means the status of any vehicle which had been rendered unsafe to be driven upon the streets as the result of some occurrence other than a wreck, including, but not limited to, mechanical failures or breakdowns, fire, the elements, or vandalism, so as to reasonably necessitate that such vehicle be removed by a tow truck. 
    Hazardous material means: 
(1)  Any substance classified as a hazardous material under state or federal law or under a rule adopted pursuant to state or federal law; or 
(2)  A chemical petroleum product, gas or other substance that, if discharged or released, will or is likely to create an imminent danger to individuals, property or environment. 
    Incident management tow means any tow of a vehicle in which the tow truck is summoned by a peace officer because of a traffic accident or to an incident. 
    Non-consent tow means any tow of a vehicle that is not a consent tow, including an incident management tow and a private property tow. 
    Parking facility means public or private property used, wholly or partly, for restricted or paid vehicle parking. The term "parking facility" includes: 
(1)  A restricted space on a portion of an otherwise unrestricted parking facility; and 
(2)  A commercial parking lot, a parking garage, and a parking area serving or adjacent to a business, church, school, home, apartment complex, property governed by a property owners' association, or government-owned property leased to a private person, including: 
a.  A portion of the right-of-way of a public roadway that is leased by a governmental entity to the parking facility owner; and 
b.  The area between the facility's property line abutting a county or municipal public roadway and the centerline of the roadway's drainage way or the curb of the roadway, whichever is farther from the facility's property line. 
    Parking facility owner means: 
(1)  An individual, corporation, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company, association, trust, or other legal entity owning or operating a parking facility; 
(2)  A property owners' association having control under a dedicatory instrument, as that term is defined in Texas Property Code § 202.001, over assigned or unassigned parking areas; or 
(3)  A property owner having an exclusive right under a dedicatory instrument, as that term is defined in Texas Property Code § 202.001, to use a parking place. 
    Police Department means the City of Wichita Falls Police Department and its officers, authorized employees and agents. 
    Police tow means an incident management tow initiated when the Police Department calls a rotation contract holder from a rotation list. 
    Private property tow means any tow of a vehicle authorized by a parking facility owner without the consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle. 
    Private property towing permit means a state-issued permit required for a tow truck used to perform a non-consent tow authorized by a parking facility owner. A tow truck permitted for this type of tow may also be used for consent towing but not for incident management towing, in accordance with Texas Occupations Code § 2308.104. 
    Public roadway means a public street, alley, road, right-of-way, or other public way, including paved and unpaved portions of the right-of-way. 
    Rotation contract means an agreement between the city and a towing company to perform police tows. 
    Rotation contract holder means a towing company contracted with the city to perform police tows. 
    Rotation list means any list prepared in accordance with a rotation contract and the provisions of this article. 
    State means the State of Texas and its offices, departments and agencies. 
    Tow truck means a motor vehicle, including a wrecker, equipped with a mechanical device used to tow, winch, or otherwise move another vehicle. 
    Towing company means an individual, association, corporation or other legal entity that controls, operates or directs the operation of one or more tow trucks over a public highway in the state, but does not include a political subdivision of the state. 
    Vehicle means a device in, on, or by which a person or property may be transported on a public roadway. The term "vehicle" includes an operable or inoperable automobile, truck, motorcycle, recreational vehicle, or trailer, but does not include a device moved by human power or used exclusively on a stationary rail or track. 
    Vehicle owner means a person: 
(1)  Named as the purchaser or transferor in the certificate of title issued for the vehicle under Texas Transportation Code ch. 501; 
(2)  In whose name the vehicle is registered under Texas Transportation Code ch. 502, or a member of the person's immediate family; 
(3)  Who holds the vehicle through a lease agreement; 
(4)  Who is an unrecorded lienholder entitled to possess the vehicle under the terms of a chattel mortgage; or 
(5)  Who is a lienholder holding an affidavit of repossession and entitled to repossess the vehicle. 
    Vehicle storage facility means a vehicle storage facility, as defined by Texas Occupations Code § 2303.002, that is operated by a person who holds license issued under Texas Occupations Code ch. 2303 to operate the facility. 
    Wrecked means the status of any vehicle damaged in any manner of collision which renders the vehicle inoperable mechanically or unsafe to operate. 
(Code 2001, § 26-756; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
State Law reference- Definitions, Texas Occupations Code § 2308.002. 
Sec. 26-757. - Applicability. 
(a)  The prohibitions and requirements of this article shall apply to all vehicles towed on public roadways located in the city. This article shall also apply to vehicles seized by the Police Department. 
(b)  Any tow truck operated within the city shall be in full compliance with all applicable state and federal rules, including, but not limited to, those pertaining to vehicle registration, insurance and safety equipment. 
(Code 2001, § 26-757; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 26-758. - Emergency aid excluded. 
    The prohibitions and requirements of this article shall not apply to any person who necessarily must act immediately to prevent death or bodily injury to any person involved in an accident. 
(Code 2001, § 26-758; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 26-759. - Towing by vehicle other than tow truck. 
    A vehicle may be pushed or towed by a vehicle other than a permitted tow truck only when it does not reasonably require removal by a tow truck and only when such may be done in a safe and legal manner. 
(Code 2001, § 26-759; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 26-760. - Permit required; application; fee. 
(a)  A towing company that desires to tow vehicles shall obtain a city permit from the city. Companies that desire to perform police tows shall enter into a rotation contract with the city. All non-consent tows shall terminate within the city limits, except when directed by a law enforcement agency. 
(b)  An applicant for a new or renewal city permit shall submit, on a form provided by the city, a verified application containing or accompanied by the following: 
(1)  The true name, the trade name, location and mailing address, and telephone number of the towing company; 
(2)  The name, date of birth and home address of the applicant if a sole proprietorship; 
(3)  The name, date of birth and home address of each partner if the applicant is a partnership; 
(4)  The name, date of birth and home address of each corporate officer, if the applicant is a corporation; 
(5)  The name, address and driver's license number of every tow truck driver employed by the applicant; 
(6)  The location of the applicant's vehicle storage facility and a photocopy of the state license for the facility; 
(7)  A certificate from the city/county tax assessor-collector that all city taxes on all properties, real and personal, to be used in connection with the applicant's business are current; 
(8)  A certificate of liability insurance issued by a company authorized to do business in the state which identifies coverage in the amounts required under this article; and 
(9)  For each tow truck, the applicant intends to utilize: 
a.  The make, model, size and model year; 
b.  The vehicle identification number; 
c.  The state license plate number; 
d.  The state tow truck license plate number; and 
e.  A photocopy of the certificate of registration issued by the state; 
(10)  Copies of all permits as issued by the state for specific types of towing (incident management towing, private property towing and/or consent towing); 
(11)  Copies of all appropriate licenses for each tow truck driver and towing companies; 
(12)  Copies of continuing education requirements for license holders. 
(c)  Every application for a new or renewal city permit and/or rotation contract required under this article shall be sworn to by the applicant or city permit and/or rotation contract holder, and shall be accompanied by payment of a fee established by separate ordinance. 
(d)  No city permit or rotation contract shall be transferred or assigned from any person or company to another. When any change of ownership or change of controlling interest occurs, any existing city permit and/or rotation contract shall immediately terminate. 
(Code 2001, § 26-760; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 26-761. - Rotation contracts and police tows. 
(a)  All police tows shall be undertaken pursuant to the terms and conditions of a rotation contract specifically executed between the city and the towing company. All such related services and fees shall be established as a provision of the contract for services. 
(b)  The city may not execute a rotation contract with a towing company if: 
(1)  One or more of the following entities has been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude and five years has not elapsed since the conviction and completion of any sentences, parole, or probation that resulted from the conviction: 
a.  The towing company; 
b.  Any of the towing company's owners or officers; 
c.  Any of the towing company partners, if the towing company is a partnership; 
d.  Any of the towing company's managers or members who have authority to make decisions on behalf of the entire company, if the towing company is a limited liability company; 
e.  Any of the towing company's directors, if the towing company is a corporation or other entity with directors; 
f.  Any of the towing company's trustees, if the towing company is a trust; or 
g.  Any owner of all or part of a vehicle storage facility or any tow truck utilized by the towing company. 
For purposes of this subsection (b)(1), a person shall be considered convicted if they entered into a deferred adjudication or otherwise entered a plea of guilty or no contest. 
(2)  One or more of the following entities owes delinquent fees or taxes to the city: 
a.  The towing company; 
b.  Any of the towing company's owners or officers; 
c.  Any of the towing company partners, if the towing company is a partnership; 
d.  Any of the towing company's managers or members who have authority to make decisions on behalf of the entire company, if the towing company is a limited liability company; 
e.  Any of the towing company's directors, if the towing company is a corporation or other entity with directors; 
f.  Any of the towing company's trustees, if the towing company is a trust; or 
g.  Any owner of all or part of a vehicle storage facility or any tow truck utilized by the towing company. 
This subsection (b)(2) shall not apply to the extent the city is prohibited by state or federal law from considering the debt in authorizing a permit or other governmental benefit. 
(c)  The towing company applicant must fully complete and verify a rotation contract application, which shall be in a form promulgated by the chief of police. 
(Code 2001, § 26-761; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 26-762. - Issuance and expiration of permits and contracts. 
(a)  The city shall issue a city permit to every towing company complying with this article unless legal grounds exist for denying such a permit. 
(b)  The city shall issue to each city permit holder an inspection permit for each tow truck that passes an inspection pursuant to section 26-766. The inspection permit shall be prominently displayed on the left side of the front windshield. 
(c)  Operating a tow truck without an inspection permit issued by the city, as required by this article, shall be unlawful. 
(d)  Any person permitting the operation of a tow truck owned by that person or by a another legal entity of which the person is an agent when the tow truck does not have an inspection permit issued by the city as required by this article is committing a violation of this article. 
(e)  Every city permit shall expire at 11:59 p.m. on September 30 of each year. 
(Code 2001, § 26-762; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 26-763. - Insurance. 
    Every towing company having a city permit shall carry general liability coverage and workers' compensation or accident insurance in the amounts required by Texas Occupations Code § 2308.001 et seq. 
(Code 2001, § 26-763; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 26-764. - Operations. 
(a)  The chief of police is authorized to establish rotation lists for police tows. The lists are composed of tow truck companies that have entered into rotation contracts with the city, and that have requested and are qualified to appear on a particular list. The Police Department shall establish and maintain these lists so as to alternate among the towing companies as much as practicable while ensuring each towing company receives all of its allotted rotation list slots. From the rotation lists, the Police Department shall call a towing company to: 
(1)  Remove a wrecked or disabled vehicle, or a vehicle in safe driving condition, but whose owner is not present, able or permitted to drive or to make authorizations; 
(2)  Remove a wrecked or disabled vehicle when the owner fails to designate a specific repair place or tow truck operator to remove his vehicle, and has authorized the Police Department to call a tow truck; and 
(3)  Remove a vehicle that the Police Department has determined is evidence or that may contain evidence in a criminal investigation. 
(b)  If the owner of a disabled vehicle is physically unable to designate to a police officer on the scene a city permit holder to remove the vehicle or the owner fails or refuses to designate one or has no preference, the police officer shall communicate that fact immediately to the police communications center or its authorized agent. The police communications center or its authorized agent shall then call the city permit holder next in line on the appropriate city rotation list and request the permit holder to tow the vehicle from the scene. After the last city permit holder on the rotation list has been called, the next such call shall go to the first city permit holder on the rotation list. 
(c)  If the owner of the vehicle does not designate a city permit holder, and the police officer contacts the communications center requesting a tow, the dispatch of the call shall constitute a police tow. The responding rotation contract holder shall deliver the vehicle to the location requested by the owner; however, the call remains a police tow. The vehicle owner shall pay the towing fees in this situation and the towing company may charge reasonable towing fees for this service. 
(d)  If, after arrival at the scene, the police officer in charge determines that assistance is needed, the rotation contract holder on-site shall dispatch immediately another tow truck of his choice. 
(e)  If, after arrival at the scene, and before the tow truck begins to depart from the scene, the owner of the vehicle requests the vehicle not be towed, the police officer may inform the tow truck driver to leave the vehicle at the scene. At that point, the police officer shall notify communications center to place the rotation contract holder back at the top of the rotation list. 
(Code 2001, § 26-764; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 26-765. - Equipment and vehicle storage facility required. 
(a)  An applicant for a city permit required under this article or an applicant for a permit renewal shall own or lease the following: 
(1)  The types of tow trucks and equipment required to safely conduct tows in accordance with the provisions of Texas Occupations Code § 2308.001 et seq. 
(2)  Storage facility. The applicant must own or have use of a storage facility licensed under the occupation code and be in full compliance with all relevant state statutes. The facility shall be located within the corporate city limits and must be completely enclosed with adequate fencing, locks, and other security devices as necessary to maintain security of stored vehicles. A towing company is not required to own or lease a storage facility if it only tows vehicles owned by the towing company. 
(b)  A towing company that wishes to enter into a rotation contract with the city shall own or lease, at the minimum, three of the following types of tow trucks, one of which must be a heavy duty tow truck: 
(1)  Medium duty tow truck capable of towing motor vehicles with a gross weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds, but less than 25,000 pounds. 
(2)  Heavy duty tandem axle tow truck capable of towing motor vehicles with a gross weight rating that exceeds 25,000 pounds and equipped with a minimum of a 12,000-pound wheel lift under reach, a minimum of two 20,000-pound winches, and a boom rated at not less than a 25-ton lift capacity. 
(3)  Should a towing company choose to operate one or more medium duty tow trucks, at least one of the medium duty tow trucks shall have a boom and winch rated at not less than 8,000-pound lift capacity and a wheel lift device rated at not less than 4,500 pounds. 
(c)  At a minimum, all tow trucks shall be equipped with the following equipment, which at all times shall be maintained in working order: 
(1)  Wrecking bar; 
(2)  Towing lights; 
(3)  Emergency overhead warning lights; 
(4)  Safety chain; 
(5)  Fire extinguisher (A.B.C. Type), five-pound minimum required; 
(6)  Broom; 
(7)  Shovel; 
(8)  Reflectors or traffic cones; 
(9)  Trash container; 
(10)  Two-way voice or computer communication between tow truck and company dispatcher; 
(11)  Backing warning signal; and 
(12)  Wheel chocks (exception: roll-backs and wheel-lift tow trucks). 
(d)  Each tow truck shall have the name, city and state of the city permit holder, as shown on its permit, on each side of the tow truck. The name, city, state and telephone number of the towing company shall appear in letters at least two inches high, which are permanently affixed, legible and on a contrasting background. Magnetic or other forms of removable signs shall not comply with this requirement. 
(Code 2001, § 26-765; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 26-766. - Inspection of tow trucks and equipment. 
    Any holder of a city permit or an applicant for a city permit required under this article, by virtue of making application, agrees to allow the inspection of tow trucks, tow truck equipment and storage facilities by the chief of police between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays. In addition, each tow truck and the required equipment authorized under a contract shall be subject to intermittent inspection to ensure compliance with this article. This authority shall be cumulative of any other authority held by the chief of police, other law enforcement officials, or other legally authorized public officials. The chief of police shall issue an inspection permit for each tow truck utilized by a towing company that has passed inspection. The inspection permit shall have written upon it the vehicle identification number of the tow truck to which it is affixed. The inspection permit shall be prominently displayed on the left side of the front windshield. A tow truck that fails an inspection or that is not made available for inspection within three business days after written request for inspection by the chief of police shall not be issued an inspection permit, and any previously issued inspection permit issued to that tow truck shall be void. A towing company that wishes to have a tow truck inspected after the truck has failed or been unavailable for inspection must send a request for inspection to the chief of police in writing, and must pay a $100.00 inspection fee for each failing or unavailable tow truck that towing company wishes to have inspected. 
(Code 2001, § 26-766; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 26-767. - Towing fees. 
(a)  A city permit holder performing consent tows may collect fees that are deemed reasonable in accordance with the provisions set forth in Texas Occupations Code § 2308.001 et seq. 
(b)  City permit holders performing non-consent tows shall not charge fees that exceed the maximum amounts described in this section. 
(c)  Rotation list towing fees: 
(1)  Light duty towing (towing a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds or less). 
a.  First tow truck. A fee as established by separate ordinance per hour shall be paid to a towing company for towing a vehicle from one point to another location within the city as directed by the Police Department. This fee includes any work performed during the first hour. Time posted after the first hour will be billed in increments of 15 minutes. 
b.  Second tow truck. In the event the police officer at the scene determines that a second tow truck is required, a fee as established by separate ordinance per hour shall be paid to the towing company for any work performed at the scene during the first hour after the arrival of the second tow truck. Time posted for the second tow truck after the first hour will be billed in increments of 15 minutes. The use of the second tow truck shall be approved by a police supervisor. Travel time is excluded. 
c.  Use of a dolly. No additional fees shall be charged for the use of a dolly. 
(2)  Medium duty towing (towing a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight over 10,000 pounds but less than 25,000 pounds). 
a.  First tow truck. A fee as established by separate ordinance per hour shall be paid to the towing company for towing a vehicle requiring a medium duty tow from one point to another location within the city as directed by the Police Department. This fee includes any work performed during the first hour. Time posted after the first hour will be billed in increments of 15 minutes. 
b.  Second tow truck. In the event the police officer at the scene determines that a second medium duty tow truck is required, a fee as established by separate ordinance per hour shall be paid to the towing company for any work performed at the scene during the first hour after the arrival of the second medium duty tow truck. Time posted for the second tow truck after the first hour will be billed in increments of 15 minutes. The use of the second tow truck shall be approved by a police supervisor. Travel time is excluded. 
c.  Use of a dolly. No additional fees shall be charged for the use of a dolly. 
(3)  Heavy duty towing (towing a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of over 25,000 pounds). 
a.  First tow truck. A fee as established by separate ordinance shall be paid to the towing company for towing a vehicle requiring a heavy duty tow from one point to another location within the city as directed by the Police Department. This fee includes any work performed during the first hour. Time posted after the first hour will be billed in increments of 15 minutes. 
b.  Second tow truck. In the event the police officer at the scene determines that a second heavy duty tow truck is required, a fee as established by separate ordinance shall be paid to the towing company for any work performed at the scene during the first hour after the arrival of the second heavy duty tow truck. Time posted for the second tow truck after the first hour will be billed in increments of 15 minutes. The use of the second tow truck shall be approved by a police supervisor. Travel time is excluded. 
c.  Extra equipment. If the towing company is required to rent or lease a piece of equipment which is not required in the normal operation of a towing company, the actual cost for lease or rental of such equipment may be passed on to the vehicle owner. 
d.  Number of tow truck employees to respond. A minimum of two towing company employees must respond and share the responsibilities with each heavy duty tow truck to expedite the clearing of the roadway and increase safety. Failure to respond with two towing company employees will be counted as a failure to respond and the tow truck will not be allowed to work the scene. 
(4)  Public safety towing administration fee. For vehicles towed at the instruction of a police officer, the rotation list towing fee is hereby increased by $25.00. 
(d)  Hourly rates for private property non-consent tows include any work performed during the first hour beginning upon arrival at the scene of the tow. Time posted after the first hour will be billed in increments of 15 minutes. The hourly private property tow rates are as follows: 
(1)  Light duty: Not more than $90.00. 
(2)  Medium duty: Not more than $120.00. 
(3)  Heavy duty: Not more than $205.00. 
(e)  When establishing or amending the allowable fees for non-consent tows, the amounts shall represent the fair value of the services of a towing company and are reasonably related to any financial or accounting information provided to the city. In accordance with Texas Occupations Code § 2308.203, the city establishes the following procedures relating to towing fee studies to be followed upon a request from a towing company that a study be performed. The following list is not all inclusive: 
(1)  The chief of police shall request financial records from the requesting towing company as they relate to vehicle insurance, registrations and operating costs; 
(2)  The chief of police shall obtain current fuel prices; 
(3)  The chief of police shall review towing fees from other cities of similar population; 
(4)  The chief of police shall submit a recommendation to the city manager for action. At his discretion, the city manager may authorize an increase or decrease in towing fees of not more than 25 percent, based upon the result of a requested towing fee study. Recommended increases over 25 percent shall be taken to the city council for consideration. 
(Code 2001, § 26-767; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010; Ord. No. 47-2013, § 2, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 26-768. - Storage fees and charges. 
(a)  Under this article, a city permit holder may charge the owner of the vehicle a storage fee and other charges as permitted by Texas Occupations Code § 2303.001 et seq. 
(b)  City impound. The city may charge the owner of the vehicle a storage fee permissible by law. For purposes of imposing a daily storage fee, a day begins at 12:00 midnight and ends at 11:59 p.m. the same day. A daily storage fee may be charged regardless of whether the vehicle is stored for 24 hours total, except that a daily storage fee may not be charged for more than one day if the vehicle remains at the facility for less than 12 hours. In addition to the storage fees, the city may charge a preservation fee established by separate ordinance to cover the costs of preservation and evidentiary processing of stored vehicles. Vehicles held as evidentiary material pertinent to an ongoing criminal investigation are not subject to any fees. The owner, however, will be responsible for storage fees if the vehicle is not claimed within 72 hours of notification. All fees shall be paid prior to releasing the vehicle to the owner. If the owner or any lien holders of record does not reclaim the vehicle within the time period prescribed by law, the vehicle shall be deemed abandoned and used or sold in accordance with the requirements of Texas Occupations Code ch. 2303. 
(Code 2001, § 26-768; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 26-769. - Influence over selection of towing company. 
    A police officer investigating or present at any scene where the services of a tow truck are reasonably anticipated to be necessary shall not directly or indirectly recommend to any person the name of any towing company, nor shall any such police officer influence or attempt to influence in any manner the decision of any person on choosing or selecting a towing company. 
(Code 2001, § 26-770; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 26-770. - Driving tow trucks to scene of collision. 
    No person shall drive or cause to be driven a tow truck to or near the scene of an accident on a public roadway unless such person has been called to the scene by the police communications center or its authorized agent or by a party involved in the accident. 
(Code 2001, § 26-771; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 26-771. - Duties of towing companies. 
(a)  It shall be the obligation of all city permit holders to operate towing companies so as to provide safe and prompt removal of wrecked, disabled or police tow vehicles when properly called upon to do so in accordance with this article. 
(b)  The duty to provide safe and prompt towing service upon call includes, but is not limited to, the following specific duties: 
(1)  Upon arrival at the scene of an accident, towing company personnel shall take directions from the police officer in charge of that scene. 
(2)  Any person who tows any vehicle from the scene of an accident shall remove debris of the accident from the public roadway. This duty specifically includes removal of all broken glass and metal fragments from the public roadway and the removal of any load of any vehicle from the traveled portion of the public roadway so as to eliminate any hazard to vehicular traffic. This does not include responsibility to unload cargo from a vehicle in order to permit hauling of the cargo separately. Debris shall be disposed of in a manner which will keep it out of gutters, storm sewers, streams, public rights-of-way and property not belonging to the towing company. The officer on the scene of an accident may provide assistance in locating a place for disposal of such debris. 
(3)  No city permit holder shall store any vehicles or tow trucks on the public roadways or rights-of-way. City permit holders shall use reasonable care in the storage of property not belonging to the permit holder so as to minimize the risk of theft or damage. 
(Code 2001, § 26-772; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 26-772. - Towing vehicles that contain hazardous materials. 
(a)  No towing company seeking to tow a vehicle which contains, or is reasonably believed to contain, hazardous materials may accomplish the tow unless, pursuant to 49 USC §§ 1801, 5107-5109, 5125; 49 CFR 387; Texas Transportation Code §§ 522.003(19), 522.041-522.043, and all other applicable federal and state law: 
(1)  The tow truck is registered to transport hazardous materials; 
(2)  The tow truck has been issued pertinent permits to transport same; and 
(3)  The driver of the tow truck is licensed to transport hazardous materials. 
(b)  In the event a towing company seeks to tow a vehicle containing, or reasonably believed to contain, hazardous materials, and the materials have leaked or appear to be leaking, the towing company shall immediately advise the city Fire Department of the leakage. The vehicle will not be moved until inspected by the Fire Department. The Fire Department will be the sole authority in determining the appropriate precautions to be taken prior to authorizing the vehicle to be moved by the towing company. 
(Code 2001, § 26-773; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
State Law reference- Class, endorsement or restriction of licenses, Texas Transportation Code §§ 522.041-522.043. 
Sec. 26-773. - Non-consent private property tows. 
(a)  A towing company that tows a vehicle from a parking facility without the vehicle owner's permission shall within one hour after receiving the vehicle report (by telephone, in person, or by facsimile) to the Police Department: 
(1)  A general description of the vehicle; 
(2)  The state and number of the vehicle's license plate; 
(3)  The VIN of the vehicle; 
(4)  The location from which the vehicle was towed; and 
(5)  The name and location of the vehicle storage facility where the vehicle is being stored. 
(b)  If a vehicle removed from a parking facility is later determined to be stolen, the towing company shall not be reimbursed by the city for towing the vehicle from the parking facility to the company's lot. As a stolen vehicle is evidence in a crime, the city may seize the vehicle in accordance with state law. In the alternative, the city may elect to allow the towing company to maintain custody and control of the stolen/recovered vehicle; however, the charges for storage cannot exceed those normally imposed by the city Police Department in its impound facility. Additionally, the towing company shall be responsible for any and all other procedures in accordance with the Texas Occupations Code ch. 2303. 
(Code 2001, § 26-774; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
State Law reference- Storage facilities, Texas Occupations Code § 2302.001 et seq. 
Sec. 26-774. - Filing of and investigating complaints concerning wrecker companies. 
    Any complaint regarding a towing company shall be submitted in writing to the chief of police. The complaint shall be specific as to the allegations and shall be signed by the individual submitting the complaint. Complaints will be investigated to the fullest extent possible. 
(Code 2001, § 26-775; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 26-775. - City's right to refuse vehicle. 
    The city retains the right to refuse the delivery of any impounded vehicle if the delivered vehicle is improperly towed or dropped at a location other than that designated by the Police Department. In those instances wherein the city refuses to accept a vehicle, a city tow truck or another towing company on rotation will be called to complete the delivery. The original towing company will not be paid for the call, and the call will be considered an unjustified pass. Additional action may be taken against a towing company improperly towing or dropping a vehicle in accordance with the terms of the contract and of this article. 
(Code 2001, § 26-776; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 26-776. - Administrative disposition of violations by city permit holders. 
(a)  In lieu of or in addition to any criminal prosecution or civil remedy for the violation of any section of this article, the chief of police shall have, as to the holder of any city permit or as to any applicant therefor, the duty and authority to enforce this article by administrative action in accordance with these principles and procedures. 
(b)  The proper and safe functioning of towing companies has critical impact on the health, safety and welfare of the public and involves use of the public roadways, often in circumstances necessitating prompt removal of dangerous obstructions to traffic on public roadways; therefore, the privilege of any person to be a city permit holder operating a towing company in the city shall be subjected to strict regulation in order to protect the public. 
(c)  For purposes of invoking any administrative remedy against a city permit holder, the acts or omissions of any agent or employee of the city permit holder shall be considered to be the acts or omissions of the city permit holder. 
(d)  A city permit holder may receive a written reprimand for any of the following offenses: 
(1)  Failure to properly clean up debris at an accident scene; 
(2)  Failure to maintain a licensed storage facility as required by this article; 
(3)  Driving any tow truck to or from the scene of an accident in a manner which endangers the life or safety of any person; 
(4)  Failure to maintain in effect any insurance required by this article; 
(5)  Charging a fee in excess of the amounts authorized by this article; 
(6)  Permitting a tow truck to be operated by anyone while under the influence of prescription drugs which could be reasonably anticipated to interfere with a driver's ability to operate the tow truck; 
(7)  Permitting a tow truck to be operated by anyone while under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs which could be reasonably anticipated to interfere with a driver's ability to operate the tow truck; 
(8)  Permitting a tow truck to be operated by anyone whose operator's or driver's license is suspended; 
(9)  Any sustained complaint of theft by employees of towing company while acting in their capacity as employees of towing company, whether occurring during a police tow or otherwise; 
(10)  Any sustained complaint of threats made by employees of the towing company while acting in their capacity as employees of towing company made against third parties during a police tow or otherwise; 
(11)  Failing to comply with all directions of the Police Department while performing related activities on a public roadway; or 
(12)  Failure to comply with any state or federal law or city ordinance related to the operation of a towing company. 
(Code 2001, § 26-777; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 26-777. - Procedures for administrative disposition of violation. 
(a)  The city may, without warning, notice, or hearing, suspend any city permit if the operation of the towing company constitutes an imminent hazard to public health or safety. When possible, a supervisor will confirm the hazard before suspension is effective. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by this article. When a permit is suspended, towing operations shall immediately cease. 
(b)  The city may suspend a towing company that receives two reprimands within a permit period for up to 30 days. The city may indefinitely suspend a towing company that received three or more reprimands within a one-year period. 
(c)  Whenever a city permit is suspended, the holder of the city permit shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended. Opportunity for a hearing will be provided if the city permit holder files a written request with the city manager within five business days. Whenever a city permit is suspended, the city permit holder shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within ten days of receipt of a request for a hearing. If no written request for a hearing is filed within five business days, the suspension is sustained and becomes final. 
(d)  A notice as required in this article is properly served when it is personally delivered to the holder of the city permit or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the city permit holder. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the city. 
(e)  The city manager, or his designee, shall conduct the hearings provided for in this article at a time and place designated by him. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the city manager shall make final findings and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the city permit holder by the city manager. 
(f)  In the event the city suspends or indefinitely suspends a permit holder for cause, and the cause for such suspension or indefinite suspension is determined to be invalid, the permit holder's sole remedy shall be reinstatement. 
(Code 2001, § 26-778; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 26-778. - Criminal penalty. 
(a)  Any business or person violating any prohibition, requirement, duty, or provision of this article shall be deemed to have committed a Class C misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(b)  It shall be a defense to prosecution of any violation of this article that a person violated this article while acting to prevent imminent death or bodily injury to any person involved in an accident. 
(Code 2001, § 26-779; Ord. No. 36-2010, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Secs. 26-779-26-800. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - BODY ART[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Tattooing, Texas Health and Safety Code § 146.001 et seq. 

Sec. 26-801. - General provisions. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to protect the health of the public by establishing standards for the prevention of disease that may be associated with body art procedures. These rules shall be interpreted and applied to protect the public health. 
(b)  The city adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules or the rules as amended by the State Board of Health found in 25 TAC §§ 229.401-229.413. 
(Code 2001, § 26-801; Ord. No. 11-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 26-802. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Apprentice means a person who is engaged in learning and working in the profession of body art under the direct supervision of a sponsor, and who has a written agreement with the sponsor providing for his training in accordance with this article. 
    Apprenticeship agreement means a written agreement between a sponsor and an apprentice outlining the terms of the apprenticeship. 
    Body art means the practice of physical body adornment including but not limited to body piercing, tattooing, and cosmetic tattooing. Body art does not include branding and scarification or practices that are considered medical procedures by a state medical board, such as implants under the skin. 
    Body art establishment means any place or premise where body art, whether or not for profit, is performed. 
    Body piercing means the creation of an opening in an individual's body, other than in an individual's earlobe, to insert jewelry or another decoration. 
    Client means a person who receives a body art procedure on some part of his own body. 
    Contaminated means not sterile or no longer sterile. 
    Contaminated waste means any liquid or semi-liquid blood or other potentially infectious materials; contaminated items that would release blood or other potentially infectious materials in a liquid or semi-liquid state if compressed; items that are caked with dried blood or other potentially infectious materials and are capable of releasing these materials during handling; contaminated sharps and pathological and microbiological wastes containing blood and other potentially infectious materials, as defined in 29 CFR pt. 1910.1030, known as "Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens." 
    Cosmetic tattooing means the practice of depositing pigment into the epidermis, utilizing needles, which is either permanent, semi-permanent, or temporary by someone other than a state licensed physician. Cosmetic tattooing shall also mean the same as permanent cosmetics, dermagraphy, micro-pigmentation, permanent color technology and micro-pigment implantation. 
    Department means the Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public Health District or its authorized representatives having jurisdiction to promulgate, monitor, administer and enforce these regulations. 
    Director means the director of the Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public Health District or his authorized representative. 
    Disinfection means the killing of disease-causing microorganisms on inanimate objects or surfaces. 
    Equipment means all machinery including fixtures, containers, vessels, tools, devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas, sinks, and all other apparatus and appurtenances used in connection with the operation of a body art establishment. 
    Hand sink means a lavatory equipped with hot and cold running water under pressure, used solely for washing hands, arms or other portions of the body. 
    Hot water means water, which is at a constant temperature of at least 100° F and sufficient in capacity to meet the peak water demands of the body art establishment. 
    Instruments means hand pieces, needles, needle bars, hemostats, forceps, pliers, and other items that may come in contact with a client's body or possible exposure to bodily fluids during body art procedures. 
    Licensee means a person who holds a license issued under this article. 
    Operator means any person who controls, operates, manages, conducts, performs or practices body art activities. 
    Permit means written approval by the department to operate a body art establishment. Approval is given in accordance with these regulations and is separate from any other licensing requirements that may exist. 
    Permittee means a person who holds a permit issued under this article. 
    Person means a natural person, any form of business or social organization and any other non-governmental legal entity including but not limited to a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, association, trust, or unincorporated organization. 
    Procedure surface means any work area or any surface that comes in contact with any part of the client's unclothed body. 
    Sanitize means to treat a surface using a product registered with the United States Environmental Protection Agency which has been approved by the department as being effective in reducing the number of microorganisms to a safe level. 
    Sharps means any object that may purposefully or accidentally cut or penetrate the skin or mucosa including, but not limited to, needles, scalpel blades, and razor blades. 
    Sharps container means a puncture-resistant, leak-proof container that can be closed for handling, storage, transportation, and disposal and that is labeled with the International Biohazard Symbol. 
    Single use means articles intended for one-time, one-person use and which are to be discarded after such use including, but not limited to, cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or plastic cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, razors, piercing needles, scalpel blades, stencils, ink cups, and protective gloves. 
    Sponsor means a licensed body art operator who is approved to conduct apprenticeship training in accordance with this article and who assumes full responsibility for any apprentices. 
    Sterilization means destruction of all forms of microbiotic life, including spores. 
    Tattoo means the practice of producing an indelible mark or figure on the human body by scarring or inserting a pigment under the skin using needles, scalpels, or other related equipment. The term also means the indelible mark or figure itself, and includes the application of permanent cosmetics. 
    Temporary artist means an artist that applies for a permit to showcase and demonstrate their talent lasting no more than seven consecutive days in a single building, structure, in conjunction with a single event. 
    Temporary event means an event where three or more artists gather to showcase and demonstrate their talent lasting no more than seven consecutive days in a single building, or structure, in conjunction with a single event. 
    Under direct supervision of a physician means a person employed by and working in the office or clinic of a physician, where the treatment being performed is ordered by a physician. 
(Code 2001, § 26-802; Ord. No. 11-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012; Ord. No. 50-2017, § 2, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 26-803. - Exemptions. 
    This article does not apply to: 
(1)  A medical facility licensed under other law or procedures performed in that facility; 
(2)  An office or clinic of a person licensed by the Texas State Board of Medical Examiners or procedures performed in that office or clinic; 
(3)  A person who performs only ear piercing; or 
(4)  A facility in which only ear piercing is performed. 
(Code 2001, § 26-803; Ord. No. 11-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 26-804. - Public notification requirements. 
(a)  Every operator shall give all verbal and written public educational information approved by the department to every client wanting to receive a body art procedure. 
(b)  Upon completion of a body art procedure, the operator shall provide verbal and written instructions, as approved by the department, to each client for the care of the body art procedure site. The written instructions shall advise the client to consult a physician at the first sign of infection and shall contain the name, address and phone number of the establishment. These documents shall be signed and dated by both the operator and the client. A copy shall be given to the client and the operator shall retain the original with all other required records. 
(c)  All establishments shall prominently display a disclosure statement, provided by the department, which advises the public of the risks and possible consequences of body art services. The facility permit holder shall also post in public view the name, address and phone number of the department and the Texas Department of Health, and the procedure for filing a complaint. The disclosure statement and the notice for filing a complaint shall be provided in writing to each client. 
(Code 2001, § 26-804; Ord. No. 11-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 26-805. - Client information and records. 
(a)  Prior to performing body art on a client, the operator shall require the client to present a valid, government-issued, positive identification card, including, but not limited to, a driver's license, passport, or military identification. A copy of the provided identification shall be contained in the client file. The identification must contain a photograph of the individual and a printed date of birth. 
(b)  Prior to performing body art on a client, the operator shall obtain a verbal or written statement as to whether the client falls within one or more of the following risk group categories: 
(1)  The client has a history of jaundice or hepatitis; 
(2)  The client has a history of AIDS, or has had a positive HIV test; 
(3)  The client has a history of skin disease or skin cancer at the proposed site of the body art; 
(4)  The client has a history of allergies, anaphylactic reaction to pigments or dyes, or other sensitivities; 
(5)  The client is taking medications which interfere with blood clotting, such as anticoagulants, which thin the blood; or 
(6)  The client has a history of hemophilia. 
(c)  The operator shall then ask the client to disclose verbally or in writing any other known medical condition or history that could influence or impair the healing process. 
(d)  The client shall sign a written statement, also signed by the operator, that the information provided regarding risk group categories and known medical conditions and history is true and complete to the client's best knowledge and ability. 
(e)  Each operator shall keep a record of each body art procedure performed to include: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the client; 
(2)  Client's age, date of birth and copy of identification provided to the establishment; 
(3)  The date the procedure was performed; 
(4)  Name of operator who performed the procedure; 
(5)  The area of the body where the procedure was performed; 
(6)  The signature of the client. 
(f)  If the client is a minor, the parent, managing conservator or guardian must be physically present during any body art procedure. The parent, managing conservator or guardian must execute an affidavit stating that the person is the parent, managing conservator or guardian of the individual on whom the body art is being performed; and must provide written and notarized consent by the individual's parent, managing conservator or guardian which shall contain: 
(1)  The full name, address, and telephone number of the client; 
(2)  The full name address, and telephone number of the parent, managing conservator or guardian; 
(3)  The area of the body and the specific body art procedure for which consent is granted; and 
(4)  The signature of the minor and the signature of the parent, managing conservator, or guardian. 
(Code 2001, § 26-805; Ord. No. 11-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 26-806. - Records retention. 
(a)  The following information shall be kept on file on the premises of a body art establishment for a minimum of three years and shall be readily available for inspection by the department: 
(1)  The identification of each operator in the establishment, including the following information: 
a.  Full name; 
b.  Date of birth; 
c.  Gender; 
d.  Home address; 
e.  Home and work phone numbers; 
f.  Identification photo; and 
g.  Duties. 
(2)  The name of the establishment, the hours of operation, and the proprietor's name and address. 
(3)  A complete description of all body art procedures performed, including the clients' files and, for a tattoo procedure, the specific colors applied, and, when available, the manufacturer or catalogue identification number of each color. 
(4)  A full inventory (including the manufacturer and serial or lot numbers, if available or applicable) for the following items: 
a.  Instruments; 
b.  Body jewelry; 
c.  Sharps; and 
d.  Inks used for body art procedures. 
(5)  A copy of these regulations. 
(6)  Records regarding each employee that show one of the following: 
a.  Proof that the employee has completed the Hepatitis B vaccination series; 
b.  A statement that the employee was offered and declined in writing the Hepatitis B vaccination series; 
c.  A statement that antibody testing has revealed that the employee is immune to Hepatitis B; or 
d.  A dated and signed physician's statement specifying that the Hepatitis B vaccination series is contraindicated in a particular employee for medical reasons. 
(b)  Client records shall be confidential. 
(Code 2001, § 26-806; Ord. No. 11-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 26-807. - Preparation and care of the body art area. 
(a)  Before performing a body art procedure, the skin and surrounding area where the body art procedure is to be placed shall be washed with antimicrobial soap, or if appropriate the client shall be provided iodine with which to cleanse the area, and any washing pad shall be discarded after use on a single client. 
(b)  If shaving is necessary, disposable razors or safety razors with single use blades shall be utilized. Single use blades shall be discarded after each use and the reusable holder shall be autoclaved after each use. Following shaving, the skin and surrounding area will be washed with antimicrobial soap and the washing pad shall be discarded after a single use. 
(c)  If the skin of the client is not free of rash, infection, or any other visible pathological condition, no body art procedure may be performed. No person affected with boils, infected wounds, open sores, abrasions, exudative lesions, acute respiratory infection, nausea, vomiting, fever or diarrhea shall receive a body art procedure until such condition is resolved or documentation is presented to the operator to ensure that there is not a likelihood of disease contagion. 
(d)  In the event of blood flow, all products used to check the flow of blood or to absorb blood shall be single use and disposed of immediately after use. 
(Code 2001, § 26-807; Ord. No. 11-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 26-808. - Sanitation and sterilization. 
(a)  The operator shall maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness, conform to hygienic practices, and wear clean clothes when performing body art procedures. Before performing body art procedures, the operator must thoroughly wash his hands in hot running water with liquid antimicrobial soap, and then rinse hands and dry with disposable paper towels. This shall also be done as often as necessary to remove contaminants. 
(b)  In performing body art procedures, the operator shall wear disposable medical gloves. The gloves shall be discarded after the completion of each procedure on an individual client, if not more frequently. 
(c)  If, while performing a body art procedure, the operator's glove is pierced, torn, or otherwise contaminated, the procedures in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be repeated immediately. The contaminated gloves shall be immediately discarded and the hands washed thoroughly before a fresh pair of gloves are applied. Any item or instrument used for body art which is contaminated during the procedure shall be removed and replaced immediately with new ones before the procedure resumes. 
(d)  Sharps ready for disposal shall be disposed of in approved sharps containers. 
(e)  Contaminated waste which may release liquid blood or body fluids when compressed or may release dried blood or body fluids when handled must be placed in an approved red bag marked with the international biohazard symbol. It shall then be disposed of by a waste hauler approved by the department. 
(f)  Contaminated waste which does not release liquid blood or body fluids when compressed or does not release dried blood or body fluids when handled may be placed in a covered receptacle and disposed of through approved disposal methods. Storage of contaminated waste on-site shall not exceed the period specified by the department or more than a maximum of 30 days. 
(g)  The skin of the operator shall be free of rash, infection, or any other visible pathological condition. No person affected with boils, infected wounds, open sores, abrasions, exudative lesions, acute respiratory infection, nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea shall work in any area of a body art establishment in any capacity. 
(h)  All non-disposable instruments used for body art shall be cleaned thoroughly after each use by scrubbing with an antimicrobial soap solution and hot water or with an approved disinfectant to remove blood and tissue residue, and then placed in an ultrasonic unit which will be operated in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. A copy of the manufacturer's recommended procedures for operation of the unit must be readily available for inspection on the premises by employees and by the department. 
(i)  After cleaning, all non-disposable instruments used for body art shall be packed individually in paper peel-packs and sterilized. All paper peel-packs shall contain either a sterilizer indicator or internal temperature indicator. Paper peel-packs must be dated and initialed by the individual responsible for cleaning and sterilizing equipment, with an expiration date not to exceed 30 days. Sterile equipment may not be used after the expiration date without repackaging and resterilizing. 
(j)  All non-disposable instruments used for body art shall be sterilized in an autoclave or in a dry heat sterilizer if approved by the department. The sterilizer shall be used, cleaned, and maintained according to manufacturer's instruction. A copy of the manufacturer's recommended procedures for the operation of their sterilization unit must be readily available for inspection on the premises by employees and by the department. 
(k)  A permittee shall demonstrate monthly that the sterilizer used is capable of attaining sterilization through spore destruction tests. These tests shall be verified through an independent laboratory at least once per year. No permit shall be issued or renewed until the department receives documentation of the sterilizer's ability to destroy spores. Monthly test records and laboratory verification shall be retained by the operator for a period of three years and made available to the department upon request. 
(l)  After sterilization, the instrument used for body art shall be stored in a dry, clean cabinet or other tightly covered sanitizable container reserved for the storage of such instruments. 
(m)  All instruments used for body art shall remain stored in sterile packages until just prior to performing a body art procedure. When assembling instruments used for performing body art procedures, the operator shall wear disposable medical gloves and use techniques to ensure that the instruments and gloves are not contaminated. 
(n)  All inks, dyes, pigments and sharps shall be specifically manufactured for performing body art procedures and shall not be adulterated or contaminated. Immediately before applying a tattoo, the quantity of the dye to be used for the tattoo shall be transferred from the dye bottle and placed into sterile, single use paper cups or plastic caps. Upon completion of the tattoo, these single cups or caps and their contents shall be discarded. 
(o)  Smoking, eating, or drinking is prohibited in the area where body art is performed. 
(Code 2001, § 26-808; Ord. No. 11-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 26-809. - Requirements for single use items. 
(a)  Single use pre-sterilized items shall expire in accordance with the manufacturer's expiration date. All paper peel-packs shall contain either a sterilizer indicator or internal temperature indicator. Paper peel-packs must be dated and initialed by the individual responsible for cleaning and sterilizing equipment, with an expiration date not to exceed 30 days. Sterile equipment may not be used after the expiration date without repackaging and resterilizing. 
(b)  Single use items shall not be used on more than one client for any reason. After use, all single use needles, razors, rubber bands and other sharps shall be immediately disposed of in approved sharps containers. 
(c)  All body art stencils shall be single use and disposable. Petroleum jellies, soaps and other products used in the application of stencils shall be dispensed and applied on the area to be tattooed with sterile gauze or in a manner to prevent contamination of the original container and its contents. The gauze shall be used only once and then discarded. 
(Code 2001, § 26-809; Ord. No. 11-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 26-810. - Requirements for body art establishment premises. 
(a)  All walls, floors, and procedure and seating surfaces of a body art establishment shall be of such construction as to be easily cleaned and sanitized after each client. Walls, floors, and procedure and seating surfaces shall be smooth, non-absorbent, free of open holes or cracks, light-colored, washable, and in good repair. Walls, floors, procedure and seating surfaces and ceilings shall be maintained in a clean condition. Procedure and seating surfaces shall be sanitized after each client. 
(b)  Effective measures shall be taken by the body art operator to protect the entrance into the establishment to prevent the breeding or presence on the premises of insects, rodents, and other pests. Insects, rodents, and other pests shall not be present in any part of the establishment. Insects, rodents, and other pests shall be controlled to minimize their presence: 
(1)  Within the physical facility and its contents; and 
(2)  On the contiguous land or property under the control of the permittee. 
(c)  The presence of insects, rodents, and other pests shall be controlled by: 
(1)  Routinely inspecting incoming shipments of supplies; 
(2)  Routinely inspecting the premises for evidence of pests; using methods, if pests are found, such as trapping devices or other means of pest control; and eliminating harborage conditions. 
(d)  Dead or trapped birds, insects, rodents, and other pests shall be removed from control devices and the premises at a frequency that prevents their accumulation, decomposition, or the attraction of pests. 
(e)  Maintenance tools such as brooms, mops, vacuum cleaners, and similar items shall be: 
(1)  Stored so they do not contaminate equipment, utensils, linens, and single-use articles; and 
(2)  Stored in an orderly manner that facilitates cleaning of the area used for storing the maintenance tools. 
(f)  The premises shall be free of litter and items that are unnecessary to the operation or maintenance of the establishment such as equipment that is nonfunctional or no longer used. 
(g)  No animals of any kind shall be allowed in a body art establishment except: 
(1)  Animals trained and actively used to assist persons with physical disabilities; 
(2)  Governmental agency police dogs accompanying police officers; 
(3)  Sentry dogs running loose in outside fenced areas; and 
(4)  Fish in aquariums in waiting rooms and nonprocedural areas. 
(h)  There shall be a minimum of 75 square feet of floor space for each operator in the establishment, and body art stations shall be separated by dividers, curtains or partitions. Each establishment shall have an area which may be screened from public view for clients requesting privacy. 
(i)  The establishment shall be well-ventilated and equipped with an artificial light source equivalent to at least 20 footcandles, measured three feet off the floor, for cleaning. At least 100 footcandles shall be provided at the level where the body art procedure is being performed, and where instruments and sharps are assembled. 
(j)  All body art establishments shall be completely separated by solid partitions or by walls extending from floor to ceiling from hair salons, retail sale establishments, or any other such activity which may cause potential contamination of work surfaces. 
(k)  Outer openings of a body art establishment shall be protected against the entry of insects and rodents by: 
(1)  Filling or closing holes and other gaps along floors, walls and ceilings; 
(2)  Closed, tight-fitting windows; and 
(3)  Solid self-closing, tight-fitting doors, except that doors designed for emergency exit only and which activate a security alarm when opened need not be self-closing. 
(l)  If a body art establishment opens into a larger structure, such as a mall, airport, or office building, or into an attached structure, such as a porch, and the outer openings from the larger or attached structure are protected against the entry of insects and rodents as per subsection (k) of this section, this shall be deemed to comply with subsection (k) of this section. 
(m)  If the windows or doors of a body art establishment, or of a larger structure within which a body art establishment is located, are kept open for ventilation or other purposes, the openings shall be deemed to comply with subsection (k) of this section if they are protected against the entry of insects and rodents by: 
(1)  Sixteen mesh to 25.4 millimeters (16 mesh to one inch) screens; or 
(2)  Properly designed and installed air curtains or other effective means. 
(n)  The perimeter walls and roof of a body art establishment shall effectively protect the establishment from the weather and the entry of insects, rodents, and other animals. 
(o)  A separate hand sink with available hot and cold running water under pressure, supplied with liquid antimicrobial soap and disposable paper towels, shall be readily accessible within the body art establishment for each operator. In addition, there shall be at least one lavatory, excluding any service sinks, and one toilet in a body art establishment. 
(p)  At least one covered waste receptacle and one sharps receptacle shall be provided in each operator area and one covered waste receptacle shall be provided in each toilet room. Receptacles in the operator area shall be emptied daily and solid waste shall be removed from the premises at least twice weekly. All refuse containers shall be lidded and kept clean and all bio-hazard items shall be appropriately marked. 
(q)  All instruments and supplies shall be stored in clean, dry, and covered containers. 
(r)  If reusable cloth items are used, they shall be mechanically washed after each client. Soiled cloth items shall be kept in clean, non-absorbent receptacles or clean, washable laundry bags and stored and transported to prevent contamination of clean equipment, clean instruments, and single-use articles. Reusable cloth items shall be mechanically washed with detergent and dried. Clean cloth items shall be stored in a dry, clean environment until used. 
(Code 2001, § 26-810; Ord. No. 11-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 26-811. - Establishment permit. 
(a)  No person may operate a body art establishment unless he has received a body art establishment permit from the department. 
(b)  A permit shall expire one year from the issuance of the permit. Any person operating a body art establishment shall obtain a permit from the department annually. 
(c)  Any person applying for a body art establishment permit shall submit a scale drawing and floor plan of the proposed establishment for a plan review by the department as part of the original permit application process. Permit renewals must be accompanied by such a drawing if the floor plan changes from the plan submitted with the original application. 
(d)  A permit for a body art establishment shall not be transferable from one place or person to another. 
(e)  Permits shall be prominently displayed in the body art establishment and shall not be defaced or altered in any manner. 
(f)  The holder of a body art establishment permit shall only permit the performance of body art in the establishment by operators who have complied with the operator license or apprenticeship program requirements of this article. 
(Code 2001, § 26-811; Ord. No. 11-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 26-812. - Operator license. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to practice body art procedures without first obtaining a license from the director. The director shall determine by investigation whether the applicant is a proper person to receive a license. If the director shall find that the applicant is not sufficiently skilled in the practice of body art, has been guilty of negligence or misconduct therein to such extent that the health or safety of persons serviced by him would be endangered, or is not over the age of 18, the director shall refuse to approve the license. The available licenses are: 
(1)  Tattoo operator; 
(2)  Cosmetic tattoo operator; and 
(3)  Body piercing operator. 
(b)  The director shall issue the license required under this article for a period of one year from the date of approval. The license may be renewed from year to year upon the filing of a renewal application, and upon payment of a renewal fee. 
(c)  The operator license shall be valid from the date of issuance and shall automatically expire annually at the anniversary from the date of issuance unless revoked sooner by the department. 
(d)  An application for an operator license shall include: 
(1)  Name; 
(2)  Date of birth; 
(3)  Sex; 
(4)  Residence; 
(5)  Mailing address; 
(6)  Home phone number; 
(7)  Places of employment as an operator; 
(8)  Training and experience; and 
(9)  Proof of attendance at a bloodborne pathogen training program, given or approved by the department. 
(e)  Knowledge of facility safety, anatomy, infectious disease control, and skin diseases, disorders and conditions shall be demonstrated through submission of documentation of completion of courses or successful completion of an examination approved or given by the department with a passing grade of 70, attained prior to issuance of the operator license. The department will maintain a list of courses approved for this purpose. Training provided by professional body art organizations or associations or by equipment manufacturers may also be submitted for consideration to comply with this requirement. The director shall make the final determination as to whether an applicant's training, coursework, or examination suitably demonstrates the required knowledge. 
(f)  No operator license shall be issued unless the body art operator has demonstrated compliance with the provisions of this section and all other provisions of this article. 
(g)  All operator licenses shall be conditioned upon continued compliance with the provisions of this section as well as all applicable provisions of this article. 
(h)  An operator license shall be posted in a prominent and conspicuous area where clients may readily observe it. 
(Code 2001, § 26-812; Ord. No. 11-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 26-813. - Apprenticeship program. 
(a)  A person interested in learning the profession of body art may make application to the director for a body art apprentice license. An application for a body art apprentice license shall contain: 
(1)  Name; 
(2)  Date of birth; 
(3)  Sex; 
(4)  Residence; 
(5)  Mailing address; 
(6)  Home phone number; 
(7)  Proof of attendance at a bloodborne pathogen training program, given or approved by the department; 
(8)  An apprenticeship agreement, signed by both the sponsor and the person applying to be an apprentice; and 
(9)  Proof of the completion of any other requirements the director shall deem necessary prior to allowing the person to become an apprentice. 
(b)  An apprenticeship agreement shall not be sufficient for the purposes of this article unless it contains: 
(1)  The name, operator license number, and place of employment of the sponsor; 
(2)  All locations where the apprentice will participate in training; 
(3)  The duration of the apprenticeship, to be for a period of at least one year; 
(4)  Whether the apprentice will be paid during the apprenticeship, and whether the apprentice will be an employee or an independent contractor; 
(5)  A statement that both the apprentice and the sponsor agree to comply with all applicable state and local laws regarding body art. 
(c)  No body art operator shall sponsor more than two apprentices at any given time. 
(d)  When performing body art, an apprentice will clearly identify himself to the client and the client's parent, managing conservator or guardian if the client is a minor, and shall have the client sign a written statement demonstrating the client's awareness that the body art procedure will be performed by an apprentice. 
(e)  The director is authorized to promulgate such rules as shall be reasonable and necessary to carry out a body art apprenticeship program. 
(Code 2001, § 26-813; Ord. No. 11-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 26-814. - Temporary performance of body art. 
(a)  The director may grant a temporary body art license to a person rather than requiring that person to obtain a body art operator license under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The director has determined that the applicant for a temporary body art license has been qualified by another jurisdiction to perform body art, and that the requirements to be so qualified by that jurisdiction are commensurate with those for a body art operator license under this article; 
(2)  The applicant for a temporary body art license is sponsored by a body art operator licensed under this article; 
(3)  The applicant will be performing body art only at a permitted body art establishment where the sponsoring licensed body art operator is presently employed; or 
(4)  The applicant is part of an approved temporary event. 
(5)  The temporary body art license shall be good for a period of no longer than seven days; and 
(6)  The director is satisfied that the circumstances under which the applicant for a temporary body art license will perform body art conform to the requirements of this article and state law. 
(b)  In determining whether the issuance of a temporary body art license is appropriate, the public health and safety shall be the primary concern of the director. Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring the director to issue a temporary body art license. 
(c)  All provisions of this article shall apply to temporary events except when listed otherwise. 
(d)  Any person making application for a temporary body art event shall provide any and all such information as the director may deem necessary to assist him in determination whether the issuance of the license is appropriate with a list of artist and their applications 30 days before the event with fees on a form provided by the Health District so that experience of the artist can be verified: 
(1)  The applicant is licensed by the State of Texas; 
(2)  The applicant shall submit a drawing of the floor plan of the event space; 
(3)  There shall be a minimum of 50 square feet of floor space for each operator (Two operators per 100 sq. ft. space) in the event, and stations shall be separated by dividers, curtains or partitions at least three feet high; 
(4)  An approved hand wash station must be provided with-in ten feet of every booth with no barriers between the booth and the sink. The station must have 100°F water, soap, disposable paper towels, trash can, enclosed fresh & waste water catch tank; 
(5)  There shall be an area which may be screened from public view for clients requesting privacy; 
(6)  There shall be at least one sharp container per booth adequate in size for needles; 
(7)  There shall be at least one biohazard container per booth adequate in size for hazardous waste. 
(e)  Any person making application for a temporary body art permit shall provide any and all such information as the director may deem necessary to assist him in determination whether the issuance of the permit is appropriate: 
(1)  Any person that has been denied a license or permit previously from the WFWCPHD may not be granted a temporary license; 
(2)  Temporary artist permit shall last for no longer than seven consecutive days; 
(3)  No more than four temporary artist permits will be issued in a continuous 12 month period; 
(4)  Artist must use all pre-sterilized disposable equipment, unless the organizer provides a decontamination/sterilization area equipped with an ultrasonic cleaner and medical grade autoclave; 
(5)  All artists must provide a current copy of blood borne pathogen training; 
(6)  Must provide a copy of aftercare instructions to clients; 
(7)  No reusable cloth items will be allowed. 
(Code 2001, § 26-814; Ord. No. 11-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012; Ord. No. 50-2017, § 2, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 26-815. - Additional prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any body art procedure upon a person under the age of 18 years without the presence, consent, and proper identification of a parent, managing conservator or guardian. Nothing in this section is intended to require an operator to perform any body art procedure on a person under 18 years of age even with the consent of a parent, guardian or managing conservator. It shall be unlawful for any person to tattoo upon a person under the age of 18 years, regardless of parental consent, except in accordance with V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 146.012 as amended. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to perform body art on a person who the operator has reason to suspect is under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to perform, own, operate, or solicit business as a body art establishment, or operator without first obtaining all necessary permits, licenses and approvals from the department. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to obtain or attempt to obtain any body art establishment permit or operator license by means of fraud, misrepresentation, or concealment. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to perform upon a person branding, scarification, or implants under the skin, unless the procedure is considered a medical procedure by a state medical board and is performed by a licensed physician. 
(f)  Mobile units are not allowed. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform body art procedures unless such procedures are performed in a body art establishment with a current permit. 
(Code 2001, § 26-815; Ord. No. 11-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012 Ord. No. 50-2017, § 2, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 26-816. - Suspension or revocation of permits. 
(a)  Permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be suspended by the department for failure of the holder to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Whenever a permit or license holder has failed to come into compliance with this article after receipt of a notice issued informing him of his failure to comply with the requirements of this article, he must be notified in writing that the permit or license is immediately suspended. The notice must also contain a statement informing the permit or license holder that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the department within ten days. 
(c)  Any person whose permit or license has been suspended may, at any time, make written request for reinstatement of the permit or license. Such application shall include a statement signed by the applicant that in his opinion the conditions causing the suspension have been corrected. Within ten days following receipt of a written request, the department shall reinspect the body art establishment or evaluate documentation provided by the permittee or licensee. If the director determines that the applicant is complying with the provisions of this article, the permit or license will be reinstated. 
(d)  For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article or for interference with the department in the performance of its duties, the permit or license may be permanently revoked after an opportunity for a hearing has been provided by the department. Before taking such an action, the department shall notify the permit or license holder or operator in writing, stating the reasons for which the permit or license is subject to revocation and advising the permit or license holder or operator of the requirements for filing a request for a hearing. A permit or license may be suspended for cause, pending its revocation or a hearing relative thereto. 
(e)  The department may permanently revoke a permit or license after ten days following service of the notice unless a request for a hearing is filed with the department by the permit or license holder within ten days of notice. 
(f)  A notice as required in this section is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or license or when it is sent by a registered or certified mail, return receipt request, to the last known address of the holder of the permit or license. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the department. 
(g)  The hearings provided for in this section will be conducted by the director at a time and place designated by the department. Based upon the record of the hearing, the director shall make a finding and may sustain, modify, or rescind any official notice or order considered in the hearing. The department within 20 days will furnish a written report of the hearing decision to the permit or license holder. 
(h)  Other licensing authorities will be notified by the department of the revocation of any permit or license. 
(Code 2001, § 26-816; Ord. No. 11-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 26-817. - Enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for any violation of or failure to perform any duty required by this article. 
(b)  Inspections will be conducted as often as necessary during a body art establishment's normal working hours or by appointment at non-working hours throughout the year to ensure compliance with this article. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to interfere with the department or its agents in the performance of its duties. 
(d)  A copy of the inspection report must be furnished to the permit holder of the body art establishment, with the department retaining possession of the original. 
(e)  If, after investigation, the director should find that a permittee or licensee is in violation of this article, he may, as an alternative to suspension or revocation, advise the permittee or licensee in writing of his findings and instruct the permittee or licensee to take specific steps to correct such violations within a period of time not to exceed 30 days. 
(f)  If the director has reason to suspect that a communicable disease may be transmitted by an operator, use of unapproved or malfunctioning equipment, or unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the director, upon written notice to the licensee or permittee, is authorized to take any or all of the following actions: 
(1)  Issue an order stating the cause for the action and restricting any or all operators from the body art establishment and from performing any body art procedure until the director determines there is no further risk to public health. 
(2)  Issue an order stating the cause for the action and immediately suspending the permit of the body art establishment until the director determines there is no further risk to the public health. 
(g)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to require an operator to perform any body art procedure upon a client. 
(Code 2001, § 26-817; Ord. No. 11-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Secs. 26-818-26-839. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - CRIME FREE MULTI-HOUSING PROGRAM 

Sec. 26-840. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to create a crime prevention program designed to reduce crime, drugs, gangs, and gang activity on apartment properties within the city. 
(Code 2001, § 26-840; Ord. No. 65-2008, § 1, 10-7-2008) 
Sec. 26-841. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Apartment community means a multifamily residential rental property containing ten or more separate living units designed for residential occupancy. 
    Manager means the owner or the person appointed or hired by the owner to be responsible for the daily operation of an apartment community. 
    Owner means the persons, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity who holds title to an apartment community. 
    Police official means the chief of police or such other person as he may designate to act as the official primarily responsible for the administration of this article or the said official's designees. 
    Registered agent means the person identified by the owner of an apartment community in the registration filed pursuant to this article authorized to receive any legal process and/or notice required or provided for in this article on behalf of the owner. 
(Code 2001, § 26-841; Ord. No. 65-2008, § 1, 10-7-2008) 
Sec. 26-842. - Registration of apartment communities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an apartment community in the city without first registering the ownership of such property as required by this section. No fee shall be charged for the registration required by this section. 
(b)  The owner of an apartment community shall provide or cause to be provided to the police official the following information regarding such property: 
(1)  The name of the owner and, if the owner is a corporation, whether foreign or domestic, the registered agent of the owner and the residential or business address of the owner and registered agent, if any, which address information shall include the street name and number, office or suite number if a business address, and the city, state, and zip code; 
(2)  The nature and extent of the owner's interest in the property. If there is only one owner, the extent of the owner's interest is 100 percent; and 
(3)  The name and business or residence address, including street name and number, city, state and zip code, of the current manager or management company of the apartment community and, if the manager is other than an individual, the name, title, business address, including street name and number, city, state and zip code, of the individual to be contacted for any purpose under this article relating to the apartment community. 
(c)  The use of a public or private post office box or other similar address shall not be sufficient for the purposes of complying with this section. 
(d)  Any change of management or ownership of an apartment community, including, but not limited to, the sale of the property or any ownership interest therein, shall require the purchaser or transferee to update the information provided under subsection (b) of this section and to file such updated information with the police official within 30 days of the effective date of such ownership change. A prior owner may advise the police official that he no longer holds any ownership interest in the property. The same requirement shall apply to any change relating to the owner's registered agent and manager or management company. 
(e)  The owner of a newly constructed apartment community shall comply with the provisions of this section not later than the 30th day following completion of construction. 
(f)  A true and correct copy of the registration statement shall be posted at all times in the business office at the property or, if no business office is maintained at the property, in a common area or other conspicuous place accessible at all times to the tenants of such property. 
(g)  A failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall constitute an offense under this article. 
(h)  Compliance with the requirements of this section shall be deemed to meet the requirements of Texas Local Government Code §§ 250.003 and 250.004. 
(Code 2001, § 26-842; Ord. No. 65-2008, § 1, 10-7-2008) 
State Law reference- Personal liability on nonowners of property, Texas Local Government Code § 250.003; owner or property management company agent for service, Texas Local Government Code § 250.004. 
Sec. 26-843. - Training. 
    The owner of each apartment community in the city shall ensure that their manager has attended an eight-hour crime free multi-housing class provided by the police official. There shall be no charge for the class. Upon completion of this class, the police official shall issue to the manager a manager's crime free multi-housing license (manager's license). This manager's license will not expire and is good for the life of the manager. It shall be unlawful for an owner to operate an apartment community in the city for longer then three months if the manager of the apartment community has not obtained a manager's license. 
(Code 2001, § 26-843; Ord. No. 65-2008, § 1, 10-7-2008) 
Sec. 26-844. - Level I certification. 
    Upon completion of the requirements set out in section 26-843, the police official shall issue to the apartment community a crime free multi-housing Level I certificate which may be displayed by the apartment community. This certificate shall expire after two years or at the time the manager holding a manager's license ceases to function as the apartment community manager. It shall be unlawful for any apartment community to display a crime free multi-housing Level 1 certificate if said apartment community has not met the requirements of this section and section 26-843. 
(Code 2001, § 26-844; Ord. No. 65-2008, § 1, 10-7-2008) 
Sec. 26-845. - Level II certification and gold certification. 
    The police official is hereby authorized to create two additional tiers of multi-housing requirements. These additional requirements are voluntary. Upon completion of tier two requirements, the police official shall issue to the apartment community a crime free multi-housing Level II certificate which may be displayed by the apartment community. Upon completion of the third and final tier requirements, the police official shall issue to the apartment community a crime free multi-housing gold certificate, which may be displayed by the apartment community and used in advertising. The two certification levels in this section shall expire after two years. It shall be unlawful for any apartment community to display either certificates once they have expired. 
(Code 2001, § 26-845; Ord. No. 65-2008, § 1, 10-7-2008) 
Chapter 30 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency management, Texas Government Code § 418.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to create new organizations within the city government, § 7(q). 
State Law reference- Civil emergencies generally, Texas Government Code § 418.001 et seq. 

Sec. 30-26. - Construction of article. 
    This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule, or regulation. 
(Code 1966, § 10-7; Code 2001, § 30-26) 
Sec. 30-27. - Liability under emergency orders. 
(a)  This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety, and neither the city; the city's agents and representatives; nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee or any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to this article, shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of such activity. 
(b)  Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of or injury to any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of or damage to the property of such person. 
(Code 1966, § 10-8; Code 2001, § 30-27) 
Sec. 30-28. - Positions of emergency management director and city emergency coordinator created. 
    The following positions are created for the purpose of establishing, coordinating, and operating a civil defense and disaster relief program: 
(1)  Emergency management director. In accordance with the executive order of the governor of the state, this position shall be held by the mayor or the presiding officer of the city council. The director shall be responsible for ensuring that a comprehensive emergency management program is established within the city. 
(2)  Emergency coordinator. This position shall be held by the city manager. The city manager shall be responsible for administering a comprehensive emergency management program within the city in accordance with the powers, duties, and responsibilities set out in section 30-29. The city manager may delegate the day-to-day responsibilities of this position to any other city officer or employee. The officer or employee so delegated shall hold the position of emergency management coordinator. 
(Code 1966, § 10-1; Code 2001, § 30-28) 
Sec. 30-29. - Duties of emergency coordinator. 
    The following duties and responsibilities are specifically delegated to the city emergency coordinator: 
(1)  The direction and control of the actual disaster operations of the city emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(2)  The marshaling, after a declaration of an emergency as provided for in section 30-31, of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any city department to aid in carrying out the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(3)  The supervision of the development and maintenance of an emergency management plan for the city. 
(4)  The performing of an ongoing survey of actual or potential major hazards which threaten life and property within the city, including recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(5)  The supervision of the drafting of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with representatives of the state or of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county and with other municipalities within the county for the countywide coordination of emergency management efforts. All such agreements must be approved by the city council prior to execution. 
(6)  The issuance of reasonable rules, regulations or directives which are necessary for the protection of life and property in the city during a state of emergency. Such rules and regulations shall be filed promptly in the office of the City Clerk and shall receive widespread publicity whenever possible. 
(7)  The final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions, during a state of emergency. 
(8)  The authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes during a state of emergency. 
(9)  The determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization during a state of emergency. 
(10)  The maintenance of necessary liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional, federal or other emergency management organizations. 
(Code 1966, § 10-2; Code 2001, § 30-29) 
Sec. 30-30. - Operational emergency management organizational structure. 
    The city's operational emergency management organization shall consist of the city officers and employees so designated by the coordinator in the emergency management plan, as well as all organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. Such plan shall set forth the form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign tasks, duties and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out this article. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management and of the federal government. 
(Code 1966, § 10-4; Code 2001, § 30-30) 
Sec. 30-31. - Declaration of emergency. 
    If a disaster occurs, the emergency management director and the city emergency coordinator shall be immediately notified. A state of emergency may be declared by the emergency management director upon the occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or manmade cause, including fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, water contamination, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot, hostile military or paramilitary action, other public calamity requiring emergency action, or energy emergency. Upon declaration of a state of emergency, the director shall authorize the city emergency coordinator to put into effect the plan for handling such an emergency. A state of emergency may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a state of emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Code 1966, § 10-3; Code 2001, § 30-31) 
Sec. 30-32. - Predominance of emergency orders. 
    At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Code 1966, § 10-6; Code 2001, § 30-32) 
Sec. 30-33. - Unauthorized emergency signals. 
    Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal or the termination of a warning shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this article. 
(Code 1966, § 10-5; Code 2001, § 30-33) 
Sec. 30-34. - Expenditure of funds. 
    Except as specifically authorized or otherwise allowed by state law and the city Charter and city ordinances, no person shall have the right to expend any unappropriated or unbudgeted public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council. 
(Code 1966, § 10-9; Code 2001, § 30-34) 
Sec. 30-35. - Impersonation of officers; hindering officers; penalty for violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the implementation and operation of the emergency management plan. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the city's emergency management organization, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(Code 1966, § 10-10; Code 2001, § 30-35) 
Chapter 34 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal courts of record, Texas Government Code § 30.00001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT OF RECORD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal court of record for Wichita Falls, Texas Government Code § 30.00301 et seq.; rules of procedure, Texas Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.011 et seq. 

Sec. 34-26. - Applicability. 
    This article applies to the municipal court of record created by Ordinance 2533, passed September 16, 1969. 
(Code 1966, § 12-1; Code 2001, § 34-26) 
State Law reference- Authority to create, Texas Government Code § 30.00001 et seq.; jurisdiction, Texas Local Government Code §§ 127.042, 215.070, 341.903, 401.002. 
Sec. 34-27. - Fees and court costs generally; fee for driving safety course. 
    In addition to collection of all fees and court costs authorized by state law, the municipal court shall assess and collect an administration fee of $10.00 from each person taking a driving safety course for the purpose of dismissing a traffic citation. 
(Code 1966, § 12-2; Code 2001, § 34-27) 
State Law reference- Special expense fee for driver safety course, Texas Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.0511(f). 
Sec. 34-28. - Building security fund. 
    In addition to collection of all fees and court costs authorized by state law and as ordained in section 34-27, the municipal court shall assess and collect a building security fee of $3.00 from each person convicted in a trial for a misdemeanor offense in the city's municipal court of record. All fees collected under this section shall be paid to the director of finance to be held on deposit by such person in a fund to be known as the Municipal Court Building Security Fund. All funds held may be dispensed, as needed, by the director of finance to provide security services for buildings housing the municipal court of record for the city. 
(Code 1966, § 12-5; Code 2001, § 34-28) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy, Texas Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.017. 
Sec. 34-29. - Technology fund. 
    All persons convicted in municipal court of a misdemeanor offense shall be assessed a technology fee of $4.00. All fees so collected shall be deposited in a fund to be known as the Municipal Court Technology Fund. Expenditures from this fund shall be made by city council resolution for the purchase of municipal court technological enhancements as authorized by state law. 
(Code 1966, § 12-6; Code 2001, § 34-29) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy, Texas Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.0172. 
Sec. 34-30. - Court costs for Child Safety Fund. 
    In addition to collection of all fees and court costs authorized by state law and as ordained in this article, the municipal court shall assess and collect a Child Safety Fund fee of $5.00 from each person convicted of a stopping, standing, or parking violation in the municipal court of record for the city. All fees collected under this section shall be paid to the director of finance to be held on deposit by such person in a fund to be known as the Municipal Court Child Safety Fund. All funds held may be dispensed, as needed, by the director of finance to fund the city's share of the school crossing guard program, operated in conjunction with the Wichita Falls Independent School District. 
(Code 1966, § 12-7; Code 2001, § 34-30) 
State Law reference- Fee for child safety authorized, Texas Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.014. 
Sec. 34-31. - Collection fee for delinquent cases. 
    In accordance with Texas Ann. C.C.P. art. 103.0031, there is hereby imposed an additional fee of 30 percent on all debts and accounts receivable (i.e., fines, fees, court costs, restitution, and other debts) that are more than 60 days past due and have been referred to a private firm for collection. 
(Ord. No. 63-2013, § 1, 11-5-2013) 
Chapter 42 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency medical services, Texas Health and Safety Code § 773.001 et seq.; private security systems, Texas Occupations Code § 1702.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AMBULANCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency medical services, Texas Health and Safety Code § 773.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ambulance means a motor vehicle that is designed or constructed, staffed, equipped and maintained or operated for the transportation of medical patients and shall include transfer ambulances. 
    Ambulance service means a person or company that uses ambulances to transport patients for emergency and non-emergency purposes where the transport originates and terminates in the territorial limits of the city. 
    Director means the director of the Wichita Falls Department of Health or his designee. 
    Franchise means an agreement between the city and a person, under which said person is granted the privilege of operating an ambulance service inside the city for a specific period of time and in accordance with the specific terms and conditions of the agreement. 
    Operate means to drive or to be in control of an ambulance. 
    Person includes a corporation, organization, government or government subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, and any other legal entity. 
    Primary facility means a fixed facility from which the primary administrative operations of the ambulance service in the county are conducted and at which ambulances are parked, stored, repaired, or maintained. 
    Transfer ambulance means any motor vehicle used primarily for transferring the injured or sick under circumstances which do not constitute an emergency and which have not been represented as an emergency. 
(Code 2001, § 42-26; Ord. No. 37-2011, § 1(42-1), 8-2-2011) 
Secs. 42-27-42-34. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FRANCHISE CERTIFICATES 

Sec. 42-35. - Preamble. 
    It is the city's policy to provide for and to promote adequate and efficient ambulance service in the city. To this end, this article provides for the regulation of ambulance rates and services to be carried out in a manner that protects the public health and safety, promotes the public convenience and necessity, and respects the concept of free enterprise. 
(Code 2001, § 42-35; Ord. No. 37-2011, Div. 2, 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 42-36. - Required franchise. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate an ambulance service in the city except under authority of a franchise for ambulance service granted by the city council. 
(Code 2001, § 42-36; Ord. No. 37-2011, § 1(42-2), 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 42-37. - Qualifications for franchise holder. 
    To apply for a franchise, an applicant must: 
(1)  Have its primary facility located in the territorial limits of the city; 
(2)  Maintain at least four ambulances currently licensed by the state, and based at its primary facility; and 
(3)  Meet the minimum vehicle, equipment and staffing requirements for each ambulance as established by the Department of State Health Services. 
(Code 2001, § 42-37; Ord. No. 37-2011, § 1(42-3), 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 42-38. - Franchise application. 
(a)  Every person proposing to operate an ambulance service in the city shall make application, in writing, in the form promulgated by the director, requesting that the city council grant it a franchise certificate to operate an ambulance service under this article. The application shall be sworn and filed with the director, setting forth full and complete information on the following matters: 
(1)  The name of the applicant, applicant's owners, and all other identifying and ownership information which may be required by the director. 
(2)  A compiled financial statement with note disclosure from a certified public accountant. 
(3)  A complete statement of the assets to be used in the ambulance service for which the application is being made, together with full information on liabilities existing against such assets. 
(4)  The number of vehicles and a general description of the vehicles the applicant proposes to use in the operation of the ambulance service; a description of the operations of the proposed ambulance service and location of the primary facility and other facilities to be used in the operation of the ambulance service. 
(5)  A description of any past business experience of the applicant, particularly from any municipality in providing emergency medical services; and the identification and description of any franchise, including any revocation or suspension thereof, held by the applicant. 
(6)  The telephone numbers the applicant intends to use for the ambulance service. 
(7)  Such additional factual information as the applicant may desire to include, and such additional factual information as may be required by the director, to aid the city council in reviewing the application. 
(b)  The director shall submit an ambulance franchise application to the city council within 60 days following receipt of the latter of: 
(1)  An application fully completed in accordance with the aforementioned requirements and the form promulgated by the director. 
(2)  The application fee. 
(Code 2001, § 42-38; Ord. No. 37-2011, § 1(42-4), 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 42-39. - Investigation of application and approval. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a franchise, the director shall investigate and make findings of fact concerning public convenience and necessity and other relevant factors. 
(b)  The applicant for a franchise certificate has the burden of proving that the public convenience and necessity require the proposed ambulance service and that the applicant is qualified and financially able to provide the service proposed in the application. 
(c)  The director shall obtain a criminal background check on each applicant, its officers, and the owners deemed by the director to be substantial, and any other related party whose criminal background check the director determines will aid the city council in reviewing the application. 
(Code 2001, § 42-39; Ord. No. 37-2011, § 1(42-5), 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 42-40. - Hearing on application; requirement for issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the application for a franchise, the city council shall set a date for public hearing upon the application, and the director shall notify the applicant of the hearing date in writing. 
(b)  The council shall review the application and conduct such hearings and investigation as it deems appropriate. In determining whether or not a franchise should be granted, the council shall give weight and due regard to, among other things, the following: 
(1)  Probable permanence and quality of the service offered by the applicant; 
(2)  The financial ability and responsibility of the applicant and its organization and personnel; 
(3)  The age and quality of applicant's equipment; and 
(4)  The experience of the applicant in providing emergency medical services. 
(c)  If the city council finds that the public convenience and necessity require the operation of the ambulance service, and that the applicant is fit to conduct the business and that the other requirements of this article have been complied with, it shall grant the franchise by ordinance. Once granted, the franchise shall remain in effect for a period of five years from the date granted or such lesser time as determined by the city council. 
(Code 2001, § 42-40; Ord. No. 37-2011, § 1(42-6), 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 42-41. - Multiple franchises must be disclosed. 
    No person shall have any pecuniary interest in more than one current, valid ambulance franchise in the city without disclosing such interest to the director. 
(Code 2001, § 42-41; Ord. No. 37-2011, § 1(42-7), 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 42-42. - Transferability. 
    A franchise issued pursuant to this division may not be transferred to another person unless the proposed transferee and new transferor file a written application for the transfer with the director, and the transfer application is approved by the city council. 
(Code 2001, § 42-42; Ord. No. 37-2011, § 1(42-8), 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 42-43. - Revocation of franchise. 
    An ambulance franchise is revocable by the city council after written notification to the franchise holder and a public hearing before the city council in which the city council finds that such franchise holder is in violation of this article and the violation warrants revocation. 
(Code 2001, § 42-43; Ord. No. 37-2011, § 1(42-9), 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 42-44. - Annual franchise fee. 
    A franchise holder shall pay an annual franchise fee to the director. Such fee must be paid, without proration, at the time of the issuance of the franchise and on or before the first business day of each year thereafter. 
(Code 2001, § 42-44; Ord. No. 37-2011, § 1(42-10), 8-2-2011) 
Secs. 42-45-42-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATION OF FRANCHISE 

Sec. 42-56. - Holder's and operator's duty to comply. 
(a)  In the operation of an ambulance service, a franchise holder shall comply with the terms and conditions of the franchise holder's franchise and, except to the extent expressly provided otherwise by the city, shall comply with this chapter, regulations established under this chapter, and other laws applicable to the operation of an ambulance service in this state. 
(b)  While on duty, an operator shall comply with this chapter, regulations established under this chapter and other laws applicable to the operation of an ambulance and a motor vehicle in this state. 
(Code 2001, § 42-56; Ord. No. 37-2011, § 1(42-20), 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 42-57. - Insurance; ambulances. 
(a)  Before an ambulance permit is issued to operate an ambulance service in the city, the franchise holder shall procure and furnish to the director and shall thereafter keep in full force and effect the insurance coverage as required by the state. 
(b)  Every insurance policy shall insure all of the ambulances owned, leased, contracted for or controlled by the holder of such franchise and used in such ambulance service for which a franchise has been authorized. Such policy shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property caused by the operation of such vehicles. 
(c)  Every such policy of insurance shall be issued by an insurance company organized and existing under the laws of this state or having a legal right to do business in this state. 
(d)  The franchise holder shall keep current insurance certificates covering all of its vehicles on file with the director during the term of the franchise and shall cause current evidence of insurance for each of its vehicles to be kept in said vehicle. Insurance certificates and policies shall name the city as an additional insured, provide the city with at least 30 days notice of cancellation, nonpayment of premium, or non-renewal, and include a waiver of subrogation in favor of the city. 
(Code 2001, § 42-57; Ord. No. 37-2011, § 1(42-21), 8-2-2011) 
Secs. 42-58-42-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - AMBULANCE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 42-71. - Ambulance operation within city limits. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate an ambulance unless it is permitted by the city where the ambulance picks up and drops off a patient in the territorial limits of the city. 
(Code 2001, § 42-71; Ord. No. 37-2011, § 1(42-30), 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 42-72. - Ambulance permit; offenses; nontransferability. 
(a)  The franchise holder shall obtain an ambulance permit for each ambulance utilized in his ambulance service, indicating the ambulance's authority to operate, which shall show thereon the date of expiration of the permit for the ambulance. An ambulance permit must be attached to the left rear window of the ambulance in a manner approved by the director. The franchise holder must pay a permit fee for each ambulance permit he obtains from the director. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he: 
(1)  Attaches an ambulance permit to a vehicle not authorized to operate as an ambulance; 
(2)  Forges, alters, or counterfeits an ambulance permit required by this section; 
(3)  Possesses a forged, altered, or counterfeited ambulance permit required by this section; 
(4)  Displays more than one ambulance permit issued by the city on a vehicle at the same time; or 
(5)  Attaches an ambulance permit to an ambulance to which it was not issued. 
(c)  An ambulance permit assigned to one ambulance is not transferable to another ambulance. 
(Code 2001, § 42-72; Ord. No. 37-2011, § 1(42-31), 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 42-73. - Ambulance permit expiration. 
    All ambulance permits expire on December 31 of the year in which they were issued. 
(Code 2001, § 42-73; Ord. No. 37-2011, § 1(42-32), 8-2-2011) 
Secs. 42-74-42-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 42-91. - Suspension. 
    The following regulations apply to the suspension of a franchise: 
(1)  The director may suspend a franchise if the director determines that the franchise holder: 
a.  Failed to comply with this article. 
b.  Intentionally or knowingly impeded the director, his staff, or other law enforcement officials in their duty or execution of their authority. 
c.  Ceases to qualify for a franchise under this article. 
(2)  Suspension of a franchise does not affect the expiration date of the ambulance permits or the franchise. 
(3)  Suspension of a franchise means that all ambulance service must cease. 
(Code 2001, § 42-91; Ord. No. 37-2011, § 1(42-40), 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 42-92. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Whenever a franchise suspension is issued by the director, the franchise holder shall be notified in writing of the penalty. Opportunity for a hearing will be provided if the franchise holder files a written request with the city manager within ten business days. The franchise holder shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within ten business days of a request for a hearing. If no request for a hearing is filed within ten business days, the administrative penalty or suspension is sustained and becomes final. 
(b)  A notice as required in this article is properly served when it is personally delivered to the franchise holder or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the addresses provided by the franchise holder in its franchise application. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee shall conduct the hearings provided for in this article at a time and place designated by him. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the city manager shall make final findings and shall sustain, modify, or rescind said administrative penalties considered in the hearing. 
(Code 2001, § 42-92; Ord. No. 37-2011, § 1(42-41), 8-2-2011) 
Secs. 42-93-42-146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ALARM SYSTEMS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Fire detection and alarm devices, Texas Insurance Code, § 6002.001 et seq.; burglar alarms, Texas Local Government Code § 214.191 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-147. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm notification means a notification intended to summon the Police Department or Fire Department, which is designed either to be initiated purposely by a person or by an alarm system that responds to a stimulus characteristic of unauthorized intrusion or fire. 
    Alarm site means a single premises or location (one street address, area or subarea) served by an alarm system that is under the control of one owner. 
    Alarm system means a device or system that emits, transmits, or relays a signal intended to summon or that would reasonably be expected to summon police or fire services of the city, including, but not limited to, local alarms. 
    Burglar alarm means an alarm system as defined in this section, but does not include an alarm: 
(1)  Installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site; or 
(2)  Designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises which does not have a local alarm. 
    Chief means the city fire chief or authorized representative in matters under this article pertaining to fires. In all other cases, the term "chief" means the chief of police or authorized representative. 
    False alarm notification means an alarm notification to the Police Department or Fire Department, when the responding officer or Fire Department personnel finds no evidence of an attempted criminal offense or criminal offense or fire. 
    Local alarm means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure. 
    Permit holder means the person designated in the application as required in section 42-182(1) who is ultimately responsible for responding to alarms and giving access to the site and who is also responsible for proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees. 
(Code 1966, § 141/2-1; Code 2001, § 42-146; Ord. No. 86-2006, § 1, 11-7-2006) 
State Law reference- Definitions, Texas Local Government Code § 218.001, Texas Insurance Code § 6002.002. 
Sec. 42-148. - Proper operation and maintenance. 
(a)  A permit holder in control of an alarm system shall: 
(1)  Maintain premises containing an alarm system in a manner that ensures proper operation of the alarm system. 
(2)  Maintain the alarm system in a manner that will minimize false alarm notifications. 
(3)  Respond or cause a representative to respond within a reasonable period of time when notified by the city to repair or inactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to the premises, or to provide security for the premises. 
(4)  Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report. 
(b)  A person in control of a local alarm shall adjust the mechanism or cause the alarm signal to sound for no longer than 15 minutes after being activated. 
(Code 1966, § 141/2-4; Code 2001, § 42-148; Ord. No. 86-2006, § 1, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 42-149. - Reporting of alarm signals. 
    A permit holder in control of an alarm system shall not allow alarm signals to be reported through a relaying intermediary that does not comply with the requirements of this article and any rules and regulations promulgated by the chief. 
(Code 1966, § 141/2-5; Code 2001, § 42-149; Ord. No. 86-2006, § 1, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 42-150. - Indirect alarm reporting. 
    An intermediary who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the city shall communicate alarm notifications to the city in a manner and form determined by the chief. 
(Code 1966, § 141/2-6; Code 2001, § 42-150; Ord. No. 86-2006, § 1, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 42-151. - Dial alarm devices using prerecorded voice messages. 
    No person shall use or cause or permit to be used any alarm device which automatically selects a telephone trunk line of the Police Department or Fire Department and then reproduces any prerecorded voice messages to report any robbery, burglary, fire or other emergency. 
(Code 1966, § 141/2-7; Code 2001, § 42-151; Ord. No. 86-2006, § 1, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 42-152. - Operating instructions. 
    A person in control of an alarm system shall maintain at each alarm site a complete set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. For a fire alarm system, such instructions shall be posted at the alarm panel at the alarm site. Special codes, combinations or passwords must not be included in these instructions. 
(Code 1966, § 141/2-8; Code 2001, § 42-152; Ord. No. 86-2006, § 1, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 42-153. - Alarm dispatch records. 
(a)  The police officer or Fire Department representative responding to an alarm call resulting from an attempted criminal offense, criminal offense, or fire or a false alarm notification shall record such information as necessary to permit the chief to maintain records, including, but not limited to, the following information: 
(1)  Identification of the permit holder. 
(2)  Identification of the alarm site. 
(3)  Arrival time and dispatch received time. 
(4)  Time of day and date. 
(5)  Area and subarea. 
(6)  Name of permit holder's representative on premises, if any. 
(b)  The responding police officer shall indicate on the dispatch record whether the notification was caused by a criminal offense or fire or whether the notification was the result of a false alarm. 
(Code 1966, § 141/2-9; Code 2001, § 42-153; Ord. No. 86-2006, § 1, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 42-154. - System performance reviews. 
    If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation and suppresses false alarms, the chief may require a conference with an alarm permit holder and the individual or association responsible for maintenance of the alarm system to review circumstances of each false alarm. 
(Code 1966, § 141/2-10; Code 2001, § 42-154; Ord. No. 86-2006, § 1, 11-7-2006) 
State Law reference- On-site inspection of burglar alarms, Texas Local Government Code § 218.006. 
Sec. 42-155. - Service fee. 
(a)  The holder of an alarm permit shall pay a service fee for the signaling of a false alarm by a burglar alarm as established by separate ordinance. 
(b)  If the responding police officer or Fire Department official determines that an alarm notification was caused by an attempted criminal offense, criminal offense, or fire, no service fee will be assessed for that notification. 
(Code 1966, § 141/2-11; Code 2001, § 42-155; Ord. No. 86-2006, § 1, 11-7-2006) 
State Law reference- Burglar false alarm penalties, Texas Local Government Code § 214.197. 
Secs. 42-156-42-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Burglar alarm permit, Texas Local Government Code §§ 214.192-214.196. 

Sec. 42-181. - Required. 
    A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated an alarm system without an alarm permit issued by the chief. A separate permit is required for each alarm site. 
(Code 1966, § 141/2-2(a); Code 2001, § 42-181; Ord. No. 86-2006, § 1, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 42-182. - Contents of application. 
    Each application for an alarm permit must contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the permit holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this article. 
(2)  Classification of the alarm site as either residential or commercial. 
(3)  For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the purpose of the alarm system; i.e., burglary, robbery, personal hostage, or fire. 
(Code 1966, § 141/2-2(c); Code 2001, § 42-182; Ord. No. 86-2006, § 1, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 42-183. - Payment of fees prior to issuance or renewal. 
    All fees owed by an applicant for an alarm permit must be paid before a permit may be issued or renewed. 
(Code 1966, § 141/2-2(f); Code 2001, § 42-183; Ord. No. 86-2006, § 1, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 42-184. - Issuance. 
    Upon receipt of a properly completed application form for an alarm permit and a permit fee established by separate ordinance, the chief shall issue an alarm permit to an applicant, unless the applicant has failed to pay a service fee or has had an alarm permit for the alarm site revoked, and the violation causing the revocation has not been corrected. 
(Code 1966, § 141/2-2(b); Code 2001, § 42-184; Ord. No. 86-2006, § 1, 11-7-2006; Ord. No. 53-2010, § 6, 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 42-185. - Grounds for denial. 
    Any false statement of a material matter made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a permit. 
(Code 1966, § 141/2-2(d); Code 2001, § 42-185; Ord. No. 86-2006, § 1, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 42-186. - Duration and renewal. 
    An alarm permit is issued for one year from the date of issuance and must be renewed every year upon submission of an updated application and renewal fee established by separate ordinance. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to submit an application prior to the permit expiration date. 
(Code 1966, § 141/2-3; Code 2001, § 42-186; Ord. No. 86-2006, § 1, 11-7-2006; Ord. No. 53-2010, § 6, 9-21-2010) 
Sec. 42-187. - Transferability; notice of change in information. 
(a)  An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person. 
(b)  A permit holder shall inform the chief of any change that alters any information listed on the permit application within three business days. No fee will be assessed for such changes. 
(Code 1966, § 141/2-2(e); Code 2001, § 42-187; Ord. No. 86-2006, § 1, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 42-188. - Revocation. 
(a)  A chief shall revoke an alarm permit if he determines that: 
(1)  There is a false statement of a material matter in the application for a permit; 
(2)  The permit holder has violated section 42-148, 42-149, 42-150, 42-151, 42-152, or 42-154; or 
(3)  The permit holder has failed to make full payment of all false alarm service fees assessed under section 42-155 within 30 days from the date the chief notified the permit holder in writing of the false alarm service fee. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he operates an alarm system during the period in which his alarm permit is revoked. 
(Code 1966, § 141/2-12; Code 2001, § 42-188; Ord. No. 86-2006, § 1, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 42-189. - Appeal from denial or revocation of permit or false alarm determination. 
(a)  If a chief refuses to issue or renew an alarm permit or revokes a permit, he shall send to the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and a statement of the right to an appeal. However, notification by certified mail is not required for a false alarm determination, and regular mailing shall be sufficient. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the chief to the city manager or his designee by filing with the city manager a written request for a hearing, setting forth reasons for the appeal, within ten days after receipt of the notice from the chief. The city shall continue to respond to alarms pending a hearing on the appeal. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the city manager stays an action of a chief in revoking a permit until the city manager makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day period, the action of a chief is final. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee shall serve as hearing officer at an appeal and shall consider evidence by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing. The hearing officer shall make his decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The hearing officer must render a decision within 15 days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The hearing officer shall affirm, reverse or modify the action of the chief. The decision of the hearing officer is final as to administrative remedies with the city. 
(Code 1966, § 141/2-13; Code 2001, § 42-189; Ord. No. 86-2006, § 1, 11-7-2006) 
Chapter 46 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to define, prohibit, abate, suppress and prevent within the city, and for a distance of 5,000 feet outside its limits, all nuisances and causes, § 7(k); nuisances, § 147. 
State Law reference- Authority to establish rules and regulations protecting health, Texas Local Government Code §§ 54.004, 54.012 et seq.; health and sanitation powers, Texas Health and Safety Code, § 122.006; authority to define and prohibit nuisances, Texas Local Government Code § 217.042; nuisances, Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of noise levels, Texas Local Government Code § 212.151 et seq.; nuisances and disorderly conduct including within 5,000 feet outside the city, Texas Local Government Code § 217.042; disorderly conduct, Texas Penal Code § 42.01; highway sound barriers, Texas Transportation Code § 201.610. 

Sec. 46-19. - Unnecessary and disturbing noise or vibration. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made noise of such character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual in the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the city which is offensive to the ordinary sensibilities of the city's inhabitants, which noise renders the enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable or interferes with peace and comfort. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to operate, or to permit or to cause the operation of any device that creates vibration which is above the vibration perception threshold of an individual at or beyond the property of the source if on private property or at 50 feet from the source if in a public space or public right-of-way. For the purpose of this section, the term "vibration perception threshold" means the minimum ground-borne or structure-borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a reasonable person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects. 
(Code 1966, § 20-32; Code 2001, § 46-26; Ord. No. 97-2000, § 1, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 46-20. - Certain sounds or acts deemed loud, disturbing and unnecessary. 
    The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises, in violation of this article, and are declared to be unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises offensive to the ordinary sensibilities of the city's inhabitants, rendering the enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable, and interfering with the peace and comfort, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, streetcar or other vehicle, while not in motion, except as a danger signal, as may be required by state law, if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control or if another vehicle is backing, starting or turning in such a way as likely to cause a collision. 
(2)  The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, streetcar or other vehicle while in motion, except as a danger signal, as required by state law. 
(3)  The playing of any radio, television set, phonograph, or musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume as to disturb the peace, quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any dwelling, apartment, hotel or other type of residence. 
(4)  The keeping of any animal or fowl which emits or makes an unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise. 
(5)  The use of any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar, bus or vehicle so out of repair or so loaded which emits or creates loud and unnecessary grating, grinding or rattling noise. 
(6)  The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of danger. 
(7)  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust from any stationary steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motorboat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively and efficiently prevent loud or unusual noises, annoying smoke, and the escape of gas or steam. 
(8)  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust from any motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device, which will effectively and efficiently prevent loud and unusual noises and annoying smoke. 
(9)  The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building in a residential district, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. seven days a week, except for urgent necessity in the interest of public safety. 
(10)  The creation of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise on any street adjacent to any school or court, which is in session, or adjacent to any hospital; provided, however, conspicuous signs are located in such streets indicating that schools, hospitals and courts are adjacent thereto. 
(11)  The creation of unreasonable, loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers or the sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building located on any premises which disturbs the quiet or repose of persons occupying adjoining property or those occupying property across any street or alley and within a 200-foot radius. 
(12)  The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood. 
(13)  The use of any drum, loudspeaker, or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise to any performance, show, sale or display of merchandise as to attract customers to any place of business. 
(14)  The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving vehicles for the purpose of advertising any show, sale or display of merchandise. 
(15)  Causing, suffering or allowing any air moving, conditioning or cooling equipment of any nature or kind to be so operated or maintained as to cause any unusual or excessive noise which disturbs the comfort, quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity thereof. In this connection, all available and reasonable sound-deadening and muffling devices and practices shall be employed. Such equipment shall be kept in proper operating condition. 
(16)  For any vehicle to be equipped with or for any person to use upon a vehicle any bell, siren, compression or exhaust whistle, except that vehicles operated in the performance of duty by law enforcement officers, fire departments and ambulances may attach and use a bell, siren, compression or exhaust whistle. 
(17)  To recklessly operate a motor vehicle on a public road, alley, or highway in a manner that causes the vehicle to undergo sustained loss of traction (e.g., spinning and squealing tires). 
(Code 1966, § 20-33; Code 2001, § 46-27; Ord. No. 57-2004, § 1, 7-6-2004; Ord. No. 47-2007, § 1, 5-1-2007) 
State Law reference- Offensive noise from alcoholic beverage establishment, Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 101.62; disorderly conduct, Texas Penal Code § 42.01; shooting galleries exempted from noise regulation, Texas Local Government Code § 130.001 et seq.; highway sound barriers, Texas Transportation Code § 201.610; vehicle muffler required, Texas Transportation Code § 547.604. 
Sec. 46-21. - Exemptions. 
    The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to an emergency; 
(2)  Sound produced by emergency vehicles; 
(3)  Sound produced by a vehicle motor, other than as outlined in section 46-20(17) while the vehicle is moving on a public right-of-way, public waterway, airport runway, or railroad; 
(4)  Sound produced by any governmental body in the performance of a governmental function; 
(5)  Sound generated at a scheduled stadium event; by parade spectators and participants in the parade route during a permitted parade; by outdoor celebration participants sponsored or cosponsored by the city for the general welfare of the public; 
(6)  Amplifiers used on vehicles to attract patrons that are operated by ice cream and snow cone vendors that produce jingles or music from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.; 
(7)  The use and operation of an amplified, mechanical bell system in connection with the use and occupancy of a church structure. However, such systems shall not be used or operated in a manner so as to be offensive to the ordinary sensibilities of a reasonable and prudent person; and 
(8)  The sound produced by the erection, excavation, construction, demolition, alteration, or repair work, or the permitting or causing thereof, of any building or other structure, or the operation or the permitting or causing the operation of any tools or equipment used in any such activity conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(Code 2001, § 46-28; Ord. No. 57-2004, § 2, 7-6-2004; Ord. No. 47-2007, § 1, 5-1-2007) 
Secs. 46-22-46-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNKED VEHICLES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoned vehicles, Texas Transportation Code § 683.001 et seq.; junked vehicles, Texas Transportation Code § 683.071 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-46. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old. 
    Collector means the owner of one or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires, trades or disposes of special interest of antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore, preserve and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
    Demolisher means any person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck or dismantle motor vehicles. 
    Inoperable motor vehicle means a motor vehicle that does not have lawfully affixed to it either an unexpired license plate or a valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate, or a vehicle that is not in operating condition because it is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled or has one or more flat tires. 
    Junked vehicle. 
(1)  The term "junked vehicle" means a vehicle, that is self-propelled and: 
a.  Displays an expired license plate or invalid motor vehicle inspection certificate or does not display a license plate or motor vehicle inspection certificate; and 
b.  Is: 
1.  Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
2.  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
(i)  72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
(ii)  30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
(2)  For purposes of this article, the term "junked vehicle" includes a motor vehicle. This subchapter applies only to a motor vehicle that does not have lawfully attached to it: 
a.  An unexpired license plate; and 
b.  A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate. 
    Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age which has not been changed from the original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists. 
(Code 2001, § 46-56; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006; Ord. No. 57-2006, § 1, 7-18-2006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Transportation Code §§ 683.071, 683.077(b). 
Sec. 46-47. - Deemed junked vehicle; declared unlawful. 
(a)  Junked vehicles, including a part of a junked vehicle, tarps or covers thereon, that are visible at any time of the year from a public place or public right-of-way, are detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tending to reduce the value of private property, to invite vandalism, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and are detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight which is adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city; and such vehicles are therefore declared to be a public nuisance and subject to abatement as provided in this article. 
(b)  The presence of any junked motor vehicle on any private lot, tract or parcel of land, or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, or on any public right-of-way or other public property within the city, shall be deemed a public nuisance. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such a junked vehicle by wrecking, dismantling, partially dismantling, rendering inoperable, abandoning, or discarding a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way or other public property or on the real property of another or to permit a junked motor vehicle to be parked, left, or maintained on his own real property. 
(Code 2001, § 46-57; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
State Law reference- Declared a nuisance, Texas Transportation Code § 683.072. 
Sec. 46-48. - Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any real property within the city to keep or permit other persons to keep any junked vehicle or parts thereof on said premises in ordinary public view. 
(Code 2001, § 46-58; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
State Law reference- Offense to maintain public nuisance, Texas Transportation Code § 683.073. 
Sec. 46-49. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  A vehicle or vehicle part which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; 
(2)  A vehicle or vehicle part which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard; 
(3)  Or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are maintained in an orderly manner that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means. 
(Code 2001, § 46-59; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Transportation Code § 683.077. 
Sec. 46-50. - Enforcement. 
(a)  A person authorized by the city to administer the procedures authorized by this article may enter private property for the purposes specified in the procedures to examine a junked vehicle, obtain information to identify the junked vehicle, and to remove or direct the removal of the junked vehicle. The municipal court of the city may issue orders necessary to enforce these procedures. 
(b)  The administration of the procedures provided by this article shall be accomplished by regular, salaried, full-time employees of the city, except that the removal of vehicles or vehicle parts from property may be by any other duly authorized person. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee may take civil abatement action pursuant to division 4 of this article and/or take criminal action pursuant to division 3 of this article. 
(Code 2001, § 46-60; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
Sec. 46-51. - Relocation of junked vehicle after commencement of abatement proceedings. 
    The relocation of a public nuisance which is a junked vehicle under this division to another location in the city after a notice to abate such junked vehicle has been mailed has no effect on the abatement proceedings if the junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location. 
(Code 2001, § 46-61; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
Sec. 46-52. - Proof of culpable mental state not required. 
    Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined by this article. 
(Code 2001, § 46-62; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
Sec. 46-53. - Effect of article on other ordinances. 
    This article does not affect any ordinance or law authorizing the immediate removal of a vehicle. 
(Code 2001, § 46-63; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
Secs. 46-54-46-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NOTICE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Notice, Texas Transportation Code § 683.0775. 

Sec. 46-80. - Notice to owner to abate junked vehicle. 
(a)  Whenever a junked vehicle exists on private property within the city in violation of this article, the city manager or his designee shall give notice stating: 
(1)  The nature of the junked vehicle on private property, 
(2)  That the junked vehicle must be removed and abated not later than the tenth day after the date on which the notice was personally delivered or mailed; 
(3)  That the person receiving notice has the right to a hearing; 
(4)  That a request for a hearing must be made before the expiration of the ten-day period; and 
(5)  Providing the location, time and date for which a hearing will be held, with such date being no earlier than the 30th day and no later than the 60th day from the date that the notice was mailed, delivered or posted. 
(b)  The notice must be personally delivered or mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, or delivered by the United States Postal Service with signature confirmation service, to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, any lien holder of record, and the owner or occupant of the private premises on which the junked vehicle exists. If the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the notice shall be directed to the owner or occupant of the property adjacent to the right-of-way. 
(c)  If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, new notice must be given by placing said notice on the junked vehicle or by hand delivery and action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return. 
(d)  If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the vehicle is unknown, notice to the last known registered owner may be placed on the vehicle or if the last known registered owner is physically located, the notice may be hand delivered. 
(Code 2001, § 46-65; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Transportation Code § 683.075. 
Secs. 46-81-46-103. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CRIMINAL PROCESS 

Sec. 46-104. - Trial in municipal court findings of judge; penalty. 
(a)  The judge of the municipal court shall hear any case brought before the court as set out in this division, and shall determine whether the defendant is, in fact, in violation of this article. 
(b)  Upon a finding that the defendant is in violation of this article, such defendant shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not more than $200.00. 
(c)  A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted in violation of this division. 
(d)  The judge of the court shall further order the defendant to remove and abate such junked vehicle within ten days. To abate or remove the junked vehicle, the judge of the municipal court may issue an order to the city manager or his designee to have the same removed, and the city manager or his designee shall take possession of such junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises. The city manager or his designee shall thereafter dispose of such motor vehicle in such manner consistent with state law and division 5 of this article. 
(Code 2001, § 46-66; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
State Law reference- Disposal of junked vehicle, Texas Transportation Code § 683.078. 
Sec. 46-105. - Description of vehicle in order. 
    Any order requiring the removal of a vehicle or part thereof shall include a description of the vehicle, and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
(Code 2001, § 46-67; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
Secs. 46-106-46-123. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CIVIL ABATEMENT PROCESS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Alternate administrative procedure authorized, Texas Transportation Code § 683.0765; alternate administrative procedure, Texas Local Government Code § 54.044. 

Sec. 46-124. - Public hearing; order to abate junked vehicle. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee shall appoint an individual to preside as the administrative hearing officer. The administrative hearing officer shall be authorized to administer oaths and issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents. 
(b)  A public administrative hearing shall be held no earlier than 30 days and no later than 60 days after the date of the notice to abate the junked vehicle, in accordance with division 2 of this article. 
(c)  The person who issued the citation or summons is not required to attend a hearing under this section. 
(d)  A person charged with civil liability under this section is not required to appear at a hearing authorized under this section. A person charged with the violation who fails to appear at a hearing authorized under this section is considered to admit liability for the violation charged. 
(e)  The hearing officer may proceed with the hearing without the presence of the person charged as long as the notice provision in division 2 of this article was complied with. 
(Code 2001, § 46-68; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Local Government Code § 54.044(b)-(g). 
Sec. 46-125. - Fees. 
    The hearing officer may charge reasonable fees and expenses for each junked vehicle or part thereof, not to exceed an amount established by separate ordinance. 
(Code 2001, § 46-69; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
Sec. 46-126. - Compliance. 
    The municipal court may enforce an order of a hearing officer compelling the attendance of a witness or the production of a document. 
(Code 2001, § 46-70; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Local Government Code § 54.044(c). 
Sec. 46-127. - Citation or summons; record keeping. 
(a)  A citation or summons issued as part of a procedure adopted under this division must: 
(1)  Notify the person charged with violating the ordinance that the person has the right to a hearing; and 
(2)  Provide information as to the time and place of the hearing. 
(b)  The original or a copy of the citation or summons shall be kept as a record in the ordinary course of business of the city and is rebuttable proof of the facts it states. 
(Code 2001, § 46-71; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Local Government Code § 54.044(d), (e). 
Sec. 46-128. - Order requirements. 
(a)  At a hearing under this section, the hearing officer shall issue an order stating whether the person charged with violating this article is liable for the violation and the amount of a penalty, cost, or fee assessed against the person. 
(b)  An order issued under this section may be filed with the city clerk. The city clerk shall keep the order in a separate index and file. The order may be recorded using microfilm, microfiche, or data processing techniques. 
(c)  Any order requiring the removal of a vehicle or part thereof shall include a description of the vehicle, and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
(Code 2001, § 46-72; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Local Government Code § 54.044(h), (i). 
Sec. 46-129. - Order of possession and removal. 
    If at the administrative hearing, it is determined that the person charged with violating this article is in violation of this article, the city manager or his designee shall thereafter dispose of the motor vehicle in such a manner consistent with state law and division 5 of this article. 
(Code 2001, § 46-73; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
Sec. 46-130. - Civil suit. 
    An order issued under this section against a person charged with an ordinance violation may be enforced by filing a civil suit for the collection of a penalty assessed against the person and obtaining an injunction that prohibits specific conduct that violates the ordinance or requires specific conduct necessary for compliance with the ordinance. 
(Code 2001, § 46-74; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Local Government Code § 54.044(j). 
Sec. 46-131. - Appeal. 
(a)  A person who is found by a hearing officer to have violated an ordinance may appeal the determination by filing a petition in municipal court before the 31st day after the date the hearing officer's determination is filed. 
(b)  An appeal does not stay enforcement and collection of the judgment unless the person, before filing the appeal, posts a bond with an agency designated for that purpose by the municipality. 
(c)  An appeal under this section shall be de novo. 
(Code 2001, § 46-75; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Local Government Code § 54.044(k). 
Secs. 46-132-46-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DISPOSAL[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Disposal, Texas Transportation Code § 683.078. 

Sec. 46-161. - Interference with impoundment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally interfere with or attempt to prevent the physical impoundment of any junked vehicle by a duly authorized person or his designee pursuant to this article or pursuant to the Texas Litter Abatement Act, Texas Health and Safety Code § 365.001 et seq. 
(Code 2001, § 46-76; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
Sec. 46-162. - Removal with permission of owner. 
    After receipt of notice from the city manager to abate the junked vehicle as provided in this article, the owner or occupant of the premises may, within ten days, give written permission to the city manager for removal of the junked motor vehicle. The giving of such permission shall be considered compliance with the provisions of this article. A vehicle that has been removed may not be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Code 2001, § 46-77; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
Sec. 46-163. - Notification of Department of Motor Vehicles. 
    Within five days after the date of removal of such junked vehicle, the code enforcement officer shall deliver to the state Department of Motor Vehicles a notice identifying the vehicle or part thereof. 
(Code 2001, § 46-78; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Transportation Code § 683.074(3). 
Sec. 46-164. - No reconstruction of removed vehicles. 
    After removal of any junked vehicle, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Code 2001, § 46-79; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
Sec. 46-165. - Disposal site. 
(a)  A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, may be removed to a scrap yard, a motor vehicle demolisher, or a suitable site operated by the city. 
(b)  The city may operate a disposal site if the city council determines that commercial disposition of junked vehicles is not available or is inadequate. The city may: 
(1)  Finally dispose of a junked vehicle or vehicle part; or 
(2)  Transfer it to another disposal site if the disposal is scrap or salvage only. 
(Code 2001, § 46-80; Ord. No. 17-2006, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Transportation Code § 683.078. 
Secs. 46-166-46-183. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WEEDS, RUBBISH AND UNSANITARY MATTER[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to abate nuisances, § 7(k). 
State Law reference- Weeds and unsightly and unsanitary conditions, Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq.; Texas Litter Abatement Act, Texas Health and Safety Code § 365.001 et seq. 

Sec. 46-184. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Any and all other objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter of whatever nature means any condition, object, material or other matter that is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health; that renders the ground, the water, the air or food a hazard or likely to cause injury to human life or health; that is offensive to the senses; or that threatens to become detrimental to the public health. The term "any and all other objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter of whatever nature" includes but is not limited to any abandoned wells, shafts or basements; abandoned refrigerators; stagnant or unwholesome water; sinks; privies; filth; carrion; rubbish; junk, trash, debris or refuse; impure or unwholesome matter of any kind; and any matter, condition or object which is objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary to a person of ordinary sensitivities. 
    Large tract means a lot or parcel of real estate consisting of seven or more acres. 
    Lot or parcel of real estate includes, in addition to those grounds within their respective boundaries, all lots or parcels of ground lying and being adjacent thereto and extending beyond the property line of any such lot or parcel of real estate to the curbline of adjacent streets where a curbline has been established, and any abutting rights-of-way beyond the property line where no curbline has been established and also to the center of adjacent alleys. 
    Rubbish means all refuse, tin cans, old vessels of all sorts, useless articles, discarded clothing and bottles of all sorts, and other nondecayable wastes. 
    Trash and debris means all manner of refuse, including but not limited to mounds of dirt, compost, piles of leaves, grass and weed clippings, paper trash, useless fragments of building material, rubble, household items and appliances, items of salvage, such as scrap metal and wood, barrels, tires, objects that hold water for an extended time, tree and brush trimmings, and other miscellaneous wastes or rejected matter. 
    Tree means a woody plant with a trunk and secondary branches, which has a trunk diameter that is greater than one inch. 
    Undeveloped tract means any lot or parcel of real estate on which there is not affixed above-ground structures, such as houses, garages, sheds, or barns. 
    Weeds includes grass, or rank or uncultivated vegetable growth or matter that: 
(1)  Has grown to more than nine inches in height; 
(2)  Creates an unsanitary condition or becomes a breeding place for mosquitoes, rodents, vermin or other disease-carrying pests regardless of the height of the growth; or 
(3)  Endangers property or is liable to catch on fire. 
(Code 1966, § 18-46; Code 2001, § 46-121; Ord. No. 86-2005, § 1, 10-18-2005; Ord. No. 42-2011, § 1, 8-16-2011) 
Sec. 46-185. - Prohibitions and remedies cumulative. 
    The enumerations of the unlawful conditions and the remedy for abating the conditions as set out in this article shall not be exclusive but cumulative. 
(Code 1966, § 18-50; Code 2001, § 46-123) 
Sec. 46-186. - Accumulation declared unlawful; public nuisance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or has possession or control of any lot or parcel of real estate to permit rubbish or any other objectionable, unsightly and unsanitary matter of whatever nature to exist, covering or partly covering the surface of any lot or parcel of real estate within the city so as to produce an unsightly appearance or which may harbor reptiles or rodents, create a fire hazard or result in unsanitary conditions. Such a condition is declared to be a public nuisance, the abatement of which shall be a public necessity. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or has possession or control of any lot or parcel of real estate to permit weeds to grow on the property. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution pursuant to this section that the weeds: 
(1)  Consist only of trees; or 
(2)  Are entirely located on a large tract or an undeveloped tract and are not within 50 feet of any dedicated public street or the boundary of said tract. 
(Code 1966, § 18-47; Code 2001, § 46-124; Ord. No. 86-2005, § 1, 10-18-2005; Ord. No. 42-2011, § 2, 8-16-2011) 
Sec. 46-187. - Notice. 
(a)  The notice to abate the condition described in this article shall be given: 
(1)  Personally to the owner in writing; 
(2)  By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or 
(3)  If personal service cannot be obtained, by: 
a.  Publication at least once; 
b.  Posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or 
c.  Posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings. 
(b)  If the city mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with subsection (a) of this section and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. 
(c)  In a notice provided under this section, the city may inform the owner by regular mail and a posting on the property that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city, without further notice, may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, the city, without notice, may take any action permitted by section 46-188 and assess its expenses as provided by section 46-189. 
(Code 2001, § 46-125) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.006(b)-(d). 
Sec. 46-188. - Removal generally. 
    All unlawful conditions described in section 46-186 are declared to be public nuisances, the abatement of which shall be a public necessity. It shall be the duty of any person other than the city, owning or having possession or control of any lot or parcel of real estate upon which exists an unlawful condition described in section 46-186, to promptly remove or abate such condition, unless said condition consists solely of: 
(1)  Trees; or 
(2)  Weeds that are located on a large tract or an undeveloped tract and are more than 50 feet from a dedicated public street or boundary of the tract. 
(Code 1966, § 18-48; Code 2001, § 46-126; Ord. No. 57-2006, § 2, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 42-2011, § 3, 8-16-2011) 
State Law reference- Authority to abate nuisance, Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.006(a). 
Sec. 46-189. - Removal by city; lien on property. 
    If the owner shall fail or refuse to abate the condition described in this article within seven days from the date of notice to abate such condition as provided in section 46-188, the city may cause such condition to be abated. The cost of work done or improvements made in abating such condition shall, when performed by private, independent contractors or the city, be the actual cost to the city plus an administrative fee per lot or parcel established by separate ordinance. When the work is done, the city shall compile the cost of such work done or improvements made and shall charge such costs against the owner of such premises. A certified copy of such costs shall be filed with the county clerk, and when the copy is filed, the city shall have a privileged lien upon such lot or parcel of real estate to secure the expenditures so made, and ten percent interest on the amount from the date of such payment. The lien statement shall state the name of the owner, if known, and the legal description of the property. The lien attaches upon the filing of the lien statement with the county clerk. This lien is inferior only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. After the fixing of any such lien and for any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure had in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction. In any suit or action, the statement of charges so made or a certified copy thereof shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended in any such work or improvements. 
(Code 1966, § 18-49; Code 2001, § 46-127; Ord. No. 42-2011, § 4, 8-16-2011) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.007. 
Secs. 46-190-46-216. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OUTDOOR STORAGE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Junkyards and storage of junk, Texas Transportation Code § 396.001 et seq. 

Sec. 46-217. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the outdoor storage provisions is to regulate outdoor storage and require fencing in order to conserve the value of buildings and land by preserving, improving or enhancing property values; to enhance the attractiveness along street, road and highway corridors; to enhance the economic development climate for those proposing or considering the city for location or relocation; and to protect and enhance places and areas of historical and cultural importance. 
(Code 2001, § 46-156; Ord. No. 78-2006, § 1, 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 46-218. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fence means a structure, erected to enclose and screen areas of property, constructed as required by section 46-223. 
    Inoperable motor vehicle means a vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets for reasons including but not limited to being wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own power, or not having a valid registration and/or inspection attached thereto. 
    Motor vehicle salvage yard means any outdoor storage yard used for the deposit of dismantled or junked motor vehicles or any outdoor storage yard used for the deposit of any discarded material which has been a part of or is intended to be a part of any motor vehicle. 
    Outdoor storage means any material, vehicle or equipment that has been used, damaged or partially dismantled and is: 
(1)  Stored outside indefinitely; or 
(2)  Held outside as inventory for future sale, processing or use. 
Such articles include but are not limited to inoperable motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts, appliances, boxes, crates, pipe or pipe fittings, paper, metal, tires, toys, concrete blocks, bricks, furniture, fixtures, machinery, motors, lumber, buildings or portions of buildings, building materials, barrels or clothing. 
    Outdoor storage yard means any parcel or part of land, not within a building, upon which outdoor storage is located. 
    Public right-of-way means a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription or condemnation and used or is intended to be used as a public roadway or alley. 
(Code 1966, § 191/4-1; Code 2001, § 46-157; Ord. No. 78-2006, § 1, 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 46-219. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who negligently owns, operates, controls, maintains, or leases an outdoor storage yard in violation of this article shall, upon conviction of such violation, be deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and subject to a fine as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 191/4-6; Code 2001, § 46-158; Ord. No. 78-2006, § 1, 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 46-220. - Access to storage yards. 
(a)  Outdoor storage yards shall be kept and maintained in such a manner that will not hinder or obstruct firefighting operations. Access to each area of storage and each building on the premises shall be provided by means of roadways and/or aisles as required by the fire chief. 
(b)  Access roadways, when required by the fire chief, shall provide not less than 20 feet of clear, unobstructed width. 
(c)  Any access roadway shall be provided with a turning radius of sufficient width to accommodate firefighting apparatus. 
(Code 1966, § 191/4-2(a)(1), (2); Code 2001, § 46-159; Ord. No. 78-2006, § 1, 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 46-221. - Removal of vegetation. 
    Areas around or under outdoor storage materials or buildings shall be kept free and clear of accumulations of grass, weeds, brush or other uncultivated vegetation. 
(Code 1966, § 191/4-2(a)(3); Code 2001, § 46-160; Ord. No. 78-2006, § 1, 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 46-222. - Burning. 
    The intentional burning of outdoor storage material is prohibited. 
(Code 1966, § 191/4-2(a)(4); Code 2001, § 46-161; Ord. No. 78-2006, § 1, 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 46-223. - Fencing. 
(a)  Every outdoor storage yard created after September 19, 2006, shall have a fence or other approved screening as defined in this article installed and maintained to obscure the view of the outdoor storage from any adjacent land or right-of-way. 
(b)  Every outdoor storage yard existing prior to September 19, 2006, and legally authorized under Appendix B, Zoning, and where such land with contiguous ownership containing the outdoor storage is within 200 feet of the property line of a residence or residential zoning boundary, shall install and maintain a fence to obscure the view of the outdoor storage from any adjacent land or right-of-way. 
(c)  Fences, as required by subsections (a) and (b) of this section, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Fences shall be sheathed with boards, slats, metal, or other approved materials, securely nailed or attached to supports, which will provide an effective visual screen. Transparent or translucent sheathing materials shall not be permitted. 
(2)  Sheathing material for screening shall extend up at least six feet tall. 
(3)  A building permit and an inspection, shall be obtained from the building inspections division prior to construction, for any proposed fence greater than six feet tall. Written plans and specifications must be submitted at the time of the permit application. 
(4)  Earthen berms, evergreen vegetation, trees, and shrubbery may be used to meet the screening requirement, provided that such material meets the intent of this article and such material is approved by the director of community development or his designee. 
(5)  Sheathing materials, posts, rails or any other fencing construction materials shall be naturally weather resistant or shall be painted or finished to resist decay or rust. Materials and/or paint shall be of uniform color and pattern. Fences or acceptable alternatives shall be maintained by repair, painting, or replacement as necessary to maintain stability, screening and weather resistant and decay resistant. The use of used or salvaged materials shall be prohibited unless specifically noted on plans and approved by the director of community development or his designee. 
(6)  Chainlink fences modified by the insertion of slats made of solid and durable materials into all spaces may be permitted if such system meets the intent of this article. Such acceptable materials shall be uniform in strength, material, and color. 
(d)  Gates, normally used for access to the outdoor storage yard, are not required to provide a solid screen. The outdoor storage yard immediately behind and perpendicular to such gate, to a distance of a least 30 feet, shall be kept clear of all storage materials. Unscreened gates shall be no wider than 20 feet. 
(e)  Buildings that are used for normal operation of the business, such as storage, sales or office buildings, are not required to be fenced; however, materials shall not be stored in front of or to the side of such buildings so as to be open to public view, except that the incidental outdoor display of commodities for retail sale is permitted. 
(f)  Areas not required to fence. Outdoor areas of land used for the storage or display of materials or vehicles incidental to the principal activity of a business shall not be required to comply with this section if such areas are included as one of the following uses: 
(1)  New or used automobile and related vehicle sales lots, authorized by a state motor vehicle dealer license. 
(2)  Storage yards incidental to the on-site sale of new building materials, new heavy machinery, new farm equipment, new nursery products, new mobile homes, new boats or new trailers. 
(3)  Storage yards for supplies and/or raw materials necessary to the on-site manufacturing, fabrication or assembly of finished products, if kept in a neat and orderly fashion. 
(4)  Parking areas for operable equipment, vehicles and trailers incidental to a rental or construction business. 
(5)  Parking areas for vehicles incidental to transportation and hauling activities of commercial businesses and governmental entities. 
(6)  Parking areas for operable motor vehicles awaiting service at auto repair or auto body shops. 
(7)  Used merchandise, that is associated with a retail business, displayed during business hours. 
(g)  Outdoor storage yards located in the light industrial (LI) and heavy industrial (HI) zoning districts are exempt from the requirements of subsection (b) of this section until one year from the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, at which time outdoor storage yards shall be regulated by all the provisions of this article. 
(h)  Where it has been determined that site constraints exist that may limit the ability of a particular site to conform to the requirements of this article, the director of community development or designee shall evaluate the ability of a proposal to come into conformance with the requirements of this article by considering constraints to that ability. If the proposal will not entirely fulfill the requirements of this article, the director or designee may instruct that a proposal be presented which strives to maintain the intent of this section to the best of its ability. Such alternate proposal shall be approved by the director or designee. An appeal to the director's decision may be made to the city council. 
(i)  Any exemption referenced in subsections (d) through (h) of this section shall not be construed as authority to violate or set aside any other requirement of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 191/4-3; Code 2001, § 46-162; Ord. No. 78-2006, § 1, 9-19-2006) 
State Law reference- Fences required for junkyards, Texas Transportation Code § 396.001 et seq. 
Sec. 46-224. - Storage on public right-of-way. 
    No storage material shall be kept or stored upon a public right-of-way. 
(Code 1966, § 191/4-4; Code 2001, § 46-163; Ord. No. 78-2006, § 1, 9-19-2006) 
Secs. 46-225-46-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OUTDOOR DINING 

Sec. 46-250. - Purpose. 
    The purpose is to encourage outdoor dining on public sidewalks downtown. The standards establish outdoor dining areas, identify clear safe pedestrian access on sidewalks, and require an encroachment agreement between a tenant and the city. Other outdoor dining area appurtenances including the location of seating, tables, barriers, signs, awnings, canopies, and umbrellas are also regulated. 
(Ord. No. 34-2015, § 1, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 46-251. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Downtown: Areas zoned central business district (CBD). Areas outside, but in close proximity to the central business district (CBD) may be considered by the director of community development or designee. 
    Encroachment agreement: An agreement between a property owner and tenant with the City of Wichita Falls to use or place items on public right-of-way. 
    Off-premises menu sign: A sign displaying a menu for a business utilizing and in an outdoor dining area. An off-premises menu sign is: 1) An "A" frame (or sandwich board) sign with a maximum area of six square feet per side; or 2) a menu in a display case (maximum size of four square feet) on a pedestal or stand not more than 50 inches in height. 
    Outdoor dining area: The use of an area of public sidewalk for the purpose of extending the seating space of businesses whose main function is the provision of food or beverages. An outdoor dining area shall abut and be contiguous to such business and may contain removable tables, chairs, plants, and related appurtenances. 
(Ord. No. 34-2015, § 1, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 46-252. - Encroachment agreement and site plan. 
    Encroachment agreement and site plan required for approval: 
(1)  Encroachment agreement. 
a.  An encroachment agreement between the tenant and city shall be required for an outdoor dining area on public sidewalks downtown. The one-time encroachment fee shall be $250.00. 
b.  The agreement is not transferrable. An encroachment agreement may be revoked at any time should there be a violation. 
(2)  Site plan. 
a.  A site plan review is required, as specified in section 7100 [of Appendix B]. 
b.  A scaled site plan showing dimensions and measurements of sidewalks and outdoor dining area including seating, tables, fencing, canopies, awnings, umbrellas, planters, off-premises menu sign or other appurtenances. Site plans shall also show the location of all utilities. 
c.  Any future additions or alterations to the approved site plan shall be subject to review and inspection by community development. 
d.  All site plans need approval prior to the encroachment agreement. 
e.  Outdoor dining areas in public right-of-way in designated historic districts or landmarks are subject to review and approval by the landmark commission. 
(Ord. No. 34-2015, § 1, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 46-253. - Minimum requirements for outdoor dining areas. 
    Outdoor dining area and pedestrian access clearance area: 
(1)  A minimum pedestrian access clearance of five feet shall be maintained between the face of the outdoor seating enclosure and back of curb (See Figure A). 
(2)  No outdoor dining areas, articles, signs, materials, merchandise, or wires or cords shall [be] locate[d] in the designated five-foot pedestrian access clearance area. 
(3)  All ingress/egress into and out of a building and fenced area shall maintain sufficient clearance, consistent with building and fire codes. 
(4)  No trash enclosures or refuse storage is allowed on the public sidewalk in the outdoor dining area. All trash and rubbish shall be promptly removed from the encroached area. 
(5)  All articles, not limited to tables, chairs, canopies/awnings/umbrellas shall be removable should there be any public improvements or maintenance needed to infrastructure in the outdoor seating area. 
(6)  The city shall not be liable for any damages or removal of articles due to such improvements or maintenance on the sidewalk within an easement or right-of-way. 
(7)  Outdoor dining areas are subject to the city's smoking ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 34-2015, § 1, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 46-254. - Fencing. 
    Fencing is meant to identify the section provided for tables, chairs and umbrellas, for use as outdoor dining areas. 
(1)  A minimum 36-inch, maximum 48-inch, tall weather resistant wrought iron, aluminum or metal fence is required around the designated dining area and anchored to the sidewalk as shown in Figure A. 
(2)  Fence must be secured to the sidewalk and remain easily removable. 
(Ord. No. 34-2015, § 1, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 46-255. - Canopies and awnings. 
(a)  Canopy (Figures B and C). 
(1)  A canopy shall maintain a minimum eight feet of vertical clearance. 
(2)  No support poles allowed in or over the right-of-way except structural columns that support cantilevered canopies shall be located within six inches of the building exterior. 
(b)  Retractable awning (Figure D). 
(1)  Retractable type awnings shall not project beyond the fence into the sidewalk clear area. 
(2)  No support poles are allowed in or over the right-of-way. 
(3)  All portions of any awning shall be a minimum of eight feet above the ground. 
(c)  The area between the top of the fence and the bottom of any awning or canopy shall remain open. No transparent barriers (such as Plexiglas or plastic) are permitted between the top of the fence and the bottom of the awning. 
(d)  All canopies and awnings shall be of UL rated non-combustible material/construction. 
(e)  Canopies and awnings must be free of advertisements and contained within the outdoor dining area. 
(f)  Commercial style canopies or retractable awnings shall be designed specifically for commercial outdoor use that can handle extreme environmental conditions. 
(Ord. No. 34-2015, § 1, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 46-256. - Outdoor umbrellas (Figure E). 
(a)  All parts of any umbrella, including the fabric and supporting ribs, must be contained entirely within the outdoor dining area. 
(b)  Umbrellas must be free of advertisements. 
(c)  Market style umbrellas, designed specifically for patio or outdoor restaurant use are required. 
(d)  Umbrellas are to maintain a minimum height clearance of eight feet. 
(Ord. No. 34-2015, § 1, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 46-257. - Signage. 
(a)  No signs allowed on sidewalks except one off-premises menu sign. No signs shall encroach into the five-foot sidewalk clearance area. Signs shall be removed from sidewalks at the close of business. 
(b)  No signs shall be allowed on fences or hanging from any other objects on or over the five-foot clearance area on sidewalks, unless required by state law. 
(c)  Signs on awnings or canopies may have the business name only in lieu of a wall, ground or pole sign and in conformance with the city's sign ordinance (section 6700 [of Appendix B]). 
(Ord. No. 34-2015, § 1, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 46-258. - Lighting. 
(a)  Lighting shall be low voltage (25 volts or less). 
(b)  Lighting fixtures, if provided shall meet the nuisance lighting ordinance. 
(c)  The applicant must obtain an electrical permit for a lighting plan from the city's building inspection division. 
(d)  No permanent lighting shall be affixed to coverings including but not limited to canopies, awnings, or umbrellas. 
(e)  All lighting must be removable. 
(Ord. No. 34-2015, § 1, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 46-259. - Outdoor heaters. 
(a)  Heating units shall have a UL or AGA listing. 
(b)  Heating units shall not be installed over or near exits from the building. Units shall maintain the required clearances from combustible materials. 
(Ord. No. 34-2015, § 1, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 46-260. - Setback from neighboring businesses. 
    Neighboring businesses must remain visible to pedestrians and motorists alike. Restaurants need to be mindful of adjoining businesses when using outdoor dining areas, making sure that neighboring businesses remain visible to pedestrians and motorists. 
(Ord. No. 34-2015, § 1, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 46-261. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibited fencing: No fabric inserts, chain link fencing, chicken wire or cyclone fencing. No banners or advertising allowed on fencing. 
(b)  Prohibited sidewalk coverings include carpet or other flooring material constructed of fabric, canvas, wool, tile, linoleum, nylon, vinyl, or any covering that is intended to resemble turf. 
(c)  Platforms: Raised decks, platforms, or other such surfaces are not permitted within outdoor dining areas. 
(d)  [Figures.] 


  

  

  

  

(Ord. No. 34-2015, § 1, 8-4-2015) 
ARTICLE VII. - DONATION BOXES 

Sec. 46-289. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator means the director of the department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article, and includes director's designees. 
    Donation box means any box, container, building, enclosed trailer, or other receptacle that is intended for use as a collection point for donated clothing or other donated household materials. 
    Person means an individual, sole proprietorship, corporation, association, nonprofit corporation, partnership, joint venture, a limited liability company, estate, trust, public or private organization, or any other legal entity. 
(Ord. No. 43-2016, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 46-290. - Donation box-General provisions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain, or allow to be placed or maintained, any donation box within the City of Wichita Falls, without having first secured a permit and decal in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any donation box located within the jurisdiction of the City of Wichita Falls that does not have a current, valid permit shall be subject to impoundment by the city. Any donation box impounded by the city shall be released to the owner upon payment of all applicable impoundment and storage fees. 
(c)  Donation boxes shall only be permitted to be placed on real property located within the following zoning use districts: Heavy Industrial District, Light Industrial District, General Commercial District; and Limited Commercial District, with a conditional use permit. 
(d)  Donation boxes shall not be permitted to be placed on real property on any residential use lot even if said lot is in an allowed zone. 
(e)  No donation box shall exceed 36 square feet in footprint size. 
(f)  Each donation box shall clearly indicate in writing on the side of each box that all donations must fit into and be placed within the donation box. 
(g)  Each donation box must be placed on an improved surface. 
(h)  The person receiving the permit for the placing or the maintaining of the donation box shall display current contact information, including: 
1.  Name, street address and phone number, (of the permittee) on the donation box; 
2.  All contact information must be readable with letters being at least four inches tall and clearly visible from the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 43-2016, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 46-291. - Application for permits. 
(a)  Applicants for permits under this article shall submit an application and site plan for review to the director of community development or designee. The application shall include the written authorization of the property owner allowing the donation box on the property. 
(b)  A separate application, site plan, and permit fee shall be required for each donation box regardless of ownership thereof. Permits issued under the provisions of this article shall be valid only at the address stated on the permit. 
(c)  An annual renewal permit fee for each donation box shall be required. All permits shall expire on December 31 of each calendar year regardless of the date of issuance; provided, however, that the fee for each permit shall be prorated for each month or portion of a month for which the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 43-2016, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 46-292. - Transfer of permit prohibited. 
    No permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferrable and the authority a permit confers shall be conferred only upon the person receiving the permit. 
(Ord. No. 43-2016, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 46-293. - Maintenance and upkeep. 
(a)  A person receiving a permit and the property owner shall be held jointly and severally liable and responsible for the maintenance, upkeep, and servicing of the donation box and clean up and removal of any donations left on the property outside of the donation box. 
(b)  The visual and structural integrity of the donation box shall be maintained at all times. 
(c)  The placement of the donation box shall not impede traffic nor visually impair any motor vehicle operation within a parking lot, driveway, alley, or street. 
(d)  The donation box shall not be located in a required setback, building limit line, easement, 100-year floodplain, driveway, or fire lane. 
(e)  The donation box shall not block or occupy any number of required parking spaces for the primary use structure. 
(f)  The current permit decal for the specific donation box shall be affixed and displayed at all times on the outside of the donation box visible from the right-of-way. 
(g)  All donation materials shall fit into and be placed inside the donation box. The collection or storage of any materials outside the container is strictly prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 43-2016, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 46-294. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  Grounds. Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked by the administrator if the person receiving the permit has been convicted of two violations of this chapter or any other provision of this Code of Ordinances concerning the donation box within a 12-month time period. 
(b)  Notice. Notice of the revocation shall be given to the person who received the permit in writing, with the reasons for the revocation, served either by personal service or by certified United States mail to their last known address. The revocation shall become effective the day following personal service or if mailed, three days from the date of mailing. 
(c)  Appeal; hearing. The person who received the permit shall have 10 days from the date of such revocation in which to file with the administrator notice of their appeal from the order revoking said permit. The appeal must be in writing. The administrator shall provide for a hearing on the appeal not later than 15 days after the notice of the appeal is filed. 
(d)  Stay. Any appeal of revocation pursuant to this section shall stay the revocation until said revocation is finalized. 
(e)  Removal of box; impoundment. Upon finalization of any revocation, the permit holder shall remove said donation box no later than ten days after said final decision. Upon expiration of this ten day grace period, the donation box shall acquire noncompliant status and be subject to immediate impoundment without further notice. 
(f)  One-year waiting period. In the event the permit of any permit holder is revoked by the administrator, no second or additional permit shall be issued to such person within one year of the date such permit was revoked. 
(Ord. No. 43-2016, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 46-295. - Criminal penalty. 
    Any person who violates this article shall, upon conviction of such violation, be deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and subject to a fine as provided in Section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 43-2016, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 46-296. - Fees. 
(a)  Permit fee. Permit fee shall be in an amount set by separate ordinance. 
(b)  Renewal permit fee. Renewal permit fee shall be in an amount set by separate ordinance. 
(c)  Impoundment fees. Impoundment fees shall be in an amount set by separate ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 43-2016, 11-1-2016) 
Secs. 46-297-46-319. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TEMPORARY STORAGE UNITS 

Sec. 46-320. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Residential means a property or lot that contains a residential use or multi-family residential use. 
    Temporary storage unit means transportable units designed and used primarily for temporary storage of building materials, household goods, and personal items for use on a limited basis on a property. This definition does not include those portable units used in the removal of municipal solid waste or licensed vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 28-2018, § 1, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 46-321. - Temporary storage units-General provisions. 
(a)  A temporary storage unit may be placed on residential property but shall not be placed on a property for longer than 60 days in a 365-day period, unless used in conjunction with a building permit. In such event, it shall be permitted to remain for the duration of the building permit. 
(b)  Location. 
(1)  Front, side, or rear yard. Temporary storage units shall be located on an improved surface in a front, side, or rear yard or an area recognized as the primary driveway serving a residence, but shall not be located in any part of a fire lane, maneuvering lane, public right-of-way, public sidewalks, visibility triangle, easements, or impair sight distance. 
(2)  Multi-family residential property. When placing the unit on a multi-family residential property, the unit shall be placed on an improved surface as close as possible to the dwelling using the unit. 
(c)  The property where the temporary storage unit is located shall contain a primary residential structure. 
(d)  A temporary storage unit shall not have a height greater than nine and one-half feet nor shall temporary storage units be stacked. 
(e)  Any unit larger than listed herein will require compliance with all building codes. 
(f)  For enforcement purposes, a temporary storage unit observed on the property is presumed to have been the same temporary storage unit for the entire 60-day period. 
(Ord. No. 28-2018, § 1, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 46-322. - Criminal penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates this article shall, upon conviction of such violation, be deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and subject to a fine as provided in section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 28-2018, § 1, 7-17-2018) 
Secs. 46-323-46-349. - Reserved. 
Chapter 50 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Home rule municipality, fire department, Texas Local Government Code § 342.011; appointment of fire protection personnel, Texas Government Code § 410.032; firefighter qualifications and training, Texas Government Code § 419.032; fire escapes, Texas Health and Safety Code § 791.001 et seq.; flammable liquids, Texas Health and Safety Code § 753.001 et seq.; fire safety, Texas Health and Safety Code § 791.001 et seq.; fire alarms, Texas Insurance Code, § 6002.001 et seq.; fire codes, Texas Local Government Code § 235.001 et seq.; fires and fire protection, Texas Local Government Code § 351.001 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, Texas Local Government Code § 240.904; arson investigation, Texas Local Government Code § 352.015 et seq.; controlled burning, Texas Penal Code § 28.01(6). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Tampering with, use of or disturbing fire hydrants. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, use, disturb, or draw or take any water from any public fire hydrant in the city. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the city Fire Department. 
(Code 1966, § 15-4; Code 2001, § 50-1) 
Secs. 50-2-50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 50-31. - Organization. 
    The Fire Department shall consist of a chief appointed by the city manager and such firefighters and other officers and employees as shall be authorized by the city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 15-123; Code 2001, § 50-31) 
Charter reference- City manager to appoint department director, § 61. 
Sec. 50-32. - Powers and duties of chief. 
(a)  The chief of the Fire Department shall, subject to the approval of the city manager, have exclusive control of the stationing and transferring of all firefighters and other officers and employees in the department. He shall be vested with the disciplinary power of the department. 
(b)  The chief of the Fire Department shall also be charged with the duty of seeing that all ordinances passed affecting the department and that all state laws in regard thereto are rigidly enforced. 
(Code 1966, § 15-124; Code 2001, § 50-32) 
Sec. 50-33. - Office of fire marshal created. 
    The office of city Fire Marshal is created. 
(Code 1966, § 15-97; Code 2001, § 50-33) 
Sec. 50-34. - Civil service positions designated. 
(a)  The following positions in the Fire Department are classified under civil service compliance with Texas Local Government Code § 143.021: 
Classification Title Number of 
Positions Firefighter Trainee As Required Firefighter 72 Fire Equipment Operator 42 Fire Lieutenant 24 Fire Captain 15 Fire Battalion Chief 5 Assistant Fire Chief 1  
(b)  No other person employed by the city maybe classified as holding a position under civil service with the Fire Department. 
(Code 1966, § 15-127; Code 2001, § 50-34; Ord. No. 93-2000, § 1, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 96-2005, § 1, 12-6-2005; Ord. No. 87-2007, § 1, 10-2-2007; Ord. No. 3-2008, § 1, 1-15-2008; Ord. No. 60-2008, § 1, 9-16-2008; Ord. No. 78-2009, 10-20-2009; Ord. No. 44-2014, 9-16-2014) 
Sec. 50-35. - Distribution and control of property and equipment. 
    All necessary equipment and property for effective firefighting may be maintained and distributed according to fire hazards. The chief of the Fire Department shall be charged with the control of all buildings, quarters, motor vehicles and equipment used by the department. 
(Code 1966, § 15-125; Code 2001, § 50-35) 
Sec. 50-36. - Fire cost recovery. 
(a)  The following fees shall be assessed and collected for the use or presence of equipment and supplies in Fire Department responses to open burning permit supervision, vehicle fires and accidents, hazardous material spills and releases, and low water crossing rescues and rescue attempts: 
(1)  For each response to an incident scene involving at least one fire apparatus (engine, truck, rescue/hazmat, manpower squad, command vehicle, mini-pumper): Amount provided by separate ordinance, with a one-day minimum; 
(2)  The actual cost of any consumable used or partly used for the mitigation of any hazardous materials spill or release; and 
(3)  The actual cost of repairing or replacing any nonconsumable item damaged during attempts to mitigate an incident covered under this section. 
(b)  If a vehicle that is the subject of a response is covered by an automobile insurance policy, the occupants of said vehicle will not be billed in accordance with this section for the response, and the responsible vehicle's insurance company will instead be billed for that response. 
(Ord. No. 53-2010, § 1, 9-21-2010; Ord. No. 69-2011, § 2, 12-6-2011) 
Secs. 50-37-50-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE CODE 

Sec. 50-61. - Adopted. 
    The following portions of the 2015 International Fire Code, published by the International Code Council, are adopted by reference as though they were copied fully in this section: Chapters 1-80, and Appendices B, C, D, F, H, and I. 
(Code 1966, § 7-14; Code 2001, § 50-61; Ord. No. 118-2003, § 1, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 46-2007, § 1, 5-1-2007; Ord. No. 33-2011, § 7, 7-5-2011; Ord. No. 57-2015, § 7, 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 50-62. - Changes, deletions and amendments. 
    The following changes, deletions and amendments are made to the specified sections in the 2015 International Fire Code adopted in Section 50-61. Where an adopted section of the 2015 International Fire Code has not been changed, deleted, or amended by this ordinance, it is adopted as worded in the 2015 International Fire Code. 
103.1 General. The department of fire prevention is established within the jurisdiction under the direction of the fire code official. The function of the department shall be the implementation, administration and enforcement of the provisions of this code. Any reference in this code to the fire code official shall mean the fire marshal. 
105.1.1 Permits required. A property owner or owner's authorized agent who intends to conduct an operation or business, or install or modify systems and equipment that are regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be performed, shall first make application to the fire code official and obtain the required permit. Where the fire marshal determines that the specific circumstances of any activity do not create a condition potentially hazardous to life, property or public welfare, he shall have the authority to waive the requirement of a permit. 
108.1 Board of appeals established. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code shall be appealed to the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals per Section 113 of the amendments to the 2015 International Building Code. 
109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violation a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be deemed to have committed a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any of the provision of the fire codes is committed or continued, and upon convictions of any such violation, such person shall be punished by a fine as provided in Section 1-14 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Wichita Falls. 
(Code 1966, § 15-16; Code 2001, § 50-62; Ord. No. 118-2003, §§ 2, 3, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 46-2007, §§ 2, 3, 5-1-2007; Ord. No. 33-2011, § 7, 7-5-2011; Ord. No. 57-2015, § 7, 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 50-63. - Annual fire inspection. 
    All commercial businesses inside the city limits of Wichita Falls shall be required to have an annual fire inspection performed on their premises. "Commercial business" is defined as a business that provides a service or sells physical products, and includes industrial, retail or commercial office. 
(Ord. No. 40-2017, 9-19-2017) 
Secs. 50-64-50-92. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PYROTECHNICS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Fireworks, Texas Occupations Code § 2154.001 et seq. 

Sec. 50-93. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Pyrotechnics means and includes any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and includes Roman candles; sky rockets; helicopter-type rockets; cylindrical fountains, cone fountains; wheels; illuminating torches and colored fire in any form; sparklers and dip sticks; mines; shells; firecrackers; salutes; whistles without report; squibs; a fire balloon; a hydrogen-filled balloon; signal lights; blank cartridges; toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are used; torpedoes; dago bombs or other devices of like construction and any devices containing any explosive or flammable compound or any tablets or other devices containing any explosive substance. However, the term "pyrotechnics" does not include auto flares, paper caps containing not in excess of an average of 0.25 of a grain of explosive content per paper cap manufactured in accordance with the regulations for packing and shipping as provided therein and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices for use of such caps, the sale and use of which shall be permitted. 
(Code 1966, § 15-1(a); Code 2001, § 50-91) 
Sec. 50-94. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to the possession or use of signaling devices for current daily consumption by railroads, the Police Department and Fire Department and others required to use them by law, nor to the possession, sale or use of normal stock of flashlight compositions by photographers or dealers in photographic supplies or for signal or ceremonial purposes or athletic or sports events or for the use by military organizations. 
(b)  This article shall be applicable within the corporate city limits and also within the area immediately adjacent and contiguous to the city limits and extending outside the city limits for a distance of 5,000 feet. Notwithstanding the prohibitions contained in this article, pyrotechnics warehouses and commercial wholesale pyrotechnics stores containing in size at least 1,500 square feet existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be authorized to continue operation for a period of ten years from date of annexation into the city. Upon the expiration of such ten-year period, such structures shall be utilized for a purpose consistent with the requirements of this article. Commercial wholesale pyrotechnics stores, as that term is used in this subsection, shall mean pyrotechnics stores that sell pyrotechnic devices to bona fide retail dealers and not to the general public. 
(Code 1966, § 15-1(d), (j); Code 2001, § 50-92) 
Sec. 50-95. - Using, keeping, storing, manufacturing or selling in city limits. 
    No person shall fire or explode or keep, store, manufacture or sell any pyrotechnics in the corporate city limits. 
(Code 1966, § 15-1(b); Code 2001, § 50-95) 
Sec. 50-96. - Possession in city limits; identification of commercial vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall have in his possession in the corporate city limits any pyrotechnics. Subject to Texas Local Government Code § 342.013, any pyrotechnics so found in the possession of any person shall be condemned, seized, and confiscated by the Police Department or the fire marshal. 
(b)  Any commercial pyrotechnics dealer or operator, jobber, retailer, importer, or manufacturer transporting Class C fireworks within the city limits and extending for a distance outside of the city limits for a total of 5,000 feet must display on each vehicle the word "fireworks." This may be permanently attached to the vehicle or on a sign. The word "fireworks" must be at least six inches in height and shall be visible on both sides and the rear of the vehicle. 
(c)  Prosecution for possession of fireworks pursuant to this article shall be subject to the affirmative defense established by Texas Local Government Code § 342.013. 
(Code 1966, § 15-1(c); Code 2001, § 50-96) 
State Law reference- Extraterritorial jurisdiction regarding nuisances, Texas Local Government Code § 217.001. 
Sec. 50-97. - Permit for pyrotechnics display. 
    The state fire marshal may issue a written permit to a properly qualified person for giving a pyrotechnic display in accordance with Texas Government Code § 417.0041. It shall be the duty of the city fire marshal to make an investigation as to whether such a display as proposed shall be of such a character and so located that it may be hazardous to property or dangerous to any person, and he shall so advise the state fire marshal of his findings. All pyrotechnic displays must be permitted by the city Fire Marshal's Office. A fee established by separate ordinance will be assessed for the permit. All displays will be supervised by the fire marshal. 
(Code 1966, § 15-1(e); Code 2001, § 50-97) 
Sec. 50-98. - Use, keeping, manufacturing or selling in extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(a)  No person shall have, keep, store, manufacture or sell any pyrotechnics within the area immediately adjacent and contiguous to the city limits and extending for a distance outside of the city limits for a total of 50 feet. It shall be unlawful to do or perform any act in violation of this subsection within such area of 50 feet outside the city limits, provided that this subsection shall not apply within any portion of such 50-foot area which is contained within the territory of any other municipal corporation. 
(b)  No person shall use, fire, explode or cause to be used, fired or exploded any pyrotechnics within the area immediately adjacent and contiguous to the city limits and extending for a distance outside the city limits for a total of 50 feet. It shall be unlawful to do or perform any act in violation of this subsection within such area of 50 feet outside the city limits, provided that this subsection shall not apply within any portion of such 50-foot area which is contained within the territory of any other municipal corporation. 
(Code 1966, § 15-1(f), (g); Code 2001, § 50-98) 
Sec. 50-99. - Permit for keeping, manufacturing or selling in extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
    No person shall have, keep, store, manufacture or sell any pyrotechnics within an area extending for a distance outside of the city limits from a distance of 50 feet to a distance of 5,000 feet from the city limits, unless such person shall have obtained a permit from the city fire marshal's office. The application for such permit shall contain the specific location of the building used to keep, store, manufacture or sell the pyrotechnics and must also contain a blueprint or diagram showing the construction of such building. The construction of the building must comply with the rules and regulations of the city fire marshal's office. A permit fee established by separate ordinance will be assessed per retail location. 
(Code 1966, § 15-1(h); Code 2001, § 50-99) 
Sec. 50-100. - Hours of closing for manufacturing or selling in extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
    All persons manufacturing or selling pyrotechnics within an area extending for a distance outside of the city limits from a distance of 50 feet to a distance of 5,000 feet from the city limits shall close their doors and places of business each night from 11:55 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. the following morning and shall not sell or manufacture any pyrotechnics during this time period. 
(Code 1966, § 15-1(i); Code 2001, § 50-100) 
Chapter 54 - FLOODS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1-54-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local governments must adopt ordinances necessary for jurisdiction to qualify for National Flood Insurance Program, Texas Water Code § 16.3145; political subdivision to comply with Federal requirements, Texas Water Code § 16.315. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-26. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure (such as garages and storage sheds). 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any section of this article or a request for a variance. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH or VO zone on the city's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within the city subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the flood insurance rate map, Zone A usually is refined into Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
    Base flood means the flooding having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation means the computed elevation to which floodwater is anticipated to rise during the base flood. Base flood elevations (BFEs) are shown on flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and on the flood profiles. The BFE is the regulatory requirement for the elevation or floodproofing of structures. The relationship between the BFE and a structure's elevation determines the flood insurance premium. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means a nonbasement building: 
(1)  Built, for a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the elevated floor or, for a building in zone V1-30, VE or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and 
(2)  Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, the term "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. 
    Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the flood insurance rate map, i.e., October 16, 1979. The term "existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is completed before the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads, or the construction of streets). 
    Flood and flooding mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of the city on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodplain and floodprone area mean any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See Flooding. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances; subdivision regulations; building codes; health regulations; special purpose ordinances, such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance; and other applications of police power. The term "floodplain management regulations" describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway and regulatory floodway mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term "functionally dependent use" includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle, but includes a mobile home. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial flood insurance rate map or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
    Start of construction, for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (PL 97-340), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basements, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. For full requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, where specified, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-16; Code 2001, § 54-26; Ord. No. 101-2005, § 1, 12-6-2005) 
Sec. 54-27. - Statutory authorization. 
    The state legislature has, in Texas Water Code § 16.311 et seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city council ordains this article. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-1; Code 2001, § 54-27) 
Sec. 54-28. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-2; Code 2001, § 54-28) 
Sec. 54-29. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; streets; and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-3; Code 2001, § 54-29) 
Sec. 54-30. - Lands to which article applies. 
    This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-27; Code 2001, § 54-30) 
Sec. 54-31. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study (FIS)" and accompanying flood insurance rate map which is effective February 3, 2010, and any revisions thereto are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-28; Code 2001, § 54-31) 
Sec. 54-32. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall be located, altered or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-30; Code 2001, § 54-32) 
Sec. 54-33. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-31; Code 2001, § 54-33) 
Sec. 54-34. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all sections shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-32; Code 2001, § 54-34) 
Sec. 54-35. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur, and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-33; Code 2001, § 54-35) 
Sec. 54-36. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or that cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities. 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage. 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-4; Code 2001, § 54-36) 
Secs. 54-37-54-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 54-61. - Designation of floodplain administrator. 
    The director of the Department of Public Works is appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-44; Code 2001, § 54-61; Ord. No. 15-2012, § 1, 3-20-2012) 
Sec. 54-62. - Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to this article. 
(2)  Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (33 USC 1344) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agencies prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Ensure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 54-31, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer division 3 of this article. 
(9)  a.  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development, including fill, shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
b.  Under the provisions of 44 CFR 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH on the community's flood insurance rate map which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional flood insurance rate map revision through the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-45; Code 2001, § 54-62; Ord. No. 15-2012, § 1, 3-20-2012) 
Sec. 54-63. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with this article. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-29; Code 2001, § 54-63) 
Sec. 54-64. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him and include, but are not limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations; existing and proposed structures; and the location of such in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures. 
(2)  Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed. 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 54-92(2). 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 54-62(1). 
(b)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the sections of this article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others. 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development. 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems. 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site. 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable. 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(11)  The effect of any additional fill or accumulative fill on the 100-year floodplain of the Wichita River. Compensatory storage may be required to offset proposed fill. 
(c)  Fees for a floodplain development permit shall be as provided by separate ordinance. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-46; Code 2001, § 54-64; Ord. No. 15-2012, § 1, 3-20-2012) 
Sec. 54-65. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors section 54-64(b) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted in and the intent of this article, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article in section 54-29. 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or floodplain if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances shall be as follows: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense; create nuisances; cause fraud on or victimization of the public; or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by the city for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that the criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (j) of this section are met and the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(l)  Each application for a variance shall be accompanied by a variance application fee as set out in this zoning ordinance in Appendix B to this volume, as amended. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-47; Code 2001, § 54-65; Ord. No. 15-2012, § 1, 3-20-2012) 
Sec. 54-66. - Penalty for violation. 
    If any individual, including any officer, agent or employee acting in behalf of any individual, firm, association or corporation, violates any section of this article within the corporate city limits, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of such violation in the municipal court, he shall be fined as provided in section 1-14. Each day that such violation continues shall be a separate offense. Prosecution or conviction under this section shall never be a bar to any other remedy or relief for violations of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-48; Code 2001, § 54-66) 
Secs. 54-67-54-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION STANDARDS 

Sec. 54-91. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, the following are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-59; Code 2001, § 54-91) 
Sec. 54-92. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 54-31, 54-62(8), or 54-93(d), the following are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot or more above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in section 54-62, is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot or more above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed to at least one foot above the base flood elevation so that below the floodproofed elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification, which includes the specific elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which such structures are floodproofed, shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. Standards for manufactured homes shall be as follows: 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's flood insurance rate map shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this subsection, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include but are not limited to use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map on sites: 
1.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
2.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
3.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood; 
be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated one foot or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map that are not subject to this subsection be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is one foot or more above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map shall either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
c.  Meet the permit requirements of section 54-64(a) and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (4) of this section. 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(6)  Accessory structures. Accessory structures may be built below one foot above the base flood elevation provided that such structures satisfy the following standards in unnumbered and numbered A zones: 
a.  The structure is low valued and represents a minimal investment. 
b.  The structure shall be small in size, not to exceed 600 square feet. 
c.  The structure shall be unfinished on the interior. 
d.  The structure can be used only for parking and limited storage. 
e.  The structure shall not be used for human habitation (including work, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas). 
f.  Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment must be elevated to one foot above the BFE or floodproofed. 
g.  The structure is constructed and placed on building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters. 
h.  The structure is designed to have low flood damage potential, i.e., constructed with flood resistance materials. 
i.  The structure is firmly anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
j.  Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the structure. 
k.  Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be provided below one foot above the BFE. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-60; Code 2001, § 54-92; Ord. No. 101-2005, § 2, 12-6-2005; Ord. No. 22-2012, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 54-93. - Subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with sections 54-28, 54-29 and 54-36. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet development permit requirements of section 54-64 and this division. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 54-31 or 54-62(8). 
(d)  All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-61; Code 2001, § 54-93) 
Sec. 54-94. - Areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 54-31 are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest predominant or typical surrounding adjacent grade at least one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's flood insurance rate map (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's flood insurance rate map (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed to at least one foot above the base flood elevation so that below the floodproofed elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads or effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 54-64, are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within Zone AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-62; Code 2001, § 54-94; Ord. No. 22-2012, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 54-95. - Floodways. 
    Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 54-31 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development, unless certification by a professional registered engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. This section shall not apply to the placement of manufactured homes in existing manufactured homes parks or subdivisions. 
(2)  If subsection (1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction sections of this division. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all provisions required by section 65.12. All information required to comply with section 65.12 shall be provided to the community by a professional engineer on behalf of the party requesting the encroachment into the floodway. 
(Code 1966, § 151/2-63; Code 2001, § 54-95; Ord. No. 15-2012, § 2, 3-20-2012) 
Chapter 58 - HEALTH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Health, Texas Health and Safety Code § 11.001 et seq.; powers and duties regarding public health, Texas Health and Safety Code § 122.001 et seq.; powers of a home rule city, Texas Health and Safety Code § 122.006. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1-58-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC HEALTH DISTRICT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Public health district, Texas Health and Safety Code § 121.041 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Appointing body means a member empowered by this article to appoint voting representatives to the Public Health Board. 
    Director means chief administrative officer of the city-county public health district. 
    Health authority means the physician appointed to administer state and local laws relating to public health. 
    Local public health district (LPHD) means the Wichita Falls/Wichita County Local Public Health District. 
    Member means the city, the county, or any other eligible government entity which may be admitted to the local public health district at a future date, and includes both operating and contributing members, but does not include government entities who merely contract with the local public health district for services. 
    Physician means a person licensed to practice medicine by the state board of medical examiners. 
    Public board of health means the Advisory Board of the local public health district. 
    Representative means a person appointed to serve on the advisory Public Board of Health for the local public health district. 
(Code 1966, § 18-76; Code 2001, § 58-26) 
Sec. 58-27. - Created. 
    There is created the Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public Health District, which shall be referred to as "the local public health district." 
(Code 1966, § 18-74; Code 2001, § 58-27) 
Sec. 58-28. - Legislative authority. 
    The agreement in this article is made in accordance with and pursuant to the Local Public Health Reorganization Act of 1983, Texas Health and Safety Code § 121.001 et seq. If there is any ambiguity or conflict, the terms and provisions of that act shall govern so far as is applicable. 
(Code 1966, § 18-75; Code 2001, § 58-28) 
Sec. 58-29. - Organizational structure and financial administration. 
(a)  The budget of the public health district shall be prepared and administered by the city manager with the advice of the director/health authority and the Public Board of Health. 
(b)  The public health district shall be operated primarily by the city, except as provided in the agreement in this article. All personnel shall be appointed by the city manager according to the city's personnel procedures. 
(c)  The local public health district shall have the power to provide services for nonmembers by contract, provided that any contract shall have been approved by the city council. 
(Code 1966, § 18-77; Code 2001, § 58-29) 
Sec. 58-30. - Director. 
(a)  Appointment of a director of the local public health district shall be made by the city manager, who shall seek and receive advice from the members of the public health district and the Public Board of Health before any appointment. 
(b)  The director shall perform all duties as specified in Texas Health and Safety Code § 121.001 et seq., and shall be subject to all requirements and rules of Texas Health and Safety Code § 121.001 et seq. 
(c)  The director may be removed from office pursuant to the personnel procedures applicable to city employees. 
(d)  The director shall seek the advice of the local Public Board of Health and the health authority in the performance of his duties. 
(e)  The director shall perform all management and supervisory functions pertaining to the local public health district as so directed by the city manager, except for those functions which are required by state law to be performed by a physician. 
(Code 1966, §§ 18-79, 18-80; Code 2001, § 58-30) 
Sec. 58-31. - Payment of costs. 
(a)  The cost of operating the city-county public health district shall be prorated between or among its members as may be separately negotiated and approved by the governing bodies from time to time with the objective that each member pays in direct proportion to the cost of providing specific services to that member. 
(b)  The director of the local public health district shall provide information necessary to the members in order that they may anticipate contributions which will be required from them for the next fiscal year. 
(c)  Services for which proportionate contributions will be required will be determined by considering the cost of providing staff salaries, supplies, office quarters, health and clinic centers, health services and facilities, maintenance, travel, and such other factors as may be included by mutual agreement of the members. 
(Code 1966, § 18-81; Code 2001, § 58-31) 
Sec. 58-32. - Fees. 
(a)  Generally. The public health district shall charge fees to persons who receive public health services. However, no person shall be denied public health services because of his inability to pay for services, and the public health district shall make provisions for a reduced fee or no fee for persons unable to pay for the services in whole or in part. 
(b)  Authority to be set; annual adjustments. The city manager is hereby authorized to set fees for clinic services provided by the Health Department and make annual adjustments as authorized by the state administrative code. 
(Code 1966, § 18-82; Code 2001, § 58-32; Ord. No. 74-2000, § 1, 7-5-2000) 
Sec. 58-33. - Procedures for admission, withdrawal and exclusion of members. 
(a)  Other qualified government entities within the county may apply to become a member of the local public health district. The governing body of each member government entity shall review the application. If a majority of the governing body of each member government entity approves the application, the governmental entity may be admitted to membership upon such terms as are acceptable to the applicants and members. 
(b)  If a participating governmental agency decides to withdraw from the public health district, it shall give six months' notice, in writing, to the governing body of each member. Upon the expiration of six months, this agreement then shall no longer bind the withdrawing member; however, the fiscal responsibility will be encumbered to the end of the local public health district's fiscal year, which is October 1 of each year. 
(Code 1966, § 18-83; Code 2001, § 58-33) 
Sec. 58-34. - Procedures for modification of agreement. 
    Agreements made pursuant to this article may be modified at the request of a member, subject to the approval of all members of the local public health district, provided the changes are in accordance with the state Board of Health guidelines and the Local Public Health Reorganization Act. 
(Code 1966, § 18-85; Code 2001, § 58-34) 
Sec. 58-35. - Approval, modification and filing for record. 
(a)  The cooperative agreement made pursuant to this article shall be approved by the governing bodies of the city and the county and shall be signed by the appropriate officers of the city and county. 
(b)  Modification of the cooperative agreement shall be in writing and shall be effective upon the approval of the governing body of each member. 
(c)  A copy of the cooperative agreement and any subsequent modifications shall be included in the minutes of the governing body of each member and shall be filed with the county clerk, the city clerk, and with the state Department of Health. 
(Code 1966, § 18-86; Code 2001, § 58-35) 
Sec. 58-36. - Application of Uniform Grant and Contract Management Act of 1981. 
    Provided that the governing bodies of each member of the local public health district so request by appropriate action, the city may apply to the governor's office for designation as operator of the city-county public health district and may request a single audit or coordinated audits by all state agencies from which the public health district receives funds. 
(Code 1966, § 18-87; Code 2001, § 58-36) 
Sec. 58-37. - Contract authorized. 
    The city manager is authorized to enter into a contract with the county upon the terms and conditions set forth in this article. 
(Code 1966, § 18-88; Code 2001, § 58-37) 
Secs. 58-38-58-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC BOARD OF HEALTH[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Public Board of Health, Texas Health and Safety Code § 121.046. 

Sec. 58-66. - Created. 
(a)  There shall be created an advisory Public Board of Health which shall advise the members of the local public health district on matters of public health. 
(b)  The board shall have the advice and cooperation of the director/health authority and the city manager in the performance of its duties. 
(Code 1966, § 18-78; Code 2001, § 58-66) 
Sec. 58-67. - Composition; qualifications; appointments. 
(a)  The Public Board of Health shall consist of 11 representatives. Seven of the representatives shall be voting representatives and four shall be nonvoting representatives. 
(b)  Two of the voting representatives shall be citizens of the county who reside outside the city and shall be appointed by the county commissioners. However, if the Commissioners' Court makes no appointments within 30 days of a request for appointment by the city, the city council may proceed to fill the positions. 
(c)  Five of the voting representatives shall be appointed by the city council. 
(d)  Insofar as is possible, voting representatives shall be selected from the following classes: 
(1)  Voting representatives. 
a.  One legally qualified, licensed and practicing physician approved by the medical society of the county. 
b.  One legally qualified, licensed and practicing veterinarian. 
c.  One legally qualified, licensed, and practicing dentist. 
d.  One registered nurse. 
e.  Two interested citizens at large. 
f.  One member of either the Texas Restaurant Association or the Texas Grocer's Association. 
(2)  Nonvoting representatives. The nonvoting representatives are designated as follows: 
a.  The county judge or his representative. 
b.  The city manager or his representative. 
c.  The director/health authority. 
d.  The manager. 
(Code 1966, § 18-78; Code 2001, § 58-67) 
Sec. 58-68. - Terms. 
(a)  Voting representatives of the Public Board of Health shall be appointed for two-year terms and may be reappointed for two additional two-year terms. The voting representatives may not serve concurrent terms that exceed six years. 
(b)  Public Board of Health voting representatives will serve two-year terms, except that three of the voting representatives will be appointed for one year to ensure staggered terms. Each representative may be reappointed for two additional two-year terms. 
(c)  An unexpired term will be filled from the representative class in which the vacancy occurs. 
(d)  Representatives' terms of office shall expire December 31. 
(Code 1966, § 18-78; Code 2001, § 58-68) 
Sec. 58-69. - Residency. 
    Each representative of the Public Board of Health must have resided in the public health district for a period of three years prior to appointment. 
(Code 1966, § 18-78; Code 2001, § 58-69) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Health and Safety Code § 121.046(e)(4). 
Sec. 58-70. - Compensation. 
    Representatives of the Public Board of Health shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1966, § 18-78; Code 2001, § 58-70) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Health and Safety Code § 121.046(e)(5). 
Sec. 58-71. - Removal of members. 
(a)  A representative of the Public Board of Health may be removed by the appointing body or by a majority vote of the remaining representatives present, provided that there is a quorum of five voting representatives and providing that the county Commissioners' Court approves the removal of any representative who resides outside the city limits. Action may be initiated by the appointing body or by any representative of the board. The representative being considered for removal shall be provided an opportunity to be heard by the board before the vote is called. 
(b)  A representative may be removed by the voting representative as provided in subsection (a) of this section or by the appointing body for neglect of duty, incompetence, malfeasance, or conviction of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. However, if any representative misses three consecutive regular meetings without being excused by the board as a whole, the board shall declare a vacancy and notify the appointing authority of such fact so that vacancy may be filled. 
(Code 1966, § 18-78; Code 2001, § 58-71) 
Sec. 58-72. - Advice to nonvoting representatives; administration of programs. 
(a)  The nonvoting representatives of the Public Board of Health shall receive the advice of the board on matters of public health, including the budget. 
(b)  The director/health authority and the manager shall administer programs, and shall report to the state Board of Health and the Public Board of Health as the situation warrants. 
(Code 1966, § 18-78; Code 2001, § 58-72) 
Sec. 58-73. - Officers; rules of procedure; quorum; meetings. 
(a)  The Public Board of Health shall elect a chair, a vice-chair and a secretary and shall adopt rules for the conduct of its meetings. 
(b)  Four voting representatives shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(c)  The board shall meet bimonthly on the second Friday of the first month, or at such special meeting as may be called by the chair, the director/health authority, or the city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 18-78; Code 2001, § 58-73; Ord. No. 29-2005, § 1, 5-3-2005; Ord. No. 02-2017, 1-3-2017) 
Secs. 58-74-58-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SMOKING IN CERTAIN PLACES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Indoor air quality, Texas Health and Safety Code § 385.001 et seq.; tobacco use prohibited in certain places, Texas Penal Code § 48.01. 

Sec. 58-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bar means an area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages and where minors are not allowed admission. A restaurant that contains a bar is not included, as minors are admitted in these areas. 
    Director means chief administrative officer of the city-county public health district. 
    Electronic Smoking Device means any product containing or delivering nicotine or any other similar substance intended for human consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor or aerosol from the product. The term "electronic smoking device" includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah, or vape pen, or under any other product name or descriptor. 
    Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity. 
    Employer means any person, including a municipal corporation, or nonprofit entity, who employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
    Enclosed area means a space that is enclosed on all sides by solid partitions that extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, but not limited to, screens, walls, windows, and doors. 
    Operator means the owner or person in charge of a public place or workplace, including an employer. 
    Public place means an enclosed area or any portion thereof to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted or allowed access, including, but not limited to: banks, bars, bingo halls, educational facilities, fraternal organizations, health care facilities, hotel and motel rooms, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, waiting rooms, and workplaces. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
    Retail tobacco store or retail electronic cigarette store means a retail store whereby 75 percent of quarterly sales are from tobacco products and accessories, to include electronic cigarettes, in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
    Smoke means to inhale, to exhale, to burn or to carry any lighted cigar, pipe, cigarette, weed or other plant in any manner or form, or to use an electronic smoking device. 
    Workplace means an enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer in which employees work or have access to during the course of their employment. 
(Code 1966, § 18-99; Code 2001, § 58-101; Ord. No. 26-2014, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 58-102. - Smoking prohibited in public places. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person smokes in a public place. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person smokes in an enclosed area in a building or facility owned, leased, or operated by the city. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if the person smokes in an enclosed area of a workplace. 
(d)  A person commits an offense if the person smokes within: 
(1)  20 feet of an entrance or open window of a public place, if the operator of the public place allows entry to children under the age of 18 years, or 
(2)  Five feet of an entrance or open window of a public place, if the operator of the public place does not allow entry to children under the age of 18 years. 
(e)  The owner or operator of a public place commits an offense if said owner or operator witnesses a person smoking in the public place and: 
(1)  Within five minutes of witnessing the smoker, fails to request the smoker to cease smoking, 
(2)  Provides further service to the smoker, or 
(3)  Within five minutes of witnessing the smoker, fails to request the smoker to leave the premises if the smoker has been requested to cease smoking and the smoker continues to smoke in the public place. 
(f)  A person commits an offense if the person smokes in or within 20 feet of: 
(1)  A playground in a public park, 
(2)  A festival, concert, or play sponsored by the city on city property, 
(3)  A pavilion in a public park, 
(4)  The seating area of any outdoor arena, stadium or amphitheater, 
(5)  Bleachers or grandstands for the use of spectators at sporting and other public events, 
(6)  A pool or pond in a public park, or 
(7)  The municipal produce market, which consists of Lots 8, 9 and the south half of Lot 10 of Block 162 of the Original Townsite (also known as 713 Ohio Street) during such time as said market is being utilized for the display or sale of food products. 
(Code 1966, § 18-100; Code 2001, § 58-102; Ord. No. 26-2014, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 58-103. - Exemptions. 
    This article does not apply to: 
(1)  A private residence, except when used as child care, adult day care or health care facility; 
(2)  A retail tobacco store; 
(3)  A retail electronic cigarette store; 
(4)  Before July 17, 2015, a building that was designated on October 1, 2014, by the state as a location authorized to conduct bingo in a license issued pursuant to the Texas Bingo Enabling Act (Texas Government Code § 2001.001 et seq.); 
(5)  Between July 17, 2015 and July 17, 2017, an enclosed area that is a separately enclosed, separately ventilated, smoking room within a building that was designated on June 17, 2014, by the state as a location authorized to conduct bingo in a license issued pursuant to the Texas Bingo Enabling Act (Texas Government Code § 2001.001 et seq.); 
(6)  Before June 17, 2016, a public place that was a bar on October 1, 2014; and 
(7)  Before June 17, 2016, a separately ventilated area of a food establishment that possessed its food establishment permit on June 17, 2014. 
(Code 1966, § 18-106; Code 2001, § 58-103; Ord. No. 26-2014, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 58-104. - Voluntary designation of a non-smoking campus. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the owner or operator of an enclosed or outdoor public place from voluntarily designating his property as non-smoking. 
(Code 1966, § 18-107; Code 2001, § 58-104; Ord. No. 26-2014, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 58-105. - Smoking in taxicabs prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be an offense for any individual to smoke in a taxicab. 
(b)  An owner or holder of a taxicab franchise commits an offense if the owner or his designee permits any individual to smoke in a taxicab. 
(c)  The holder of a taxicab service franchise shall conspicuously post a sign in each taxicab that indicates smoking is prohibited. 
(Code 1966, § 20-22; Code 2001, § 58-105; Ord. No. 26-2014, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 58-106. - Signs required. 
(a)  The owner or operator of a public place shall conspicuously post a "No Smoking" sign, the international "No Smoking" symbol (depiction of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it), or other sign containing words or pictures that could reasonably be understood as an intent to prohibit smoking: 
(1)  In each public place and workplace where smoking is prohibited by this article; and 
(2)  At each entrance to a public place or workplace where smoking is prohibited by this article. 
(b)  The operator of a public place shall conspicuously post signs in areas where smoking is permitted through an exemption under this article. 
(c)  The operator of a public place or an employer shall remove any ashtrays or other smoking accessories from a place where smoking is prohibited. 
(d)  It is not a defense to prosecution under this article that an operator failed to post a sign required under this section. 
(Code 1966, § 18-101; Code 2001, § 58-106; Ord. No. 26-2014, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 58-107. - Retaliation prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person discharges, refuses to hire, or retaliates against a customer, employee, or applicant for employment because the customer, employee or applicant for employment reports a violation of this article. 
(b)  An employee who works in a setting where an employer permits smoking under this article does not waive or otherwise surrender any legal right the employee may have against the employer or any other party. 
(Code 1966, § 18-102; Code 2001, § 58-107; Ord. No. 26-2014, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 58-108. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This section is cumulative of other laws providing enforcement authority. 
(b)  A person may report a violation of this article to the director of the health district or his designee. 
(c)  The director or his designee may enforce this article and may seek injunctive relief in addition to any civil or criminal penalties associated with a violation. 
(d)  The director or his designee may suspend or revoke a permit or license issued by the director to the operator of a public place or workplace where a violation of this article occurs, in addition to any other available remedies. 
(Code 1966, § 18-103; Code 2001, § 58-108; Ord. No. 26-2014, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 58-109. - Public education. 
(a)  The director or his designee shall: 
(1)  Obtain or develop a comprehensive tobacco education program to educate the public about the harmful effect of tobacco and its addictive qualities; 
(2)  Conduct informational activities to notify and educate businesses and the public about this article; and 
(3)  Coordinate the city's tobacco education program with other civic or volunteer groups organized to promote smoking prevention and tobacco education. 
(b)  To implement this section, the director or his designee may publish and distribute educational materials relating to this article to businesses, their employees, and the public. 
(Code 1966, § 18-104; Code 2001, § 58-109; Ord. No. 26-2014, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 58-110. - Minor access to tobacco products. 
    A retail establishment shall only place tobacco products and electronic smoking devices for sale behind a sales counter or in another secure location that prevents minors from accessing the products without the intervention of an employee. 
(Code 1966, § 18-105; Code 2001, § 58-110; Ord. No. 26-2014, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Secs. 58-111-58-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AQUATIC FACILITIES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 02-2019, § 1, adopted Feb. 19, 2019, amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, §§ 58-135-58-142, pertained to public and semipublic water-related activities, and derived from Code 1966, §§ 18-108, 18-109, 18-110(a), 18-110(b), 18-112, 18-113, 18-114(a); Code 2001, §§ 58-135-58-142; Ord. No. 11-2001, 2-6-2001. 
State Law reference- Public pools and spas, Texas Health and Safety Code § 341.064. 

Sec. 58-135. - Adoption of the state aquatic facility regulations. 
(a)  The standards of the following statutes, laws, and regulations in their current form and as they may hereafter be amended, are adopted and applied into this article as if they were set forth at length herein: 
(1)  Texas Health and Safety Code Title 5 § 341.064, "Swimming Pools and Bathhouses;" and 
(2)  Texas Health and Safety Code Chapter 757, "Pool Yard Enclosures;" and 
(3)  Texas Admin. Code Title 25, Part I, Chapter 265 Subchapter L, "Standards of Public Pools and Spas;" and 
(4)  Texas Admin. Code Title 25, Part I, Chapter 265 Subchapter M, "Public Interactive Water Features and Fountains." 
(b)  If a conflict occurs between a provision of this article and a provision of the above statutes, laws, or regulations, the stricter provision shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 02-2019, § 1, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 58-136. - Definitions. 
    Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. A term not included in this list of definitions but defined within the state aquatic facility regulations shall have the meaning assigned to it within the state aquatic facility regulations: 
    Aquatic facility means a pool, spa, special aquatic activity device, public interactive water feature, fountain or venue that may be used for swimming or bathing, or other regulated water body as defined by state aquatic facility regulations. 
    Authorized agent or employee means the Director of Health of the regulatory authority, which shall have the enforcement responsibility for this article. 
    Certified pool operator means a person who: 
(1)  Possesses a valid and current certificate of accreditation, and 
(2)  Obtains certification by completion of one of the following courses or other nationally recognized course in aquatic facility operation, safety and management, and: 
a.  NRPA, "aquatic facility operator" (A.F.O.); 
b.  NSPF, "certified pool-spa operator" (C.P.O.); 
c.  Y.M.C.A., "pool operator on location" (P.O.O.L.); 
d.  NSPI, "professional pool and spa operator" (P.P.S.O.); 
e.  ASPSA, "licensed aquatic facility technician" (L.A.F.T.); or 
f.  Other training at discretion of the Director of Health. 
    Coliform testing refers to total coliform not fecal coliform. 
    Enclosure means a fence, wall, or combination of fences, walls, gates, windows, or doors that completely surround an aquatic facility. 
    Extensively remodeled means the replacement of or modification to an aquatic facility structure or its enclosure, its circulation system or its appurtenances, so that the design, configuration or operation is different from the original design, configuration or operation, including the installation of new deck detail or tile work that is different from the original design. This term does not include the normal maintenance and repair or the replacement of equipment which has been previously approved if the size, type or operation of the equipment is not substantially different from the original equipment. 
    Manager of operations means the person primarily responsible for the safe, sanitary maintenance of a public pool, spa, or other water-related activity. 
    Permit holder means a local person who has the ultimate responsibility for the operation of any pool, spa, or other related water activity regulated in this article, and who shall, in all respects, act as the representative for any entity having an ownership interest in the same. 
    Private aquatic facility means any aquatic facility located on private, single-family residential property under the control of the homeowner or tenant, the use of which is limited to members of the homeowner's or tenant's family or invited guests. 
    Public aquatic facility means any aquatic facility which is intended to be used by the general public for swimming, bathing or other related purposes and is operated by an owner, lessee, operator, licensee or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged for use. 
    Regulatory authority means the Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public Health District. 
    Secured means that an enclosure during normal operation is maintained so that all gates and entrances are maintained closed with functioning self-latching and self-closing mechanisms, and that the enclosure is not allowed to maintain gaps large enough to allow the passage of a four-inch sphere or provide any feature that may be easily climbed to gain access to the aquatic facility. The enclosure during times when the aquatic facility is closed to the public must maintain the above conditions, but the gates or entrances to the enclosure must also be locked so that no person may enter the gates or entrances without the authorization of the certified pool operator and/or person in charge. 
    Semi-public aquatic facility means any aquatic facility which is not included within the definition of either "private aquatic facility" or "public aquatic facility" as those terms are defined in this section. 
    Service animal means a dog that has been individually trained to do work or perform tasks for an individual with a disability. The task(s) performed by the dog must be directly related to the person's disability. 
    State aquatic facility regulations means the regulations adopted by the State of Texas to regulate public pools and spas, and includes the following, as amended from time to time: 
(1)  Texas Health and Safety Code, Title 5, § 341.064, "Swimming Pools and Bathhouses;" 
(2)  Texas Health and Safety Code, Chapter 757, "Pool Yard Enclosures;" 
(3)  Texas Admin. Code Title 25, Part I, Chapter 265 Subchapter L, "Standards of Public Pools and Spas;" and 
(4)  Texas Admin. Code Title 25, Part I, Chapter 265 Subchapter M, "Public Interactive Water Features and Fountains." 
(Ord. No. 02-2019, § 1, 2-19-2019) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-137. - Penalty for violation. 
    A violation under this section is a Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine. In addition thereto, such person may be enjoined from continuing such violations. Each day upon which such violation occurs constitutes a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 02-2019, § 1, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 58-138. - Permit; certification of manager of operations. 
(a)  Permit required; transferability; posting. A person may not operate a public or semi-public aquatic facility without a permit issued by the regulatory authority. Permits are not transferable from one person to another person or from one location to another location. A valid permit must be posted at every establishment regulated by this article. Therapeutic pools as defined in the standards are not exempt from this section. 
(b)  Application for permit. A person desiring to operate a public or semi-public aquatic facility must make a written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the pool, the name and address of each manager of operations and the application fee. An incomplete application will not be processed. Failure to provide all required information or falsifying information required may result in denial or revocation of the permit. All permits will expire March 31 of each year; the same information is required for a renewal permit as for an initial permit. Each pool and spa at each location will be charged a separate permit fee as determined by the regulatory authority. 
(c)  Certification of manager of operations. 
(1)  A manager of operations of a public or semi-public aquatic facility shall obtain certification from the regulatory authority. A manager of operations may obtain certification by successfully completing a training course conducted by the regulatory authority. No person will be allowed to act as the manager of operations without first having obtained certification. 
(2)  Certification training classes will be conducted each year. The fee for certification of a manager of operations shall be determined by the regulatory authority and the certification shall expire March 31 of the year following its issuance. 
(3)  A person showing a current certificate as a certified aquatic facility operator (AFO), certified pool-spa operator (CPO), a pool operator on location (POOL) or any other training approved by the regulatory authority, may be exempt from the health district training. 
(4)  Facilities constructed before the adoption of this article must comply with all provisions of this article and all future amendments to this article, unless the regulatory authority grants a variance in writing, or unless otherwise exempted under Texas Health and Safety Code, § 757.005. 
(5)  If a variance to this article is issued by the regulatory authority, the permit applicant must annually reapply for the variance in writing. The granting of a variance does not guarantee that the director will grant future variances. 
(6)  All fees are nonrefundable and will not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 02-2019, § 1, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 58-139. - Inspections and annual pre inspections. 
(a)  The regulatory authority is authorized to conduct inspections as necessary to ensure compliance with all sections of this article. The regulatory authority shall have the right of entry at any reasonable hour upon the premises where public or semi-public aquatic facilities are located. The regulatory authority shall have the authority to collect water and photographic and/or video evidence from the aquatic facility. 
(b)  Each public or semi-public aquatic facility shall pass an annual pre-operation inspection by the regulatory authority prior to use by the public each permit year. There shall be no charge for one preliminary pre-operation inspection that is not requested by the facility and for one pre-operation inspection that is requested by the facility; a re-inspection fee shall be required for all further pre-operation inspections. 
(c)  Effective with permit renewal in 2020, each public or semi-public aquatic facility shall also annually submit certification by a licensed, registered electrician that the electrical equipment for the aquatic facility meets all local, state, and federal electrical codes on a form promulgated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-2019, § 1, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 58-140. - Maintenance and operation. 
(a)  Every public or semi-public aquatic facility shall be under the supervision of the permit holder, who shall be responsible for compliance with all parts of this article relating to aquatic facilities maintenance, and operation and safety of swimmers. It shall be unlawful for such permit holder to cause or permit the existence of a condition which is in violation of any section of this article. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the certified pool operator and/or an appropriately trained designee to: 
a.  Assure that someone can physically respond within one hour of being notified by the regulatory authority to the site of the aquatic facility; 
b.  Check at least once per day that the aquatic facility remains in compliance with this article and with state aquatic facility regulations; and 
c.  Check and record water chemistry at least once per day for each aquatic facility permitted to ensure compliance with state and local aquatic facility regulations, including: 
1.  Disinfectant levels; 
2.  pH levels; 
3.  Cyanuric acid levels (if applicable); and 
d.  Ensure that an appropriate method is used to check water chemistry as specified in state aquatic facility regulations; 
e.  Retain records of daily water chemistry checks for at least two years on site; and 
f.  All records must be made available to the regulatory authority upon request. 
g.  Register certification as a certified pool operator or manager of operations with the regulatory authority and maintain a copy of the registration on site at the facility. In the event that the certified pool operator/manager of operations is no longer employed on premises, the aquatic facility must employ another certified pool operator/manager of operations who possesses or obtains a current Wichita Falls Wichita County Public Health District Manager of Operations or certified pool operator as defined by this article. 
(2)  To ensure compliance with this article, it is recommended that all manager of operations/certified pool operators use a DPD test kit certified by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
(b)  All pumps, filters, sanitizers and chemical feeders, drains, ladders, lighting, ropes and appurtenant equipment used in the operation of all public and semi-public aquatic facilities, shall be maintained in a good state of repair. 
(c)  All public and semi-public aquatic facilities shall be treated and maintained in accordance with current Texas Department of State Health Services unless otherwise stated: 
(1)  Every pool shall contain a sanitizer concentration equivalent to a free chlorine residual between 1.0-8.0 ppm. Every spa shall contain a sanitary concentration equivalent to a free chlorine residual of 3.0-8.0 ppm. If aquatic facility is outside the required range of free chlorine residual or equivalent, then the aquatic facility shall be immediately closed to the public. A test kit for measuring the concentration of the free chlorine shall be present at each aquatic facility. The regulatory authority must approve use of any sanitizer other than chlorine. 
(2)  Every aquatic facility shall have water with a pH of not less than 7.2 and not more than 7.8. An adequate pH test kit shall be present at each aquatic facility. If an aquatic facility test shows an acid reaction less than 7.0 or basic reaction over 7.8, then the pool or spa shall be immediately closed to the public. 
(3)  The presence of microorganisms of the total coliform group or E. coli in any water sample shall be deemed unacceptable water quality. Two consecutive samples showing microorganisms of total coliform will be grounds for immediate closure of the aquatic facility. 
(4)  Every aquatic facility shall have water clarity sufficient for the main drain or a six-inch diameter turbidity test disk placed at the deepest part of the aquatic facility, to be clearly visible from the sidewalks of the pool at all distances up to ten yards, measured from a line drawn across the pool through the disc. Failure to meet this requirement shall be sufficient cause for immediate closure of the aquatic facility. 
(5)  A 15-minute maximum timer will be installed and operational at each spa. The timer must be located so that it cannot be reached unless a person exits the spa. 
(6)  Cyanuric acid shall not exceed 100 ppm in any aquatic facility. If the level exceeds 100 ppm, the facility shall close until the level can be lowered to below 80 ppm. 
(7)  During any routine inspection, if the regulatory authority is required to close the pool for non-compliance, a re-inspection fee may be charged to the permit holder for each requested return visit for re-inspection. 
(Ord. No. 02-2019, § 1, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 58-141. - Regulations in pool and spa area; suspension of permit. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he/she violates any portion of this article or the standards set forth by the Texas Department of State Health Services. 
(b)  Failure to comply with any section of this article may result in the immediate closure of the aquatic facility and/or the initiation of legal action. Upon determination that the aquatic facility does not comply with the provisions of this article, the regulatory authority shall notify the permit holder or manager of operations of the existing violations. If the regulatory authority determines that the condition of the aquatic facility may be hazardous to the health or safety of the swimmers or to the general public, the aquatic facility shall be immediately closed. A new inspection of the aquatic facility will be conducted during the regular working hours of the regulatory authority at the request of the pool manager of operations or the permit holder. If compliance has been achieved, the permit holder shall be notified that the aquatic facility may be opened. 
(c)  When the regulatory authority has ordered that an aquatic facility be closed due to non-compliance with any provision of this article, the permit holder shall not allow the aquatic facility to be used for swimming, diving or bathing purposes and shall immediately take every reasonable step to prevent the use of such aquatic facility for such purposes. By way of example and without limiting such duty, the permit holder shall immediately: 
(1)  Post notices reasonably likely to come to the attention of potential users of the aquatic facility advising of the closure; and 
(2)  Lock all gates and doorways in any fence or other enclosure surrounding such pool. 
    Failure to immediately comply with the above will result in the regulatory authority posting a sign at the pool, which states, "Pool Closed by Order of the Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public Health District." It shall be unlawful to remove, cover or mutilate such sign without the approval of the regulatory authority. Use of the aquatic facility by an individual for swimming, diving or bathing purposes after the regulatory authority has ordered such aquatic facility to be closed shall be deemed prima facie evidence that the permit holder of such aquatic facility has knowingly allowed the pool or spa to be used for such purposes. 
(d)  The regulatory authority shall suspend a permit to operate a public aquatic facility if: 
(1)  A permit holder fails to designate a certified manager of operations as specified in this article; 
(2)  The condition or operation of an aquatic facility is considered to be hazardous or constitutes an imminent health hazard to the health or safety of swimmers or the general public; or 
(3)  The permit holder fails to keep all aquatic facility equipment and devices working properly. 
    The suspension shall continue until the regulatory authority has conducted a new inspection and the cause of suspension is corrected. 
(Ord. No. 02-2019, § 1, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 58-142. - Construction compliance. 
(a)  Plans review and construction inspections. 
(1)  Prior to beginning the construction of a new aquatic facility or the extensive remodeling of an existing aquatic facility, the owner shall submit plans and specifications for such construction or remodeling to the Building Inspections Department for review. 
(2)  The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout and arrangement of mechanical, plumbing, fencing, electrical, construction materials of work areas, the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities and all associated buildings or structures. 
(3)  A licensed professional engineer shall examine the final aquatic facility design/blueprints for all new and extensively remodeled aquatic facilities (including structural, mechanical, plumbing or electrical renovations) and certify by original signature and engineer's seal compliance with state aquatic facility regulations and this article. 
(4)  No work shall begin until regulatory authority has received the engineer's certificate of pre-construction, conducted a plan review and has communicated with the Building Inspections Department that a building permit may be issued. Work shall commence and conclude within the time allowed by such permits. Deviations from approved plans shall not be permitted without approval in writing from the regulatory authority and the Building Inspections Department. If no work has begun within 180 days from the date the regulatory authority has given written notice that work may begin, or if work has begun and is halted more than 60 days, the director may withdraw approval. 
(5)  The aquatic facility construction shall pass a pre-gunite inspection, pre-plaster inspection and preoperational inspection by the regulatory authority prior to issuance of a permit. The completion of these inspections by a regulatory authority does not substitute or replace inspections required by other departments within the city. 
(6)  It is the responsibility of the person in charge to ensure that the building permit applicant and licensed professional engineer comply with all zoning, building, fire, and health ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-2019, § 1, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 58-143. - Regulations for all persons in aquatic facilities. 
    A person commits an offense if they: 
(1)  Have skin abrasions, open sores, skin disease, eye disease, nasal or ear discharge, diarrhea, or a communicable disease and bathes in a public or semi-public aquatic facility; 
(2)  Alter or remove safety equipment or signage from a public or semi-public aquatic facility except in an emergency; 
(3)  Alter or damage any part of a public or semi-public aquatic facility enclosure or allows the aquatic facility enclosure to remain unsecured while the enclosure is under repair; 
(4)  Alter or damage drain and/or suction outlet covers or grates; 
(5)  Carry glass within a public or semi-public aquatic facility area or enclosure; 
(6)  Allow an animal under his control to enter or remain within the aquatic facility, area or enclosure of a public or semi-public aquatic facility without approval from the regulatory authority, unless the animal is a service animal; 
(7)  Interfere with or obstruct the regulatory authority while they are in the process of enforcing this article; or 
(8)  Are the manager of operations/certified pool operator or the person in charge and violates any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 02-2019, § 1, 2-19-2019) 
Secs. 58-144-58-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LODGING ESTABLISHMENT REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Tourist courts, hotels, inns, and rooming houses, Texas Health and Safety Code § 341.066. 

Sec. 58-200. - Purpose of rules for lodging establishments. 
    The purpose of these rules is to establish minimum health standards for the construction, operation and maintenance of a lodging establishment within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 2001, § 58-200; Ord. No. 82-2006, § 1, 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 58-201. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Clean means free from dirt, impurities or multiple stains; hygienic conditions and practices that serve to promote or preserve health. 
    Contagious disease means a diagnosis of an illness due to Norovirus; hepatitis A virus, Salmonella typhi; Shigella spp, shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli; or similar organism clinically suspected to cause symptoms of vomiting, diarrhea, jaundice or sore throat with fever and considered transmissible. 
    Continual, continued, or repeat violation means a particular condition of construction, operation, or maintenance which is found in violation of these rules on three or more consecutive inspections or laboratory analyses within a 12-month period. 
    Easily cleanable means surfaces which are readily accessible and made of such materials and finishes and so fabricated that residue may be effectively removed by normal cleaning methods. 
    Equipment means any items used in connection with the operation of a lodging establishment including, but not limited to, any washer, dryer, ice machine, fans, air conditioning units, heaters, refrigerators, or cooking units. 
    Excessive means more than a usual, multiple or an unreasonable number. 
    Extended stay means guests that stay for a week or longer in length. 
    Fixtures means any sinks, bathtubs, showers, toilet fixtures, or any other such items used in connection with the operation of a lodging establishment. 
    Furnishings means any bedding, furniture, lamps, or any such items used in connection with the operation of a lodging establishment. 
    Guest means any person who rents and occupies a guest room in a lodging establishment. 
    Guest room means any room or unit where sleeping accommodations are regularly offered to the public. 
    Imminent health hazard means a situation that is likely to cause an immediate threat to human life, an immediate threat of serious physical injury, immediate threat of serious adverse health effects, or a serious risk of irreparable damage to the environment if immediate action is not taken. 
    Inspect or inspection means an examination by the director of health or his designee of the lodging establishment structure, facilities, equipment, and operations. The inspection area shall include, but not be limited to, the public and guest rooms; fixtures; furnishings; equipment and utensils; water supply and waste disposal facilities; and the buildings' surroundings. The term "inspect" or "inspection" shall also include a determination of the cleanliness and maintenance of the building, furnishings fixtures, equipment and utensils, and any other examination necessary to determine the degree to which any lodging establishment complies with the provisions of these rules. Inspections are performed on a routine schedule or as a result of a complaint. 
    Kitchenettes means a small kitchen with refrigeration, vented cooking range, dishwashing sinks and cooking utensil storage. 
    Law means all federal, state, and local statutes, ordinances, and/or rules. 
    Linens means the fitted sheets, top sheets, and pillows, excluding coverlets and comforters. 
    Lodging establishment means any building, group of buildings, structure, facility, place, or places of business where two or more guest rooms are provided, which is owned, maintained, or operated by any person and which is kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public for hire. The term "lodging establishment" can be construed to be a hotel, motel, motor hotel, apartment hotel, tourist court, resort, cabins, tourist home, bunkhouse, bed and breakfast, or other similar place by whatever name called, and includes all such accommodations operated for hire as lodging establishments for either transient guests, permanent guests, or for both transient and permanent guests. The term "lodging establishment" does not include duplexes, quadriplexes, dormitories, and apartment complexes. 
    Manager or operator means the owner's agent or representative, who is directly responsible for operation of the lodging establishment. 
    Nuisance means any condition as defined in Texas Health and Safety Code § 341.011. 
    Numerical score means the score determined by deducting the values of all items found in violation from 100. 
    Owner means a person who holds legal possession or ownership of a total or partial interest in the structure or property on which exists a lodging establishment. 
    Regulatory authority means the director of the Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public Health District or his designee. 
    Rules shall mean city and county ordinances or state statutes. 
    Sanitary means free from harmful elements, including pathogens that endanger public health. 
    Sanitize means the effective bactericidal treatment by a process that provides enough accumulative heat or concentration of chemical for sufficient time to reduce the bacterial count, including pathogens, to a safe level on cleaned surfaces. 
    Sealed means free of multiple cracks or other openings that permit the entry or passage of excessive moisture that causes water damage to the property. 
    Single service articles or utensils means cups, containers, ice bucket liners, stirrers, paddles, straws, napkins, doilies, wrapping materials and similar articles intended for one time use and then discarded. 
(Code 2001, § 58-201; Ord. No. 82-2006, § 1, 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 58-202. - Records required; retention. 
    It shall be the duty of the regulatory authority to provide inspection records for review. Records shall be kept for a minimum of five years and shall be available for review according to the Public Information Act. 
(Code 2001, § 58-202; Ord. No. 82-2006, § 1, 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 58-203. - Permit required; posting. 
    A person may not operate a lodging establishment without a permit issued by the regulatory authority. Permits are not transferable from one person to another or from one location to another location, except as otherwise permitted by these rules. A valid permit must be conspicuously displayed in view of the guests within a common lobby area at all lodging establishments. 
(Code 2001, § 58-203; Ord. No. 82-2006, § 1, 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 58-204. - Application; renewal. 
(a)  Any person desiring a lodging establishment permit must make a written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the following: 
(1)  Name. 
(2)  Address. 
(3)  Phone number. 
(4)  Emergency contacts for each applicant. 
(5)  Physical location. 
(6)  Billing information and the applicable fee. 
(b)  An incomplete application will not be accepted. Failure to complete required information or falsifying information required may result in denial or revocation of the permit. Renewal of the permit is required on an annual basis and is the responsibility of the owner and manager of the lodging establishment both jointly and separately. The same information is required for a renewal permit as for an initial permit. New and existing lodging establishments shall be in compliance with this article to be issued a permit. 
(Code 2001, § 58-204; Ord. No. 82-2006, § 1, 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 58-205. - Inspections. 
(a)  Prior to the approval of an initial permit for lodging establishments or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory authority shall inspect the lodging establishment to determine compliance with these rules. 
(b)  A lodging establishment that does not comply with these rules will not be granted a permit to operate. 
(c)  The regulatory authority is authorized to conduct inspections, at intervals determined by the regulatory authority, to ensure compliance with all provisions of this article. 
(d)  The lodging establishment must achieve at minimum a numerical score of 70 to pass an inspection. Demerits will be equally weighted at two points each and multiple violations of the same deficiency shall constitute one violation on the inspection form. The numerical score shall be computed by subtracting the number of demerits from 100. 
(e)  If a lodging establishment receives a numerical score of 70 or below, there must be immediate corrective actions taken to correct deficiencies to raise the numerical score above a 70 within the following 24-hour period to avoid possible closure. 
(f)  Inspections will be conducted during normal business hours unless there is a report of a contagious disease or complaint that presents an imminent threat to public health and safety. The regulatory authority shall have the right to enter at any hour upon the premises where a lodging establishment is located as deemed necessary by the director of health. 
(g)  Occupied rooms may be inspected whenever there is a reasonable risk of a health hazard or imminent threat to the structure that if uncorrected would adversely affect adjoining rooms. 
(h)  The regulatory authority shall have the authority to collect samples for laboratory analysis. 
(i)  It shall be a violation to refuse or obstruct the regulatory authority or designee from conducting inspections. 
(Code 2001, § 58-205; Ord. No. 82-2006, § 1, 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 58-206. - Compliance required; term; fee. 
    Only persons and entities that comply with the requirements of these rules shall be entitled to receive and retain a permit required by this article. Permits to operate a lodging establishment expire one year after issuance, unless revoked or suspended for noncompliance. All lodging establishments must comply with provisions of this rule upon 30 days from passage, excluding procurement of permits which will be required on January 1, 2007. The permit fee will be paid annually to the regulatory authority. All lodging establishments shall have a minimum of 75 percent of their guest rooms in a condition that meet the requirements of this subdivision in order to retain a permit to operate the lodging establishment. Fees shall be as established by separate ordinance. 
(Code 2001, § 58-206; Ord. No. 82-2006, § 1, 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 58-207. - Safety and sanitation standards. 
    All lodging establishments shall be maintained to meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Lodging establishment grounds shall be free of excessive litter and have garbage properly stored in covered containers with tight fitting lids and be free of any collection of items that could harbor rodents, cockroaches or mosquitoes and: 
a.  Shall have all walking and driving surfaces of the immediate exterior areas surfaced with concrete or asphalt, or other approved material to minimize dust. 
b.  There shall be no conditions that constitute a public health nuisance as set forth by the state. 
c.  Non-essential articles, items, or equipment that cause a public nuisance or harbors roaches, rodents or other vectors shall be removed. 
d.  Outside garbage containers shall be cleaned at least monthly or as needed to prevent a nuisance or odor. Liquid waste resulting from cleaning the containers shall be disposed in a manner that does not create a nuisance. 
e.  Animals shall be excluded from the laundry, linen storage, utensil washing, food service, single-service storage and ice machine areas except as provided by law. 
(2)  Lodging establishments shall be sealed and free of leaks and excessive water damage or mold. Construction surfaces shall be easily cleanable in good physical condition and with carpets and curtains in clean condition and free of excessive stains. Further requirements are as follows: 
a.  Furnishings shall be maintained in good condition and clean. Items with excessive wear, tears, or stains shall be replaced. 
b.  Each unit shall have trash removed, be vacuumed, and have smooth surfaces sanitized after each occupancy. 
c.  Glasses, pitchers, ice buckets, and eating and cooking utensils in the kitchenettes shall be cleaned and sanitized after each occupancy. 
d.  All rooms and bedding shall be free from an accumulation or infestation of insects or ectoparasites. If a room becomes infested with insects of any type, the room shall not be occupied until the infestation is controlled. 
e.  Soap shall be provided with a dispensed liquid or with new, individually wrapped bar soap. Used bar soap shall be removed from the rooms when the guest ends the occupancy. Other toiletries provided by the lodging establishment which are opened by the guest shall be removed when the guest ends the occupancy. Used soap and toiletries shall be discarded and shall not be used for any other purpose. 
f.  A dispensed liquid soap shall be provided in all common and public bathrooms and toilets. 
g.  Single service articles shall be replaced after each occupancy or when visibly damaged or the possibility of contamination exists. 
h.  All toxic and hazardous substances shall be properly labeled with the common name of the content and appropriately stored to prevent contamination. 
(3)  Lodging establishments providing ice shall only produce ice from potable water and such shall be handled in a sanitary manner, including that: 
a.  Ice shall be free from visible trash and sediment. 
b.  Ice shall not be made or stored in an owner's or manager's private refrigerator and/or private living areas. 
c.  Ice that is not produced at the lodging establishment shall be obtained from an approved source, shall be properly labeled and protected from contamination during transportation and storage. 
d.  Ice machines shall be of sanitary, durable, corrosion-resistant, and easily cleanable construction. 
e.  Ice machines shall be kept sanitized and in good repair. 
f.  Ice storage bins shall be drained into an approved sewage system and must have a physical air gap. 
g.  When replacement of a self-service ice machine becomes necessary or additional machines are added, an automatic self-serve ice dispensing machine shall be installed. 
h.  Ice machines shall be located in a place which provides protection from the elements and possible sources of contamination. Exterior storage spaces shall provide, at a minimum, overhead protection. The area shall be kept clean and shall be free of accumulation of excessive moisture, drippage, or trash. 
i.  Vending and ice machines shall be sanitized; with an ice scoop available and installed with a drain that includes a physical air gap to prevent back-siphonage. All ice machines with storage bins shall be equipped with an ice scoop that is attached to the ice bin with a tether of easily cleanable material. The tether shall be of such a length to prevent the scoop from touching the ground and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
j.  All lodging establishments with customer service ice machines in common areas prior to the adoption of these rules shall have automatic self-service ice dispensing machines upon replacement. This requirement excludes kitchenettes and icemakers in refrigerators. 
(4)  All linens, towels, and laundry shall be provided in a clean sanitary condition without excessive stains or damage. In addition, the following are required: 
a.  During laundering, clean linens, towels, and laundry shall be kept in separate carts and stored away from soiled linens, towels, and laundry. 
b.  Linens shall be protected from dust, dirt, vermin, or other contamination at all times. 
c.  Linens shall be changed to clean linens after each occupancy in preparation for a different occupancy. 
(5)  Lodging establishments with non-guest laundry facilities shall be restricted to the washing and drying of linens, towels, uniforms, and aprons necessary to the operation of the lodging establishment. In addition, the following are required: 
a.  If such items are laundered on the premises, a commercial washing machine and dryer shall be provided and used in accordance with subsection (5)c of this section. 
b.  Dryers shall be installed according to manufacturer's instructions. 
c.  All lodging establishments with on premise laundries prior to adoption of these rules shall have commercial washing machines and dryers within one year after the date of the adoption of this article. 
d.  Laundry facilities shall be separated from any other permanent living quarters by complete partitioning and solid self-closing doors. 
e.  Traffic through or use by guests of the non-guest laundry facility is prohibited. 
(6)  Should separate laundry facilities be provided for the use of the lodging establishment guests, these shall be located in a different room or area of the lodging establishment than those provided for commercial laundry purposes. These facilities shall be clean and maintained in good repair. 
(7)  Fire safety of lodging establishments shall be the responsibility of the manager/operator and be in accordance with the applicable code and/or ordinance. In addition, the following are required: 
a.  Lodging establishments shall have proper fire extinguishers available, fully charged, and have current inspections as required by current City Code. 
b.  Portable outside cooking grills of any type shall be no closer than ten feet from any enclosed or combustible structure. 
c.  Only professionally installed and inspected cooking ranges with approved venting for kitchenettes shall be allowed in lodging establishments. 
d.  Individual rooms may have a microwave oven and/or a coffee/tea maker; kitchenettes are exempt from this limitation. 
e.  Corded cooking or heating devices such as portable hot plates or crockpots shall not be allowed in rooms. The operator shall either post signs; state this policy verbally; provide in writing during check-in procedures; or provide this information within the guest services book within each guest room to comply with this section. 
f.  Storage and equipment rooms must be organized with all flammables properly labeled with common names. 
g.  Rooms where fuel burning appliances are used shall be properly vented in accordance with the manufacturers' specifications, and carbon monoxide monitors shall be provided in these rooms. 
h.  Rooms shall have and maintain, in operating condition, an approved battery or electrically operated smoke detector device in each guest room. Owners and operators shall be required to test each smoke detector at a minimum of two times each calendar year to determine if each detector is in working order. Records of the testing shall be maintained and provided to the public health inspector upon request. 
i.  Emergency phone numbers including 911, fire, police, and first aid equipment must be available at the front desk. 
j.  Records shall be kept of all accidents or injuries of guests and employees that occur on the premises of a lodging establishment. 
(8)  Should swimming pools, spas, and similar facilities be installed, they shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the applicable code. Swimming pool water shall only be disposed of into an approved sanitary sewer. 
(9)  Insect and rodent control, in all lodging establishments, shall be kept in such a condition as to prevent the harborage or feeding of insects or rodents. Windows shall be screened and be in good condition without cracks or missing seals and shall be in good working order. Screening material shall be 16 mesh to the inch. Rooms with infestations of insects or rodents shall be subject to closure until treatment has been deemed effective by the regulatory authority. A licensed exterminator company shall provide routine treatment of a lodging establishments, and receipts shall be kept on file. 
(10)  Lodging establishments shall, in general, be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, in good repair, and be maintained and operated with strict regard to health and safety of the transient or permanent guest. Extended stay guests at all lodging establishments shall be moved to a new room after seven days to allow cleaning and sanitization of the guest room and bathroom if maid service is not provided at a minimum of once per week or facility repairs are necessary to adhere to these rules. 
(11)  Records shall be kept for a period of no less than 90 days of the cleaning frequency of rooms that are used for extended guests stays; noting last cleaning performed and any room damage or repairs. 
(Code 2001, § 58-207; Ord. No. 82-2006, § 1, 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 58-208. - Potable drinking water approved source. 
(a)  An adequate, accessible supply of potable drinking water approved by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality shall be provided at all lodging establishments. 
(b)  Water under pressure at the required temperatures shall be provided to all fixtures and equipment that use water. 
(c)  Water from a source other than a public water supply shall not be used until the department or other state regulatory authority has approved it. 
(Code 2001, § 58-208; Ord. No. 82-2006, § 1, 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 58-209. - Approved sewage. 
(a)  Sewage and wastewater treatment and disposal shall be accomplished in a manner so as to not create a health hazard, pollute or contaminate groundwater, or create a nuisance. This includes draining swimming pool water and while performing plumbing repairs of any kind. 
(b)  Sewage and wastewater treatment systems with a discharge shall be installed and maintained in compliance with the state laws and local ordinances. 
(Code 2001, § 58-209; Ord. No. 82-2006, § 1, 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 58-210. - Personnel. 
(a)  No employee of a lodging establishment, while infected with a contagious disease that can be transmitted to other employees or the guests, or who is a carrier of organisms that cause such a disease, or who is affected with a boil, an infected wound or acute respiratory infection, shall work in a lodging establishment in any capacity in which there is a likelihood of such an employee contaminating ice, clean linens, or single service articles with pathogenic organisms or transmitting the disease to other persons. 
(b)  Employees working with and handling single service items, such as clean laundry, ice or beverages, or performing tasks that would contaminate their hands shall thoroughly wash their hands and exposed areas of their arms before starting work, after smoking, eating or using the toilet. Employees shall keep their fingernails trimmed evenly and clean. 
(c)  Employees involved in guest services and housekeeping functions shall wear clean clothing, which is in good repair. When performing cleaning functions that could bring the employee into contact with guest's bodily fluids, the employee shall be provided protective gloves for optional use. 
(Code 2001, § 58-210; Ord. No. 82-2006, § 1, 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 58-211. - Procedures when infection is suspected. 
(a)  When the regulatory authority has reasonable cause to suspect possible contagious disease transmission by an employee of a lodging establishment, it shall immediately secure a medical history of the suspected employee, make other investigations as necessary, and notify the state epidemiologist. The regulatory authority may require any or all of the following measures and any other measures, which is deemed necessary for the protection of the public health: 
(1)  The immediate exclusion of the employee from employment in lodging establishments. 
(2)  The immediate closure of the lodging establishment concerned until, in the opinion of the regulatory authority, no further danger of disease outbreak exists. Immediate suspension initiated without a hearing shall only occur upon personal order of the director of the Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public Health District. 
(3)  The restriction of the employee's services to specific areas of the lodging establishment operations where there would be no danger of transmitting disease. 
(4)  Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee and other lodging establishment employees including collection of appropriate medical specimens. 
(b)  When the regulatory authority has reasonable cause to suspect possible contagious disease transmission by a guest of a lodging establishment, the guest room shall not be occupied again until the regulatory authority has given its approval. The lodging establishment manager shall follow the regulatory authorities' instructions with respect to required cleaning and disinfection of the guest room, bathroom, furnishings, and equipment or the temporary removal of furnishings and equipment. 
(c)  The regulatory authority may require the immediate closure of any lodging establishment or any portion of a lodging establishment, after proper notice has been given, if just cause to suspect the possibility of transmission of disease or other public health hazard will result from the operation of the lodging establishment or a particular portion of the lodging establishment. Immediate suspension initiated without a hearing shall only occur upon order of the director of the Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public Health District. 
(Code 2001, § 58-211; Ord. No. 82-2006, § 1, 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 58-212. - Poisonous or toxic chemical materials. 
(a)  There shall be present in lodging establishments only those poisonous or toxic chemical materials necessary for maintaining and cleaning the premises, maintaining the landscaped ground, maintaining the swimming pools/spas, washing linens and towels, cleaning and sanitizing equipment and utensils, and controlling insects and rodents. 
(b)  All containers of chemical materials shall be prominently and distinctly labeled for easy identification and use of the contents. 
(c)  All chemical materials shall have the appropriate material safety data sheet (MSDS) kept on file for emergency use. 
(d)  Storage of materials: 
(1)  Poisonous or toxic materials consist of the following categories: 
a.  Insecticides and rodenticides. 
b.  Detergents, sanitizers and related cleaning or drying agents, caustics, acids, polishes and other chemicals. 
c.  Landscaping materials. 
(2)  Each of the three material categories shall be stored separately and kept in chemical cabinets, separate rooms or physically located away from each other to prevent mixing and possible contamination. All poisonous or toxic materials shall be stored in cabinets or in similar physically separated places used for no other purpose. To preclude contamination, poisonous or toxic materials shall not be stored above ice, linens, towels, utensils, or single-service articles, except that this requirement does not prohibit the convenient availability of detergents and sanitizers at utensil or dishwashing stations, or laundry compounds in the vicinity of washing machines or dryers. 
(e)  Use of materials. 
(1)  Bactericides, cleaning compounds or other chemicals intended for use on food, beverage, or ice contact surfaces shall not be used in a way that leaves a toxic residue on such surfaces or that creates a hazard to employees or other persons. 
(2)  Poisonous or toxic materials shall not be used in a way that contaminates ice, linens, towels, single-service articles or utensils, nor in a way that constitutes a hazard to guests, employees or other persons, nor in a way other than in full compliance with the manufacturer's labeling. 
(f)  Personal articles and medications shall be stored in employee lockers or away from ice, linens, towels, single-service articles or utensils that could become contaminated. 
(g)  First aid supplies shall be stored away from ice, linens, towels, single-service articles or utensils that could become contaminated. 
(Code 2001, § 58-212; Ord. No. 82-2006, § 1, 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 58-213. - Suspension. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing, suspend any permit to operate a lodging establishment if the operation of the establishment constitutes an imminent health hazard to public health. A supervisor will confirm the hazard before suspension is effective when possible. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is suspended because of noncompliance or failure to maintain inspection minimum standards the holder of the permit or person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended. 
(Code 2001, § 58-213; Ord. No. 82-2006, § 1, 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 58-214. - Appeal. 
(a)  Opportunity for a hearing will be provided if the holder of the permit files a written request with the regulatory authority within ten days. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing as soon as possible and not to exceed 20 days of receipt of the request for a hearing. If no written request for a hearing is filed within ten days, the suspension is sustained. 
(b)  The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for the suspension no longer exist. 
(Code 2001, § 58-214; Ord. No. 82-2006, § 1, 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 58-215. - Revocation. 
    The regulatory authority may, after providing for a hearing, revoke a lodging establishment permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article or for interference with agents of the regulatory authority in the performance of their duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation. The permit shall be revoked at the end of ten days following service of such notice unless the holder of the permit files a written request for a hearing with the regulatory authority within such ten-day period. If no request for a hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(Code 2001, § 58-215; Ord. No. 82-2006, § 1, 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 58-216. - Service of notice; conduct of hearings. 
(a)  A notice as required in this article is properly served when it is hand delivered to the general manager and a copy is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(b)  The regulatory authority shall conduct the hearings provided for in this article at a time and location designated by the director of health. The hearing shall be conducted before a panel including the assistant director of health, who shall preside over the meeting, the health district's director of nursing, and a hotelier chosen by the city manager. This panel shall conduct the hearing with evidence presented by the inspection staff and by the involved lodging property staff to determine whether to recommend to sustain, modify, or rescind any order recommended by the general environmental division. The recommendation of the panel shall be conveyed to the director of health for his consideration and based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing; the director of health shall make final findings and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. The director of health shall furnish a written report of the hearing to the holder of the permit. 
(Code 2001, § 58-216; Ord. No. 82-2006, § 1, 10-17-2006) 
Sec. 58-217. - Penalty. 
(a)  A person commits a Class C misdemeanor if the person violates any part of this article after being given a 72-hour notification of continual violations or allows conditions deemed an imminent health hazard. An offense under this article is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine pursuant to section 1-14. 
(b)  Each day of a continuing violation is a separate offense. 
(Code 2001, § 58-217; Ord. No. 82-2006, § 1, 10-17-2006) 
Chapter 62 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State historical preservation, Texas Government Code § 442.001 et seq.; state antiquities code, Texas Natural Resources Code § 191.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Purpose and declaration of policy. 
(a)  The city council finds and declares as a matter of public policy that the protection and use of historic landmarks is a public necessity and is required in the interest of the city's economy and the education, culture and general welfare of the people. 
(b)  The purposes of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Identify, provide protection for, and perpetuate historic landmarks which represent distinctive and important elements of the city's, state's and nation's past, and develop appropriate settings for them. 
(2)  Strengthen the economy of the city by stabilizing and improving property values. 
(3)  Protect and enhance the quality of neighborhoods. 
(4)  Protect and enhance the city's attraction to tourists and visitors, providing stimulus to business and industry. 
(5)  Conserve resources and save on construction costs. 
(6)  Reinforce community identity and foster civic pride in the appearance of the city and in the accomplishments of the past. 
(Code 1966, § 2-160.6; Code 2001, § 62-1; Ord. No. 92-2003, § 1, 9-16-2003) 
Sec. 62-2. - Compliance. 
    If work is performed without or contrary to this chapter, the building code administrator shall immediately stop any work. Such order shall institute immediately an appropriate action or proceeding to prevent any further unlawful action, and the unauthorized work must be corrected to meet conditions established by the Landmark Commission. 
(Code 1966, § 2-160.7.6; Code 2001, § 62-2; Ord. No. 92-2003, § 1, 9-16-2003) 
Sec. 62-3. - Enforcement, legal procedure and penalties. 
    It shall be the duty of the city to enforce this chapter. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation nor permit it to continue, and each day that the violation is maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of such penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 2001, § 62-3; Ord. No. 07-2001, § 6, 1-2-2001) 
Sec. 62-4. - Fees. 
    Fees shall be established for this chapter as provided by separate ordinance. 
(Code 1966, § 2-160.7.8; Code 2001, § 62-4) 
Sec. 62-5. - Designated landmarks and districts. 
(a)  The following are designated as city landmarks and districts: 
(1)  A commercial historic district known as the Depot Square Historic District is established pursuant to Ordinance Number 32-84 (March 20, 1984), and consists of such boundaries as designated by that ordinance and delineated in the following Depot Square District Boundary Map: 

(2)  A residential historic district known as the West Floral Heights Historic District is established pursuant to Ordinance Number 02-2005 (January 18, 2005), and consists of such boundaries as designated by that ordinance and delineated in the following Floral Heights District Map: 

(3)  Memorial Auditorium at 1300 7th Street, further described as Lots 1 and 2, Block 238, original townsite. 
(4)  Kell House at 900 Bluff, further described as Lot 1 and the north 70.67 feet of Lot 2, Block 235, original townsite. 
(5)  First United Methodist Church at 909 Tenth Street, further described as Lots 8, 9 and 10, Block 192, original townsite. 
(6)  The Woman's Forum of Wichita Falls, Inc., at 2120 Speedway Avenue, further described as Lot 9, Block 12, Country Club Estates Addition. 
(7)  The Episcopal Church of the Good Shepherd at 1109 Tenth Street, further described as Lot 7A, Block 190, original townsite. 
(8)  The Hardy-Chambers House at 1100 Travis Street, further described as Lots 1 and 2, Block 202, original townsite. 
(9)  The Hardin Administration Building of Midwestern State University at Taft Boulevard. 
(10)  Dr. Fanous' office at 1411 9th Street. 
(11)  The Berry Brown House at 1400 Travis Avenue. 
(12)  The Hamilton House at 1106 Brook Avenue. 
(13)  The Weeks-Estes House at #1 Crestway. 
(14)  The Lillis Morgan House at 1808 Elizabeth Avenue, Wichita Falls, Texas. 
(15)  The Kell Field Air Terminal located at Sheppard Air Force Base. 
(16)  The Kemp Wholesale Grocery (currently Big C Appliance) at 500 Eighth St., Wichita Falls, Texas. 
(17)  The Kemp Public Library at 1300 Lamar Street, Wichita Falls, Texas. 
(18)  The Elks Home at 1005 Ninth Street, Wichita Falls, Texas, further described as Lots 1, 2 and parts of 3 and 4, Block 186, original townsite. 
(19)  The Central YMCA at Ninth Street, Wichita Falls, Texas, further described as Lots 8, 9 and 10, Block 172, original townsite. 
(20)  The Kemp/Kell Depot at 503 Eighth Street, Wichita Falls, Texas, further described as Lots 1 and 2, Block 177, original townsite. 
(21)  The building location at 616 Seventh Street, Wichita Falls, Texas, further known as Lot 2, Jalonick Subdivision out of Lots 8 and 9, Block, original townsite, and formerly known as Toodles. 
(22)  The building located at 900 Eighth Street, Wichita Falls, Texas, further known as Lots 6 and 7, Block 166, original townsite, and commonly known as the Hamilton Building. 
(23)  The building located at 701 LaSalle Street, Wichita Falls, Texas, further known as Lot 1, Block 162, original townsite, and commonly known as the Littlest Skyscraper. 
(24)  The Graham B. Purcell Building/Federal Post Office at Lamar Street, Wichita Falls, Texas, further known as Lots 1 through 5, Block 192, original townsite. 
(25)  The Cline-Bridwell Mansion, a residence located at Hamilton Boulevard, Wichita Falls, Texas, further known as Lots 1 and 2, Block 6, Country Club Estates Addition, and commonly known as the White House. 
(26)  The John F. O'Donohoe/Anderson Bean Site, located at 615 8th Street, Wichita Falls, Texas, further known as Lot 13 (east 25 feet by 60 feet) and Lot 14 (east 50 feet by 60 feet), Block 176, original townsite, and commonly known as the Iron Horse Pub. 
(27)  The Holt Hotel Building, located at 600 8th Street, Wichita Falls, Texas, further known as Lot 7-A, Block 163, original townsite, is hereby designated as a Wichita Falls landmark. 
(28)  The Langford House, located at 1300 Tilden Street, Wichita Falls, Texas, further known as Lot 1-A, Block 56, Floral Heights Addition, also commonly known as the Wetherbee House. 
(29)  The Fraser House, located at 2106 Hiawatha Boulevard, Wichita Falls, Texas, further known as Lot 2 and 180 feet by 222 feet, Abstract 74, Block 1, Indian Heights Addition, also commonly known as the Blackwood House. 
(30)  The Montgomery House, located at 1300 Buchanan Street, Wichita Falls, Texas, further known as Lots 1, 2 and 3, Block 54, Floral Heights Addition, also commonly known as the Wagner House. 
(31)  The Mytinger-Richardson House, located at 2106 Wenonah Boulevard, Wichita Falls, Texas, also known as Lot 4, Block 5, Indian Heights, commonly known as the Burkman-Combs House. 
(32)  The Perkins-Prothro House, located at 3301 Harrison Boulevard, Wichita Falls, Texas, further described as 10.5 acres in Abstract 305, Abstract 346, and Abstract 346-A, Country Club Estates. 
(33)  The Carrigan-Stilley-Butler House, located at 2108 Wenonah Boulevard, Wichita Falls, Texas, further described as Lot 5, Block 5, Indian Heights. 
(34)  The McMahon-Bullington-Prothro House, located at 2028 Avondale, Wichita Falls, Texas, also known as the east 60 feet of Lot 2, all of Lot 3, and the west 40-feet of Lot 4, Block 1 Country Club Estates and 25 feet by 60 feet of A-305. 
(35)  The former Gorsline's Fashion Livery Stable/Liepold Clothing Store located at 711 Indiana Ave., Wichita Falls, Texas, further described as the South half of Lot 12, Block 163, Original Townsite. 
(b)  Individual properties designated as city landmarks are outlined as noted in their designation ordinance. A list form of all city designated landmarks shall be kept by the city clerk and historic preservation officer which shall be made available to the public and contain such information as necessary to establish the status of the property and the ordinance designating each such property as a landmark. 
(Code 1966, § 2-160.7.7; Code 2001, § 62-5; Ord. No. 38-2000, § 2, 4-18-2000; Ord. No. 94-2000, § 1, 9-14-2000; Ord. No. 07-2001, § 7, 1-2-2001; Ord. No. 90-2001, § 3, 9-18-2001; Ord. No. 84-2003, § 1, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 89-2003, § 1, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 92-2003, § 1, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 80-2004, § 1, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 02-2005, § 1, 1-18-2005; Ord. No. 39-2007, § 1, 4-17-2007; Ord. No. 46-2012, § 1, 9-4-2012; Ord. No. 47-2012, § 1, 9-4-2012; Ord. No. 52-2012, § 1, 9-18-2012; Ord. No. 60-2012, § 1, 10-16-2012; Ord. No. 19-2013, § 1, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 35-2013, § 1, 7-16-2013; Ord. No. 67-2013, § 1, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. 06-2016, § 1, 2-16-2016) 
Sec. 62-6. - Appeal. 
    Any person who is aggrieved by a ruling or action of the Landmark Commission under this chapter may, within 30 days after the ruling, appeal to the city council by filing written notice with the city clerk. 
(Code 1966, § 2-160.7.5; Code 2001, § 62-6) 
Sec. 62-7. - Application for and review of exterior alterations to landmarks. 
(a)  Application to the Landmark Commission shall be made prior to any major alteration to the exterior of any part of a landmark or prior to any new construction, reconstruction, demolition, removal, or relocation, except routine maintenance of any site within a designated historic district. This section shall not apply to the demolition of a building or structure as ordered by the city council, as authorized by chapter 22, article VIII of this Code. 
(b)  Minor design alterations/elements can be implemented after an administrative review is authorized by the historic preservation officer (city Planning Division) and with the issue of a certificate of appropriateness and obtaining the necessary zoning and building permit/clearances. Minor design alterations/elements include: awnings/shutters/light fixtures; exterior accessibility ramps; outdoor storage; signage; utility servicing equipment, and all other types of work indicated in the Wichita Falls Design Review Guidelines requiring administrative review. 
(c)  An application for demolition, removal, or relocation must be accompanied by an application to remove the designation as a landmark. 
(1)  A major improvement shall include improvements or alterations identified as major in the Wichita Falls Design Review Guidelines or other similar types of work considered as a major work or improvement by the historic preservation officer. 
(2)  A completed design review application for any major improvement, new construction, or demolition shall be reviewed at a public hearing by the Landmark Commission. The Landmark Commission shall conduct the public hearing during a regularly scheduled meeting within 30 days following receipt of a completed application by the historic preservation officer. The commission will consider all applicable design guidelines and render a decision for approval, conditional approval, or disapproval within 45 days of the public hearing date, unless otherwise agreed by the historic preservation officer and the applicant. 
(d)  If no decision is rendered by the Landmark Commission on a major design review application within 75 days of receipt of a complete application, approval shall be deemed granted, and a building permit, if required, may be issued with verification of application submittal. 
(e)  Any approved design review application issued a certificate of appropriateness shall expire within 12 months from the date of issuance if the work authorized is not commenced within this time period. The Landmark Commission may, however, renew an approval if application is made within 30 days of its expiration. 
(f)  Landmarks must be maintained to ensure their structural soundness and to ensure their exterior preservation. Ordinary repair and maintenance is exempt from design review by the Landmark Commission and this section, as are emergency measures authorized by the building inspection division to protect the health, safety, and public welfare. The term "ordinary repair and maintenance" is defined as any work for which a building permit is not required, where the purpose of the work is to correct any damage or deterioration, and where such work will not noticeably change the exterior appearance of any part of the landmark. 
(g)  An application shall be considered submitted when the Landmark Commission begins deliberations on the project. The need for additional information shall extend the application submittal period for an additional 30 days. Should the information not be forthcoming during that period, the application shall be considered null and void. 
(h)  No design review application that has been deemed similar to one that has previously been denied by the Landmark Commission or city council shall be considered or resubmitted for six months from the date of that denial. The historic preservation officer is the final authority as to the determination of similarity of the design review application. 
(Code 1966, § 2-160.7.3; Code 2001, § 62-7; Ord. No. 07-2001, § 2, 1-2-2001; Ord. No. 92-2003, § 1, 9-16-2003) 
Sec. 62-8. - Local historic preservation officer. 
(a)  Creation. There is hereby appointed a local historic preservation officer for the city. 
(b)  Appointment. The city manager shall appoint an existing, qualified city employee as the city local historic preservation officer. 
(c)  Functions. The historic preservation officer shall: 
(1)  Serve as the local preservation contact and/or liaison for the city, the community, the State Historical Commission, and the National Park Service. 
(2)  Submit copies of Landmark Commission meeting minutes and activities to the State Historical Commission. 
(3)  Provide resource materials and information to all Landmark Commission members to better assist them in their duties. 
(Code 2001, § 62-8; Ord. No. 90-2001, § 1, 9-18-2001) 
Secs. 62-9-62-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LANDMARK COMMISSION 

Sec. 62-36. - Created; composition; qualifications; compensation. 
(a)  There is created a Landmark Commission composed of nine members, each of whom shall be a city resident, appointed by the city council. 
(b)  Of the nine members, one shall be a licensed real estate broker or appraiser, one shall be a member of the Planning and Zoning Commission, one shall be a member of the Wichita County Heritage Society, one shall be a member of a primarily residential historic district who shall either own property or reside in the district and one shall be a member of a primarily commercial historic district who shall either own property or reside within the district, two shall be licensed or have expertise in the field of architecture, and two shall be members at-large. In the event that a member from a category noted above is unable to serve on the commission, city council may appoint an additional member at-large. 
(c)  All members should have knowledge and experience in one of the following categories: architectural, economic, cultural, archaeological, or historical development of the city which prepares them for carrying out their duties on the commission, and they shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1966, § 2-160.7.1(a); Code 2001, § 62-36; Ord. No. 07-2001, § 2, 1-2-2001; Ord. No. 92-2003, § 1, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 64-2013, § 1, 11-19-2013) 
Sec. 62-37. - Terms. 
    Members shall serve three-year terms. Term limits shall be governed by city council policy. 
(Code 1966, § 2-160.7.1(b); Code 2001, § 62-37; Ord. No. 07-2001, § 3, 1-2-2001; Ord. No. 92-2003, § 1, 9-16-2003) 
Sec. 62-38. - Proceedings. 
    The Landmark Commission shall meet monthly or as agenda issues require and may hold other meetings as necessary. These meetings shall be open to the public. A simple majority of the members shall constitute a quorum and at least five affirmative votes shall be necessary to carry out any action of the commission. The commission shall adopt appropriate guidelines and procedures relating to the provisions of this chapter and for the conduct of its business. There shall be a chairperson and vice-chairperson selected by the commission. The chairperson and vice-chairperson shall serve one-year terms and shall be elected at the first meeting of each calendar year. The chairperson and vice-chairperson may be reelected. 
(Code 1966, § 2-160.7.1(c); Code 2001, § 62-38; Ord. No. 07-2001, § 4, 1-2-2001) 
Sec. 62-39. - Functions. 
    The Landmark Commission shall: 
(1)  Recommend to the city council that certain districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects be designated as landmarks. 
(2)  Determine that certain districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects are eligible for designation as landmarks pending required restoration or rehabilitation; and they shall be deemed to have pending designation status. 
(3)  Approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove applications for alterations to the exterior of designated landmarks, to landmarks with pending designation status, and to structures located within designated historic districts, to ensure that changes are appropriate and that their historical qualities are retained. 
(4)  Regularly review the status of landmarks, landmark districts, and landmarks with pending designation status and make necessary recommendations. 
(5)  Recommend the amendment or removal of a designation using the same procedure as for the original designation. 
(6)  Review applications and appoint, as necessary, local District Design Review Committee volunteers who both demonstrate an interest in historic preservation and shall own property within that locally designated historic district. 
a.  District Design Review Committee appointments shall be for a term of three years. Term limits shall be governed by city council policy. 
b.  The terms of the District Design Review Committee volunteers shall be staggered to provide continuity and maintain a commitment of basic preservation knowledge. 
c.  District Design Review Committee volunteers shall assist the city-appointed historic district representative (either primarily residential or commercial) for a specific historic district regarding both administrative review for minor design review applications and assistance for major design alterations. 
d.  District Design Review Committee volunteers may make recommendations to the Landmark Commission regarding design review applications. 
(7)  Conduct such other activities necessary to accomplish its authorized objectives and to advance the purposes of this chapter. 
(8)  Any owner whose property is included in an application for historic district designation may remove his property from consideration by the commission by filing written notice with the city Community Development Department at least one day prior to the date of the commission meeting to hear the application. In the event the property is thereafter sold or conveyed to another party, the property shall immediately be included in the historic district and must comply with all the requirements of the district. 
(Code 1966, § 2-160.7.1(d); Code 2001, § 62-39; Ord. No. 92-2003, § 1, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 64-2013, § 2, 11-19-2013) 
Secs. 62-40-62-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGNATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-66. - Historic landmarks. 
(a)  The city council may designate, at a public hearing, districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects as historic landmarks. One or more of the following criteria shall be considered to make such designation, in that the district, site, building, structure or object: 
(1)  Is associated with significant historic events or development of the city or with the lives of persons or groups significant in the past. 
(2)  Embodies distinguishing characteristics of architectural style or type or craftsmanship or represents a significant innovation of method or use of materials. 
(3)  As a neighborhood, or district, represents a significant and distinguishable area. 
(4)  Possesses archaeological value or, based on evidence, can be expected to yield information important to history. 
(5)  Because of location, has become of value to a neighborhood community area, or city, or represents an aspect of community sentiment or pride. 
(6)  Is an existing or is proposed for recognition as a national historic landmark or state historic landmark, or is proposed for entry into the National Register of Historic Places. 
(7)  Possesses significance in history, architecture, archaeology, and culture. 
(b)  Any owner whose property is included in an application for historic district designation may remove his property from consideration by the city council by filing written notice with the city Community Development Department at least one day prior to the date of the city council meeting to hear the application. In the event the property is thereafter sold or conveyed to another party, the property shall immediately be included in the historic district and must comply with all the requirements of the district. 
(c)  Upon passage of a designation ordinance, the city clerk shall file a copy of the ordinance with the county clerk as part of the deed record. 
(Code 1966, §§ 2-160.7, 2-160.7.2; Code 2001, § 62-66; Ord. No. 07-2001, § 1, 1-2-2001; Ord. No. 92-2003, § 1, 9-16-2003) 
Secs. 62-67-62-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CRITERIA 

Sec. 62-96. - Scope. 
    To preserve the integrity of historical districts or landmarks that may be designated by the city council, the design criteria in this division shall be used to compare and evaluate individual structures presented for design review. The intent of this criteria is to ensure the preservation of the architectural and historic character of the structures located within the historic district or landmark. The criteria guidelines, section 62-97, have been adopted from the Secretary of the United States Department of the Interior's revised regulations (36 CFR 67 (1983)) for Standards for Rehabilitation of Historic Buildings. The criteria provide guidelines for the restoration of existing structures and ensure that new construction will blend with the existing character of the area. 
(Code 1966, § 2-160.7.4; Code 2001, § 62-96; Ord. No. 07-2001, § 5, 1-2-2001) 
Sec. 62-97. - Existing structures. 
    Design criteria used to compare and evaluate existing structures for rehabilitation within a designated historic district or landmark include the following: 
(1)  Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use for a property which requires minimal alteration of the building, structure, or site and its environment or to use a property for its originally intended purpose. 
(2)  The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure, or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural features shall be prohibited. 
(3)  All buildings, structures, and sites shall be recognized as products of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged. 
(4)  Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the history and development of a building, structure, or site and its environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their own right, and this significance shall be recognized and respected. 
(5)  Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize a building, structure, or site shall be treated with sensitivity. 
(6)  Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced, wherever possible. If replacement is necessary, the new material should match the material being replaced in composition, design, texture and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by historic, physical, or pictorial evidence, rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements from other buildings or structures. 
(7)  The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will damage the historic building materials shall not be undertaken. 
(8)  Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve archeological resources affected by or adjacent to any project. 
(9)  Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural or cultural material, and such design is compatible with the size, scale, material and character of the property, neighborhood or environment. 
(10)  New additions or alterations to a structure or landmark and/or its environment are subject to review by the Landmark Commission, unless the essential form and integrity of the structure and/or its environment would be unimpaired by the removal of such additions or alterations at a later date. 
(Code 1966, § 2-160.7.4(1); Code 2001, § 62-97; Ord. No. 07-2001, § 5, 1-2-2001; Ord. No. 92-2003, § 1, 9-16-2003) 
Sec. 62-98. - New construction. 
    Design criteria used to compare and evaluate new construction within a designated historic district or landmark include the following: 
(1)  Buildings should be constructed to a height within ten percent of the average height of existing adjacent buildings. 
(2)  The relationship between the width and the height of the front elevation and the width to height of windows and doors should be consistent with other buildings in the area. 
(3)  Rhythm, or the ordered recurrent alteration of strong and weak elements of the masses to openings, should be considered. 
(4)  Materials should be consistent with existing structures within the area in design, texture, and other visual qualities. 
(5)  Architectural detail should be consistent with existing structures within the area. Detail may include the selection of cornices, arches, quoins, balustrades, wrought iron work, chimneys or roof shape. 
(6)  The selection of a particular quality and quantity of landscaping should be in continuity with the surrounding area. 
(Code 1966, § 2-160.7.4(2); Code 2001, § 62-98; Ord. No. 92-2003, § 1, 9-16-2003) 
Sec. 62-99. - General criteria for use in designated district or landmark. 
    Design criteria for general use throughout a designated historic district or landmark include the following: 
(1)  Signs. Criteria for signs shall be as follow: 
a.  Graphic designs or individual letters mounted or placed directly on the face of a building are generally a preferred sign type. 
b.  Carefully designed signs on boards or plaques mounted flush with the side of the building are generally a preferred sign type. 
c.  There shall be simplicity and restraint in the selection of materials and lighting. Wood, wrought iron, and steel are preferable to plastics and extruded aluminum. Lighting achieved by floodlight or projected light or exposed globes is preferred to backlighting. Signs with rotating, blinking, or other features that appear to be moving are prohibited. 
(2)  Sidewalks and curbs. Sidewalks and curbs, constructed with an adequate barrier-free and aesthetic manner providing an efficient and convenient system for pedestrian movement are encouraged. Street furniture for comfort and convenience and aesthetically pleasing street hardware, including pedestrian scale lighting fixtures and intensities, are encouraged. 
(3)  Parking and loading. Off-street parking and loading facilities have an efficient functional relationship to the overall circulation system. The enhancement of the aesthetic quality of off-street parking and loading facilities with unobtrusive and appropriate screening and landscaping is encouraged. 
(Code 1966, § 2-160.7.4(3); Code 2001, § 62-99) 
Chapter 66 - HUMAN RELATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1-66-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fair housing ordinances, Texas Local Government Code § 214.903; fair housing, Texas Property Code § 301.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator means the administrator of the Commission on Human Needs, or authorized assistant. 
    Age means the calendar age of an individual 18 years of age or over. 
    Commission means the city Commission on Human Needs. 
    Disability means a mental or physical impairment that substantially limits at least one major life activity, a record of the impairment, or being regarded as having the impairment. The term "disability" does not include current illegal use or addiction to any drug or illegal or federally controlled substance and does not apply to an individual because of an individual's sexual orientation or because that individual is a transvestite. 
    Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under sections 66-92, 66-96, 66-97 and 66-98. 
    Dwelling means any: 
(1)  Structure or part of a structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families; or 
(2)  Vacant land that is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location of a structure or part of a structure described in subsection (1) of this definition. 
    Family includes a single individual. 
    Person means one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries. 
    Senior adult means a person 55 years of age or older. 
    To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Code 1966, § 13-12; Code 2001, § 66-26) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Property Code § 301.003. 
Sec. 66-27. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  It is declared to be the policy of the city to bring about, through fair, orderly, and lawful procedure, the opportunity for each person to obtain housing without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, familial status or physical or mental disability. 
(b)  It is further declared that this policy is established under the recognition of the inalienable rights of each individual to have access to adequate housing of his own choice without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, familial status or physical or mental disability; and further that the denial of such rights through considerations based on race, color, religion, sex, national original, age, familial status or physical or mental disability is detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an unjust denial or deprivation of such inalienable rights which is within the power and the proper responsibility of government to prevent. 
(Code 1966, § 13-11; Code 2001, § 66-27) 
Sec. 66-28. - Housing for elderly exempted. 
    The sections of this article relating to familial status do not apply to housing: 
(1)  That the commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly individuals under a federal or state program; 
(2)  Intended for, and solely occupied by, individuals 62 years of age or older; or 
(3)  Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one individual 55 years of age or older for each unit as determined by commission rules. 
(Code 2001, § 66-28) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Property Code § 301.043. 
Sec. 66-29. - Education and public information. 
    In order to further the objectives of this article, the Commission on Human Needs may conduct educational and public information programs designed to acquaint the general public with the sections and objectives of this article. 
(Code 1966, § 13-22; Code 2001, § 66-29) 
Sec. 66-30. - Cooperation with Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. 
    The administrator is authorized and encouraged to cooperate with the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, PL 90-284, and may render such service to the Secretary as they shall deem appropriate to further the policies of this article. The city manager may accept reimbursement from the Secretary for services rendered by personnel from the city to assist the city in carrying out the provisions of such federal law. 
(Code 1966, § 13-23; Code 2001, § 66-30) 
Secs. 66-31-66-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 66-61. - Administration; complaint procedure. 
(a)  The Commission on Human Needs shall have the responsibility of administering and implementing this article. 
(b)  Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (referred to as "person aggrieved") may file a complaint with the commission. Any complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be about to commit the discriminatory housing practice and shall set forth the particulars thereof. The commission is directed to prepare and adopt from time to time standard complaint forms and to furnish them upon request, without charge, to any person aggrieved. The commission may assist in the clerical preparation of such complaints. 
(c)  If this article should be declared substantially equivalent to the Federal Fair Housing Law by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, the commission shall receive and accept notification and referral of complaints from the secretary of the department, pursuant to the provisions of title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, PL 90-284, and shall treat such complaints in the same manner as complaints filed directly by the person aggrieved. 
(d)  If, in the course of any investigation as provided in section 66-62 on a complaint filed with or referred to the commission, the commission shall receive credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that the person named in such complaint has committed a discriminatory housing practice not stated in such complaint, the commission may prepare and file a supplementary complaint upon its own motion and in its own name. Such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by the person aggrieved. 
(e)  If at any time the administrator shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person has committed a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed nor is about to be filed, the administrator may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and in his own name. Such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(f)  Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the administrator shall furnish a copy of the complaint to the person named as respondent in the complaint. 
(g)  A complaint under subsections (b), (d), (e) and (f) of this section shall be filed within 180 days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints may be reasonably or fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint against him and, with the leave of the administrator, which shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may amend his answer at any time. A copy of any amendment to a complaint or an answer shall be furnished to the opposing party. Both complaints and answers shall be signed by the persons making them. 
(Code 1966, § 13-18; Code 2001, § 66-61) 
Sec. 66-62. - Investigation. 
(a)  Upon the filing of a complaint valid on its face as provided in section 66-61, the administrator shall cause to be made a prompt investigation of the matter stated in the complaint. 
(b)  In connection with such investigation, the administrator may question and take and record testimony and statements of such persons who appeal and may examine, record, and copy documents which are produced. 
(c)  During or after the investigation, the administrator shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice act has occurred or is about to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance or rectification of the discriminatory housing practice and voluntary compliance with this article. 
(d)  If conciliation is effected, the administrator shall disclose nothing said or done in the course of such conciliation in such a way as to make public identification of the person named in the complaint without the written consent of the person concerned. 
(Code 1966, § 13-20; Code 2001, § 66-62) 
Sec. 66-63. - Prosecution in municipal court. 
(a)  Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the administrator as provided in this article, but within 60 days of the filing of the complaint with the administrator, if the administrator has concluded that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred and the efforts of the administrator to secure voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful, the administrator shall prepare and file a charge in municipal court and prosecute the charge to final conclusion as rapidly as practical. 
(b)  It is the intent of this article to increase the remedies which citizens may have to ensure their rights under federal, state, or local statutory or case law. Therefore, nothing in this article shall be construed as an administrative prerequisite to a citizen pursuing his rights under any other federal, state or local statute, case, decision, or administrative ruling. 
(Code 1966, § 13-21; Code 2001, § 66-63) 
Secs. 66-64-66-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROHIBITED ACTS 

Sec. 66-91. - Familial status. 
    A discriminatory act is committed because of familial status if the act is committed because the person who is the subject of discrimination is: 
(1)  Pregnant; 
(2)  Domiciled with an individual younger than 18 years of age in regard to whom the person: 
a.  Is the parent or legal custodian; 
b.  Has the written permission of the parent or legal custodian for domicile with that person; or 
(3)  In the process of obtaining legal custody of an individual younger than 18 years of age. 
(Code 2001, § 66-91) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Property Code § 301.004. 
Sec. 66-92. - Discrimination in sale or rental of housing. 
(a)  Except as exempted by this section, it shall be unlawful to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of age, race, color, religion, sex, familial status, national origin or mental or physical disability. 
(2)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith because of age, race, color, religion, sex, familial status, national origin or mental or physical disability. 
(3)  Make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement, or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on age, race, color, religion, sex, familial status, national origin or mental or physical disability, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination. 
(4)  Represent to any person because of age, race, color, religion, sex, familial status, national origin or mental or physical disability that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  For profit, or with the hope or expectation of profit, induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, religion, sex, familial status, national origin, age or physical or mental disability. 
(b)  There shall be exempted from the application of subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses, wherever located, at any one time; provided further that if the sale of any such single-family house is by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; provided further that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided further the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this article only if such house is sold or rented: 
a.  Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or services of any real estate broker, agent or salesperson or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesperson or person; and 
b.  Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notices, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of subsection (a)(3) of this section, but nothing in the proviso shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(2)  The rental of rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society, or a nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by, or in conjunction with, a religious organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color or national origin. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which, as an incident to its primary purpose provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any dwelling designed and operated exclusively for senior adults and their spouses, unless the sale, rental, lease or occupancy is further restricted on account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or physical or mental disability. 
(f)  Nothing in this article shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation contains common lavatory, kitchen, or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such housing accommodation. 
(g)  This section does not prohibit discrimination against a person because the person has been convicted under federal law or the law of any state of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance. 
(Code 1966, §§ 13-13, 13-17; Code 2001, § 66-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Property Code §§ 301.021, 301.042. 
Sec. 66-93. - Disability. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "covered multifamily dwellings" means: 
(1)  Buildings consisting of four or more units if the buildings have one or more elevators; and 
(2)  Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more units. 
(b)  A person may not discriminate in the sale or rental of, or make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability of: 
(1)  The buyer or renter; 
(2)  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; or 
(3)  Any person associated with the buyer or renter. 
(c)  A person may not discriminate against another in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with the dwelling because of a disability of: 
(1)  The other person; 
(2)  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; or 
(3)  Any person associated with the other person. 
(d)  In this section, the term "discrimination" includes: 
(1)  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person having a disability, a reasonable modification of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the person if the modification may be necessary to afford the person full enjoyment of the premises; 
(2)  A refusal to make a reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices, or services if the accommodation may be necessary to afford the person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or 
(3)  The failure to design and construct a covered multifamily dwelling in a manner that: 
a.  Allows the public use and common use portions of the dwellings to be readily accessible to and usable by persons having a disability; 
b.  Allows all doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within the dwellings to be sufficiently wide to allow passage by a person who has a disability and who is in a wheelchair; and 
c.  Provides all premises within the dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design: 
1.  An accessible route into and through the dwelling; 
2.  Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations; 
3.  Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and 
4.  Kitchens and bathrooms that are usable and have sufficient space in which an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver. 
(e)  Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for Buildings and Facilities Providing Accessibility and Usability for Persons Having Physical Disabilities, commonly cited as "ANSI A 117.1," satisfies the requirements of subsection (d)(3)c of this section. 
(f)  Subsection (d)(3) of this section does not apply to a building, the first occupancy of which occurred on or before March 13, 1991. 
(g)  This section does not require a dwelling to be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
(Code 2001, § 66-93) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Property Code § 301.025. 
Sec. 66-94. - Inspection. 
    A person may not represent to another because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin that a dwelling is not available for inspection for sale or rental when the dwelling is available for inspection. 
(Code 2001, § 66-94) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Property Code § 301.023. 
Sec. 66-95. - Entry into neighborhood. 
    A person may not, for profit, induce or attempt to induce another to sell or rent a dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into a neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin. 
(Code 2001, § 66-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Property Code § 301.024. 
Sec. 66-96. - Discrimination in financing of housing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion, sex, familial status, national origin, age or physical or mental disability of such person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance for the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Code 1966, § 13-14; Code 2001, § 66-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Property Code § 301.026. 
Sec. 66-97. - Discrimination in provision of brokerage services. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deny another person access to, membership in, or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling and renting dwellings or to discriminate against another person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation on account of age, race, color, religion, sex, familial status, national origin or physical or mental disability. 
(Code 1966, § 13-15; Code 2001, § 66-97) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Property Code § 301.027. 
Sec. 66-98. - Unlawful intimidation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of force to willfully injure, intimidate or interfere with or attempt to injure, intimidate, or interfere with any person because of his race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or physical or mental disability because he is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing, or occupation of any dwelling or applying for or participating in any service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings. 
(Code 1966, § 13-16; Code 2001, § 66-98) 
State Law reference- Intimidation or interference, Texas Property Code § 301.171. 
Secs. 66-99-66-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Commercial establishments identified on a specific information logo sign shall conform to all applicable laws concerning the provision of public accommodations without regard to race, religion, color, sex, or national origin, Texas Transportation Code § 391.094. 

Sec. 66-126. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator means the administrator of the Commission on Human Needs, or authorized assistant. 
    Age refers to a person over the age of 19 years. 
    Commission means the city Commission on Human Needs. 
    Discrimination means any direct or indirect exclusion, distinction, segregation, limitation, refusal, denial or any other differentiation in the treatment of a person on account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age and physical or mental handicap in all places of public accommodation. 
    Physical or mental handicap means any physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities. 
    Place of public accommodation means each of the following establishments which serve the public: 
(1)  Any inn, hotel, motel or other establishment which provides lodging to transient guests, other than an establishment located within a building which contains not more than five rooms for rent or hire and which is actually occupied by the proprietor of such establishment as his residence; 
(2)  Any restaurant, cafeteria, lunchroom, lunch counter, soda fountain, or other facility principally engaged in selling food for consumption on the premises, including, but not limited to, any such facility located on the premises of any retail establishment, or any gasoline station; 
(3)  Any motion picture house, theater, concert hall, sports arena, stadium or other place of exhibition or entertainment; 
(4)  Any bar, tavern, pub, drinking establishment, or facility where alcoholic beverages are served; 
(5)  Retail establishments selling any kind of goods or services; and 
(6)  Any establishment which: 
a.  Is physically located within the premises of any establishment otherwise covered by this subsection; 
b.  Within the premises of which is physically located any such covered establishment; and 
c.  Holds itself out as serving patrons of such covered establishment. 
(Code 1966, § 13-32; Code 2001, § 66-126) 
Sec. 66-127. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  It is declared to be the policy of the city to bring about, through fair, orderly, and lawful procedure, the opportunity for each person to obtain goods and services in all places of public accommodation without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or physical or mental handicap. 
(b)  It is further declared that this policy is established under the recognition of the inalienable rights of each individual to obtain goods and services in all places of public accommodation without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, and physical or mental handicap, and, further, that the denial of such rights through considerations based upon race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or physical or mental handicap is detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an unjust denial or deprivation of such inalienable rights which is within the power and the proper responsibility of the government to prevent. 
(Code 1966, § 13-31; Code 2001, § 66-127) 
Sec. 66-128. - Interpretation. 
    In construing this article, it is the intent of the city council that the courts shall be guided by federal court interpretations of title II of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended. 
(Code 1966, § 13-33; Code 2001, § 66-128) 
Sec. 66-129. - Rules and regulations. 
    The Commission on Human Needs shall have authority from time to time to issue, amend or rescind suitable procedural regulations to carry out this article. Such rules and regulations shall provide for procedural due process and shall be subject to review and approval by the city council. 
(Code 1966, § 13-37; Code 2001, § 66-129) 
Sec. 66-130. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to a private club or other establishment not in fact open to the public, except to the extent that the facilities of such establishment are made available to the customers or patrons of an establishment within the scope of section 66-126. 
(Code 1966, § 13-38; Code 2001, § 66-130) 
Sec. 66-131. - Prohibited practices. 
(a)  All persons shall be entitled to the full and equal employment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, and accommodations of any place of public accommodation without discrimination or segregation on the ground of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age and physical or mental handicap. 
(b)  It is an unlawful discriminatory act for any person, being the owner, proprietor, or lessee of any place of public accommodation, to directly or indirectly exclude, segregate, limit, refuse or deny to any person any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, benefits, privileges, services or goods of that place on account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, and physical or mental handicap. 
(c)  It is an unlawful discriminatory act for any person, being the owner, proprietor, or lessee of any place of public accommodation, to circulate, issue, display, post, mail, or otherwise publish a statement, advertisement, or sign that indicates that any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, benefits, privileges, services, or goods of that place will be denied to any individual on account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age or physical or mental handicap or that the patronage of or presence at that place of any individual is objectionable, unwelcome, unacceptable, undesirable, or unsolicited on account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or physical or mental handicap. 
(Code 1966, § 13-34; Code 2001, § 66-131) 
Sec. 66-132. - Procedure for violations. 
(a)  The Commission on Human Needs is provided as an administrative vehicle for the procedural handling of complaints concerning any person engaging in any unlawful public accommodation practice. 
(b)  Whenever a charge is filed with the commission by a person claiming to be aggrieved (referred to as "person aggrieved") alleging unlawful public accommodation practice, the administrator shall serve a notice of the charge, including the date, place and circumstances, with as much specificity as possible of the alleged unlawful public accommodation practice on such owner, proprietor or lessee (referred to as the "respondent") within ten days. However, before any charge becomes accepted for investigative purposes, the administrator shall have personally reviewed with the person aggrieved the allegations contained therein and shall have determined that such charge comes within this article. If such review results in the determination that a particular charge does not come within this article, the person aggrieved shall be given a clear and concise explanation of the reasons why it does not. Records shall be maintained indicating the reason for which a charge was not accepted for investigation. A report of charges accepted shall be compiled by the administrator, and the results and recommendations shall be reported to the Commission on Human Needs. A charge under this section must be filed within 180 days following the occurrence of the alleged unlawful public accommodation practice. 
(c)  Charges shall be in writing under oath or affirmation and shall contain such information and be in such form as the administrator requires. 
(d)  If the administrator determines after investigation that there is not reasonable cause to believe that the charge is true, the administrator shall dismiss the charge, and promptly notify the person aggrieved of his action. 
(e)  If after investigation it is determined that there is reasonable cause to believe that a charge is true, the administrator shall endeavor to eliminate any such alleged unlawful public accommodation practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation and persuasion. Nothing said or done in the course of such endeavors may be made public by the administrator, the person aggrieved, or the respondent or be used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding without the written consent of all persons concerned. All determinations shall be reasonable and shall be made as promptly as possible. If a respondent desires at any time to enter into a predetermination settlement, the settlement shall be allowed, provided the person aggrieved and the administrator agree such is acceptable and in accordance with the objectives of this article. 
(f)  If the administrator is unable to secure from the respondent an acceptable conciliation agreement after investigation, the administrator may cause the case to be prosecuted in municipal court or refer the case to other agencies, as appropriate. 
(Code 1966, § 13-35; Code 2001, § 66-132) 
Sec. 66-133. - Access to records. 
    In connection with any investigation of a charge filed under this article, the administrator shall at all reasonable times have access to, for the purposes of examination and the right to copy, any evidence of any person being investigated or proceeded against that relates to unlawful public accommodation practices and is relevant to the charge under investigation and is not confidential as provided by law. 
(Code 1966, § 13-36; Code 2001, § 66-133) 
Secs. 66-134-66-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Unlawful employment practices, Texas Labor Code § 21.051 et seq. 

Sec. 66-161. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator means the administrator of the Commission on Human Needs, or authorized assistant. 
    Commission means the city Commission on Human Needs. 
    Employee means an individual employed by an employer, except that the term "employee" does not include any person elected to public office in this state or political subdivision of this state by the qualified voters thereof. 
    Employer and general contractor mean a person who has 15 or more employees for each working day in each of 20 or more calendar weeks in the current or preceding calendar year, and any agent of such a person. 
    Employment agency means any person regularly undertaking, with or without compensation, to procure employees for an employer or to procure for employees opportunities to work for an employer and includes an agent of such a person. 
    Handicapped person means a person who has a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities, has a record of such an impairment or is regarded as having such an impairment. 
    Labor organization means an organization, agency, or employee representation committee, group or association in which employees participate and which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of dealing with employers concerning grievances, labor disputes, wages, rate of pay, hours or other terms or conditions of employment. 
    Person includes one or more individuals, labor unions, partnerships, joint ventures, associations, corporations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy or receivers, or any other legal or commercial entity. 
    Religion includes all aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as belief, unless an employer demonstrates that he is unable to reasonably accommodate an employee's or prospective employee's religious observance or practice without undue hardship on the conduct of the employer's business. 
(Code 1966, § 13-52; Code 2001, § 66-161) 
Sec. 66-162. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  It is declared to be the policy of the city to bring about, through fair, orderly, and lawful procedure, the opportunity for each person to obtain employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or physical or mental handicap. 
(b)  It is further declared that this policy is established under the recognition of the inalienable rights of each individual to work to earn wages and obtain a share of the wealth of this city through gainful employment and; further, that the denial of such rights through considerations based upon race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or physical or mental handicap is detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an unjust denial or deprivation of such inalienable rights which is within the power and the proper responsibility of government to prevent. 
(Code 1966, § 13-51; Code 2001, § 66-162) 
Sec. 66-163. - Prohibitions; unlawful employment practices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for employers to: 
(1)  Fail or refuse to hire, discharge an individual, or otherwise discriminate against an individual with respect to compensation, terms, conditions, privileges or responsibilities of employment, because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or physical or mental handicap. 
(2)  Limit, segregate or classify an employee or applicant for employment which would deprive or tend to deprive an individual of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect the status of an employee, because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or physical or mental handicap. 
(3)  Cause or attempt to cause an employer to discriminate against an individual in violation of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an employment agency to fail or refuse to refer for employment or otherwise to discriminate against any individual because of his age, race, color, religion, sex or national origin or to classify or refer for employment any individual on the basis of his age, race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or physical or mental handicap. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any employer, labor organization, or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining, including on-the-job training programs, to discriminate against any individual because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age or disability in admission to, or employment in, any program established to provide apprenticeship or other training. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for an employer to discriminate against any of his employees or applicants for employment, for an employment agency, or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining, including on-the-job training programs, to discriminate against any individual or for a labor organization to discriminate against any member thereof or applicant for membership, because he has opposed any practice made unlawful by this article or because he has made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this article. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for an employer, labor organization, employment agency, or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining, including on-the-job training programs, to print or publish or cause to be printed or published any notice or advertisement relating to employment by such an employer or membership in or any classification or referral for employment by such labor organization or relating to any classification or referral for employment by such an employment agency indicating any preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination, based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or disability; but a notice or advertisement may indicate a preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination based on religion, sex, national origin, age or disability when religion, sex, national origin, age, or disability is a bona fide occupational qualification for employment. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to aid, incite, compel, coerce, intimidate or participate in the doing of any act declared to be unlawful by this article or to obstruct or prevent any person from enforcing or complying with this article. 
(Code 1966, § 13-53; Code 2001, § 66-163) 
Sec. 66-164. - Exceptions. 
(a)  It shall not be an unlawful employment practice for an employer to hire and employ employees; for an employment agency to classify or refer to employment any individual; for a labor organization to classify its membership or to classify or refer for employment any individual; or for an employer, labor organization, or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining programs to admit or employ any individual in any such program, on the basis of religion, sex, national origin, age or disability in those certain instances where religion, sex, national origin, age, or disability is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of that particular business or enterprise. 
(b)  It shall not be an unlawful employment practice for a school, college, university, or other educational institution or institution of learning to hire and employ employees of a particular religion, if such school, college or university or other educational institution or institution of learning is directed toward the propagation of a particular religion, if such school, college, university, or other educational institution or institution of learning is, in whole or in part, owned, supported, controlled, or managed by a particular religion or by a particular religious corporation, association, or society, or if the curriculum of such school, college, university, or other educational institution or institution of learning is directed toward the propagation of a particular religion. 
(c)  This article shall not apply to a religious corporation, association, educational institution, or society with respect to the employment of individuals of a particular religion, to perform work connected with the carrying on by such corporation, association, educational institution or society of its activities. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other section of this article, it shall not be unlawful for an employer to apply different standards of compensation or different terms, conditions or privilege of employment pursuant to a bona fide seniority or merit system or a system which measures earnings by quantity or quality of production or to employees who work in different locations, provided that such differences are not the result of an intention to discriminate because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or physical or mental handicap, nor shall it be unlawful for an employer to give and to act upon the results of any professionally developed ability test, provided that such test, its administration or action upon the results is not designed, intended or used to discriminate because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or physical or mental handicap. It shall not be unlawful under this article for any employer to differentiate upon the basis of sex in determining the amount of the wages or compensation paid or to be paid to employees of such employer if such differentiation is authorized by the provisions of section 6(d) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, as amended (29 USC 206(d)). 
(e)  Nothing contained in this article shall be interpreted to require any employer, employment agency, labor organization, or joint labor-management committee subject to this article to grant preferential treatment to any individual or to any group because of the race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or physical or mental handicap of such individual or group on account of an imbalance which may exist with respect to the total number or percentage of persons of any race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or physical or mental handicap employed by an employer, referred or classified for employment by an employment agency or labor organization, admitted to membership or classified by a labor organization, or admitted to, or employed in, any apprenticeship or other training program, in comparison with the total number or percentage of persons of such race, color, religion, sex or national origin in any community, state, section, or other area, or in the available work force in any community, state, section or other area. 
(f)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to repeal or modify any federal, state, territorial, or local law creating special rights or preferences for veterans or Indians. 
(g)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to make unlawful discrimination based upon the ages of persons who are less than 40 years of age or more than 65 years of age. 
(h)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to make unlawful discrimination with respect to aliens who entered and reside in the United States illegally. 
(Code 1966, § 13-54; Code 2001, § 66-164) 
State Law reference- Exceptions, Texas Labor Code § 21.101 et seq. 
Sec. 66-165. - Complaint procedure. 
(a)  The Commission on Human Needs is provided as an administrative vehicle for the procedural handling of complaints concerning any person engaging in an unlawful employment practice. 
(b)  Whenever a charge is filed with the commission by a person claiming to be aggrieved, alleging that an employer, employment agency, labor organization, or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining, including on-the-job training programs, has engaged in an unlawful employment practice, the administrator shall serve a notice of the charge, including the date, place, and circumstances with as much specificity as possible of the alleged unlawful employment practice, to such employer, employment agency, labor organization or joint labor-management committee (referred to as the "respondent") within ten days. However, before any charge becomes accepted for investigative purposes, the administrator shall have personally reviewed with the charging party the allegations contained therein and shall determine if such charge comes within this article. If such review results in the determination that a particular charge does not come within this article, the charging party shall be given a clear and concise explanation of the reasons why it does not. Records shall be maintained indicating the reason for which a charge was not accepted for investigation. An investigation of charges accepted shall be made by the administrator. The report of investigation results and recommendations shall be filed with the administrator of the Commission on Human Needs. A charge under this section must be filed within not more than 180 days after the alleged unlawful employment practice occurred. 
(c)  Charges shall be in writing under oath or affirmation and shall contain such information and shall be in such form as the commission requires. Such charges shall not be made public. 
(d)  If the administrator determines after investigation that there is not reasonable cause to believe that the charge is true, the commission shall dismiss the charge and promptly notify the person claiming to be aggrieved and the respondent of such action. 
(e)  If, after investigation, it is determined that there is reasonable cause to believe that a charge is true, the administrator shall endeavor to eliminate any such alleged unlawful employment practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation and persuasion. Nothing said or done during and as a part of such informal endeavors may be made public by the commission, the administrator, or his representative or be used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding without the written consent of the person concerned. All determinations shall be reasonable and made as promptly as possible. At any time if a respondent desires to enter into a predetermination settlement, the settlement shall be allowed, provided the aggrieved party and the administrator agree such is acceptable and promotable of the objectives of this article. 
(f)  If the administrator is unable to secure from the respondent an acceptable conciliation agreement after investigation, the administrator shall cause the case to be prosecuted in municipal court or shall refer the case to the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. 
(Code 1966, § 13-55; Code 2001, § 66-165) 
Sec. 66-166. - Enforcement. 
(a)  In connection with any investigation of a charge filed under this article, the administrator shall, at all reasonable times, have access to, for the purpose of examination and the right to copy, any evidence of any person being investigated or proceeded against that relates to unlawful employment practices and that is relevant to the charge under investigation and that is not confidential as provided by law. 
(b)  No person shall willfully obstruct or prevent compliance with this article or hinder or interfere with the performance of the proper exercise of a duty, obligation, right or power of the Commission on Human Needs or its representatives or other officials with duties, obligations, rights and powers established by ordinance. 
(c)  The commission shall have authority from time to time to issue, demand, or rescind suitable procedural regulations to carry out this article. Such rules and regulations shall be in conformity with procedural due process and shall be subject to review and approval by the city council. 
(Code 1966, § 13-56; Code 2001, § 66-166) 
Chapter 70 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to provide for Police Department, Texas Local Government Code § 341.003; police reserve force, Texas Local Government Code § 341.012; authority to police city owned property outside city limits, Texas Local Government Code § 342.903. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Interlocal assistance by city police to counties and other municipalities. 
(a)  By virtue of Texas Local Government Code § 362.001 et seq., the mayor is authorized to provide for regularly employed city police officers to assist any other county or municipality when, in the opinion of the mayor or other officer of such other county or municipality who is authorized to declare a state of civil emergency in such other county or municipality, there exists in such other county or municipality a need for the services of additional law enforcement officers to protect the health, life and property of such other county or municipality, its inhabitants and the visitors thereto because of riot, unlawful assembly characterized by the use of force and violence or threat thereof by three or more persons acting together or without lawful authority or during a time of natural disaster or manmade calamity. In the absence or disability of the mayor, this authority may be exercised by the city manager. In the absence or disability of both the mayor and the city manager, this authority may be exercised by the acting city manager, with the advice of the chief of police. 
(b)  While any city police officer is in the service of another county or municipality pursuant to this section, he shall be a peace officer of such other county or municipality and shall be under the command of the law enforcement officer therein who is in charge in that county or municipality, with all the powers of a regular law enforcement officer in such other county or municipality as fully as though he were within this city. 
(c)  Any city police officer who is ordered to perform police duties outside the territorial limits of this city shall be entitled to the same wage, salary, pension and all other compensation and all other rights for such service, including injury or death benefits, the same as though the service had been rendered within the limits of this city and shall also be paid for any reasonable expenses of travel, food or lodging that he may incur while on duty outside such limits. 
(d)  All wage and disability payments, pension payments, damage to equipment and clothing, medical expense and expenses of travel, food and lodging shall be paid by this city. Upon making such payments, this city shall, when it so requests, be reimbursed by the county or municipality whose authorized official requested these services out of which the payments arose. 
(Code 1966, § 24-9; Code 2001, § 70-1) 
State Law reference- Interlocal agreements for assistance, Texas Government Code § 362.001 et seq. 
Secs. 70-2-70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Appointment of department directors and officers, § 61. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to provide for a Police Department, Texas Local Government Code §§ 341.003, 342.011; civil service, Texas Local Government Code § 143.001 et seq. 

Sec. 70-31. - Organization. 
    The Police Department shall be under the direction of a chief of police, who shall be appointed by the city manager and who, subject to the supervision of the city manager and to such rules, regulations and orders prescribed by the city manager not inconsistent with the city Charter and ordinances, shall have immediate control and direction of such department. The chief of police shall be vested with the disciplinary power of the department. The department shall be composed of the chief of police and other officers and employees as the city manager may determine. 
(Code 1966, § 24-19; Code 2001, § 70-31) 
Sec. 70-32. - Duties. 
(a)  The Police Department shall be charged with the preservation of the peace and order of the city, the protection of all persons and property, and the enforcement of all criminal ordinances and all criminal laws of the city, the state and the United States. 
(b)  The department shall: 
(1)  Suppress all riots, disturbances and breaches of the peace. 
(2)  Pursue and arrest any person fleeing from justice in any part of the state or of the United States. 
(3)  Arrest all persons found in the act of committing a breach of laws or ordinances, and take the offenders forthwith before the proper court to be dealt with according to law. 
(4)  Make complaints to the proper officers of any person known or believed to be guilty of the violation of the city ordinances or of the penal laws of the state or the United States. 
(c)  The Police Department shall also aid in firefighting when so directed by the city manager. 
(Code 1966, § 24-20; Code 2001, § 70-32) 
Sec. 70-33. - Classification under civil service. 
(a)  The following positions in the Police Department are classified under civil service in compliance with Texas Local Government Code § 143.021(a): 
Classification Title Number of 
Positions Police trainee As required Police officer 165 Police sergeant 25 Police lieutenant 7 Police captain 3 Police deputy chief 2  
(b)  No other person employed by the city may be classified as holding a position under civil service with the Police Department. 
(Code 1966, § 24-21; Code 2001, § 70-33; Ord. No. 83-2001, § 1, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 85-2002, § 1, 10-1-2002; Ord. No. 91-2003, § 1, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 78-2004, § 1, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 97-2005, § 1, 12-6-2005; Ord. No. 88-2007, § 1, 10-2-2007; Ord. No. 77-2009, 10-20-2009; Ord. No. 53-2013, § 1, 9-17-2013) 
Chapter 74 - NATURAL RESOURCES 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 78 - OFFENSES 
ARTICLE I. - AIR RIFLES AND PISTOLS 

Sec. 78-1. - Shooting or discharging air rifles and air pistols. 
    It shall be unlawful to shoot or discharge an air rifle or air pistol that, by means of compressed air or compressed gas, is capable of discharging shots, pellets or any solid objects that are potentially dangerous to human safety, in such a manner that the shot, pellet or solid object so discharged travels on, along or across any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public property or on, along or across any private property which is not owned or controlled by the person who discharged such air rifle or air pistol. It shall be a defense to anyone charged under this section with shooting such a gun on private property not owned or controlled by him that he had permission of the person who owns or controls such private property. 
(Code 1966, § 20-24(a)) 
Secs. 78-2-78-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES 

Sec. 78-25. - Solicitation to acquire controlled, prohibited substance. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Controlled substance has the meaning ascribed to it by Texas Health and Safety Code § 481.002(4). 
    Controlled substance analogue has the meaning ascribed to it by Texas Health and Safety Code § 481.002(6). 
    Dangerous drug has the meaning ascribed to it by Texas Health and Safety Code § 483.001(3). 
    Prohibited substance means a controlled substance, controlled substance analogue, dangerous drug, volatile chemical or any combination thereof. 
    Solicitation to purchase or acquire a controlled substance, controlled substance analogue, dangerous drug or volatile chemical means to request, command or attempt to induce another to sell, donate or otherwise transfer or deliver a prohibited substance. 
    Volatile chemical means any of the chemicals or any isomers of any of the chemicals listed in Texas Health and Safety Code § 484.002. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, with intent to acquire a prohibited substance, he requests, commands or attempts to induce another to sell, donate or otherwise transfer or deliver a prohibited substance to the person. 
(c)  A person may not be convicted under this section on the uncorroborated testimony of the person allegedly solicited and unless the solicitation is made under circumstances strongly corroborative of both the solicitation itself and the actor's intent that the other person act on the solicitation. 
(d)  It is no defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1)  No monetary or other consideration was tendered to the person solicited; or 
(2)  The person solicited was unable or unwilling to transfer or deliver a prohibited substance. 
(e)  It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution under this section that the solicitation is made: 
(1)  In furtherance of a transaction which would not constitute a violation of any applicable law; or 
(2)  By a peace officer or federal law enforcement officer in the lawful discharge of his duties or by a law enforcement agent acting in the lawful discharge of an official duty. 
(f)  Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable, upon conviction, by a fine as provided in section 1-14. However, any conduct proscribed under this section which also constitutes an offense under state law shall not be prosecuted under this section, but shall be prosecuted pursuant to and punishable as provided by the applicable state law. An offense under this section is not a lesser-included offense under Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 481, 483 or 484. 
(Code 1966, § 20-26) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Health and Safety Code § 481.151 et seq. 
Sec. 78-26. - Manifesting purpose of selling illegal drugs and chemicals. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term "known drug dealer" means a person who, within three years previous to the date of arrest for violation of this section, has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted for the manufacture, sale, or delivery of any illegal controlled substance, dangerous drug, simulated controlled substance, or volatile chemical. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he loiters in a public place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of selling any illegal controlled substance, dangerous drug, simulated controlled substance, or volatile chemical. Among the circumstances that may be considered in determining whether such a purpose is manifested are that such person: 
(1)  Is a known drug dealer; or 
(2)  Is at a location frequented by persons who use, possess, or sell drugs; and 
(3)  Repeatedly engages in conversations with passersby, whether on foot or in a vehicle, for the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting, or procuring another to illegally possess, transfer or buy any controlled substance; or 
(4)  Repeatedly passes to, or receives from, passersby, whether on foot or in a vehicle, money, objects, or written material for the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting, or procuring another to illegally possess, transfer or buy any controlled substance. 
(c)  No arrest shall be made for violation of subsection (b) of this section unless the arresting officer affords the person an opportunity to explain his conduct, and it shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of subsection (b) of this section if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed for lawful purpose. 
(Code 1966, § 20-27) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Health and Safety Code § 481.151 et seq. 
Secs. 78-27-78-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GRAFFITI[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Graffiti, Texas Health and Safety Code § 485.001 et seq. 

Sec. 78-41. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aerosol paint means any aerosolized paint product, including a clear or pigmented lacquer or finish. 
    Aerosol paint container means any aerosol container that is adapted or made for the purpose of applying aerosol paint, spray paint or another substance capable of defacing property. 
    Graffiti means any marking, including inscriptions, slogans, drawings, or paintings, made with a graffiti implement on tangible property without the effective consent of the owner of the property. 
    Graffiti implement means any aerosol paint, aerosol paint container, broad tip marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching or engraving device, brush or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or manmade surface. 
    Guardian means: 
(1)  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
    Minor means an individual younger than 17 years of age. 
    Owner means any person with legal right of possession to tangible property. 
    Parent means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person. 
(Ord. No. 79-2008, § 1, 12-16-2008) 
Sec. 78-42. - Graffiti as nuisance; prohibition. 
(a)  Graffiti, as defined by this article, is hereby declared a nuisance and is prohibited. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any natural or manmade surface of any city-owned or non-city-owned property. 
(Ord. No. 79-2008, § 1, 12-16-2008) 
Sec. 78-43. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any section of this article shall be guilty of a violation as provided in section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 79-2008, § 1, 12-16-2008) 
Sec. 78-44. - Sale of aerosol paint to minors. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if, with criminal negligence, he sells aerosol paint to a minor. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution that the minor falsely represented himself to be 17 years old or older by displaying an apparently valid state driver's license or identification card issued by the State Department of Public Safety containing a physical description consistent with his appearance for the purposes of inducing the person to sell him aerosol paint. 
(Ord. No. 79-2008, § 1, 12-16-2008) 
Sec. 78-45. - Furnishing aerosol paint to minor. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if, with criminal negligence, he purchases aerosol paint for or gives or makes available aerosol paint to a minor. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution that the person was the minor's adult parent, guardian, or spouse, or an adult in whose custody the minor was committed by a court, and the person was visibly present when the minor possessed or used the aerosol paint product. 
(Ord. No. 79-2008, § 1, 12-16-2008) 
Sec. 78-46. - Possession of aerosol paint and graffiti implements by minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to possess aerosol paint of any sort or character. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to possess any graffiti implement while on any school property or in areas immediately adjacent to school property upon public property or upon private property without prior written consent of the owner or occupant of such private property. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution that at the time of possession the minor was accompanied or supervised by a parent or guardian, a teacher in connection with a bona fide school project, or a supervisor during the minor's regular employment. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution that the minor possessed the graffiti implement on the property at which he lives. 
(e)  It is a defense to prosecution that the possession occurred as part of an organized event sponsored or supervised by the city, a school, a church, or some other officially recognized entity. 
(Ord. No. 79-2008, § 1, 12-16-2008) 
Sec. 78-47. - Possession of graffiti implement on city property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement while in or upon any public facility, transportation vehicle, park, playground, swimming pool, recreation facility, or other public building or structure owned or operated by the city or while in or within 50 feet from an underpass bridge abutment, storm drain, or similar type of infrastructure, unless authorized by the city. 
(Ord. No. 79-2008, § 1, 12-16-2008) 
Sec. 78-48. - Responsibility of a parent or guardian. 
    A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits or by insufficient control allows the minor to create graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 79-2008, § 1, 12-16-2008) 
Sec. 78-49. - Owner responsibility and graffiti removal program. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to permit graffiti to remain on his property, except where: 
(1)  The graffiti is located on transportation infrastructure; or 
(2)  The removal of the graffiti would create a hazard for the person performing the removal. 
(b)  Prior to any enforcement or removal efforts by the city, the building and code administrator or his designee shall inform a property owner in writing that the city will remove the graffiti from the owner's property free of charge and shall request that the property owner give written permission for removal and release the city, its contractors, and/or volunteer personnel from liability in the performance of the graffiti abatement program by completing a permission and release from liability form. 
(c)  Should the property owner give written permission for the city to remove the graffiti, the city may remove the graffiti free of charge. No enforcement or lien efforts shall be undertaken against a property owner who has given written permission for the city to remove the graffiti. 
(d)  If the city informs a property owner in writing of the removal free of charge in accordance with this section and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," or the property owner fails to respond to the city's request for written permission to remove the graffiti within 30 calendar days of the date such permission is requested, the property owner will be deemed to have refused the offer. 
(e)  If the property owner refuses the offer of removal free of charge, the building and code administrator or his designee shall serve the property owner with written notice to abate graffiti from the property within 15 calendar days after the date the notice is received. The notice to abate the graffiti shall be given: 
(1)  Personally to the owner in writing; 
(2)  By letter sent by certified mail addressed to the property owner at the property owner's address as contained in the records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or 
(3)  If personal service to the owner of the property cannot be obtained under subsection (e)(1) or (e)(2) of this section, then by: 
a.  Publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city; 
b.  Posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the notice relates; or 
c.  Posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the notice relates. 
(f)  If the building and code administrator or his designee mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with this section and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered delivered. 
(Ord. No. 79-2008, § 1, 12-16-2008; Ord. No. 47-2009, § 1, 8-4-2009) 
Sec. 78-50. - Content of notice to owner. 
(a)  The notice provided to an owner described in section 78-49 shall include the following: 
(1)  The date and nature of the graffiti, to include a description of the graffiti detailing the color and approximate size and location of the graffiti; 
(2)  The physical location of the property on which the graffiti exists by street address or lot and block number; 
(3)  The name of the owner. 
(b)  If a property owner wishes to have the city remove graffiti, whether the owner has received a notice for the graffiti or not, the owner shall: 
(1)  File a police report with the police department; 
(2)  Give written permission and release the city, its contractors, and/or volunteer personnel from liability in the performance of the graffiti abatement program by completing a permission and release from liability form; and 
(3)  Pay a fee as established by separate ordinance to the city in advance for the cost of materials and labor for graffiti abatement. 
(Ord. No. 79-2008, § 1, 12-16-2008; Ord. No. 47-2009, § 1, 8-4-2009) 
Sec. 78-51. - Failure to abate graffiti. 
    If the graffiti is not removed by the owner within 15 calendar days after the date the notice is received, the city may, without further notice, make entry upon the property by it, its contractors and/or volunteer personnel, and remove the graffiti. If the city removes the graffiti after notice is given and the 15th calendar day after the date of the notice has passed, the expenses of removal in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the city will be charged to the property owner for the expense of removal and a lien may be filed against the property. 
(Ord. No. 79-2008, § 1, 12-16-2008; Ord. No. 47-2009, § 1, 8-4-2009) 
Sec. 78-52. - Assessment of expenses; liens. 
(a)  The city may assess the expenses of removal incurred by the city for the abatement of graffiti pursuant to section 78-51 against the real property on which the graffiti abatement was done. 
(b)  To obtain a lien against the property for expenses incurred under section 78-51, the building and code administrator, on behalf of the city, must file a statement of expenses with the county clerk of the county in which the property is located. The statement of expenses must contain: 
(1)  The name of the property owner, if known; 
(2)  The legal description of the property; and 
(3)  The amount of expenses incurred under section 78-51. 
(c)  A lien described by subsection (b) of this section attaches to the property on the date on which the statement of expenses is filed in the real property records of the county in which the property is located and is subordinate to: 
(1)  Any previously recorded lien; and 
(2)  The rights of a purchaser or lender for value who acquires an interest in the property subject to the lien before the statement of expenses is filed as described by subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 79-2008, § 1, 12-16-2008; Ord. No. 47-2009, § 1, 8-4-2009) 
Secs. 78-53-78-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CURFEW FOR MINORS 

Sec. 78-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Curfew hours means: 
(1)  11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday, until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and 
(2)  12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday. 
    Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term "emergency" includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
    Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
    Guardian means: 
(1)  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with which a minor has been placed by a court. 
    Minor means any person under 17 years of age. 
    Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation, operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term "operator" includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
    Parent means a person who is: 
(1)  A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person; or 
(2)  At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian in writing to have the care and custody of a minor. 
    Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
    Remain means to: 
(1)  Linger or stay; or 
(2)  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises. 
    Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Code 1966, § 20-11(a); Ord. No. 22-2001, § 1, 3-12-2001; Ord. No. 35-2018, § 1, 8-7-2018) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-62. - Unlawful conduct and defenses. 
(a)  A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(b)  A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits or by insufficient control allows the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(c)  The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution pursuant to this section that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence; 
(7)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop; 
(8)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; 
(9)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with the Texas Family Code; or 
(10)  Attending an activity supervised by adult sponsors taking responsibility for the minor and each minor has written permission from a parent or guardian to attend the activity; the activity is supervised by an adult sponsor throughout the length of the activity so that a minor may not leave the premises or establishment where the activity is held without a parent, guardian or other adult individual to whom a parent or guardian has given written permission to take the minor from the activity's premises. All ingress and egress to the facility must be controlled by the adult sponsor throughout the duration of the activity to ensure that all minors are in the premises where the activity is held. 
(e)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (c) of this section that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(Code 1966, § 20-11(b); Ord. No. 35-2018, § 1, 8-7-2018) 
Sec. 78-63. - Enforcement. 
    Before taking any enforcement action under this division, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this division unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense is present. 
(Code 1966, § 20-11(d); Ord. No. 35-2018, § 1, 8-7-2018) 
Secs. 78-64-78-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEX OFFENSES 

Sec. 78-81. - Certain persons prohibited from residing near schools. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Childcare facility means a facility which provides care, training, education, custody or supervision for at least seven children who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for part of the 24-hour day, at least three days per week, whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges for the services it offers. 
    City park means any outdoor facility located on public property that is intended for recreation and is open to the public. 
    Continuously resided means to live at a residence without a break or interruption in residency of more than 30 consecutive days. The following non-exclusive list of examples do constitute a break in residency: 
(1)  Incarceration in jail or prison for more than 30 consecutive days; 
(2)  Moving to a different residence with the intent of setting up one's residence at that location; or 
(3)  Notification to a government entity of one's residence at a different address. 
    Public or private youth center means any recreational facility or gymnasium that: 
(1)  Is intended primarily for use by persons who are 17 years of age or younger; and 
(2)  Regularly provides athletic, civic, or cultural activities. 
    Reside means to live, dwell, abide, stay, or lodge for a period of more than one day. 
    School means a private, public, or charter elementary or secondary school. 
(b)  This section applies only to a person who is: 
(1)  Required to register as a sex offender under Texas Ann. C.C.P. art. 62.001 et seq., because of a reportable conviction or adjudication involving a victim younger than 17 years of age; or 
(2)  Civilly committed as a sexually violent predator under Texas Health and Safety Code § 841.001 et seq., and subject to outpatient treatment and supervision under that chapter. 
(c)  A person to whom this section applies may not negligently reside within 1,000 feet of a school, childcare facility, public or private youth center, or city park, as measured in a straight line from the nearest property line of the residence to the nearest property line of the school, childcare facility, youth center, or city park. 
(d)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution pursuant to this section that a person residing within 1,000 feet of a school, childcare facility, youth center, or city park: 
(1)  Established the residence prior to April 4, 2006, and continuously resided at said residence after said date; 
(2)  Is under the age of 18 years; 
(3)  Is residing at the residence at the time the school, childcare facility, youth center, or park is established or extended to within 1,000 feet of the residence; or 
(4)  Is an inpatient at a licensed medical facility or at a state-operated medical or mental health institution. 
(Ord. No. 23-2006, § 2, 4-4-2006; Ord. No. 41-2006, § 1, 6-6-2006) 
Sec. 78-82. - Manifesting purpose of engaging in prostitution. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term "known prostitute or panderer" means a person who, within one year previous to the date of arrest for violation of this section, has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted of prostitution, promotion of prostitution, aggravated promotion of prostitution, or compelling prostitution. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or remain in a public place or adjacent to a public place, in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting, or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution. 
(c)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such purpose is manifested are that such person is a known prostitute or panderer and/or repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop or engages passersby in conversation or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by hailing, waving of arms, or any other bodily gesture. 
(d)  No arrest shall be made for a violation of this section unless the arresting officer first affords such person an opportunity to explain such conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating this section if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. 
(Code 1966, § 20-25) 
Chapter 82 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to provide for, regulate and maintain public improvements, § 7(h). 
State Law reference- Parks and other recreational and cultural resources, Texas Local Government Code § 306.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 82-1-82-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARK BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Park boards, Texas Local Government Code § 306.0011 et seq. 

Sec. 82-26. - Created; composition; salary. 
    There is created a Park Board for the city composed of 11 members, who shall each be a city resident and shall serve without pay. 
(Code 1966, § 22-13; Code 2001, § 82-26) 
Sec. 82-27. - Appointment; vacancies; removal. 
(a)  Members of the Park Board shall be appointed by the city council, and they shall serve for terms of three years and thereafter until their successors are appointed and qualified. Terms shall expire on December 31. The terms of the members shall be staggered so that the terms of four members shall expire on December 31 of one year, the terms of four other members shall expire on December 31 of the next year, and the terms of the three remaining members shall expire on December 31 of the next year. 
(b)  All vacancies on the board shall be filled by the city council and shall be for the unexpired term of the vacating member. 
(c)  Any member of the Park Board may be removed from office at any time by a five-sevenths majority vote of the city council without any reason being given therefor. 
(Code 1966, § 22-14; Code 2001, § 82-27) 
Sec. 82-28. - Organization and rules of procedure. 
(a)  During the month of January of each year, the Park Board shall elect one of its members chair, one vice-chair and one secretary, and their terms of office shall be for one year. 
(b)  The Park Board shall make its own rules regarding time and place of holding its meetings. Special meetings may be called from time to time by the chair, vice-chair or city manager. In calling a special meeting of the board, each member shall be notified if possible. 
(c)  Six members shall constitute a quorum. 
(d)  When the chair is present at a meeting, the chair shall preside or appoint another member to preside. If the chair is absent and the vice-chair is present, the vice-chair shall preside or appoint another member to preside. If neither the chair nor the vice-chair is present, those present may select one of their number temporary chair and proceed with the meeting. 
(Code 1966, § 22-15; Code 2001, § 82-28) 
Sec. 82-29. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The Park Board shall act in an advisory capacity to the director of parks and recreation. 
(b)  The Park Board shall recommend a long-range park improvement program, recommend a recreational system, and encourage public interest in the municipal park system. 
(c)  The Park Board shall act in an advisory capacity to the city manager in the solution of the various problems which may arise from time to time and shall make such recommendations regarding the management of the parks to the city manager. 
(d)  The Park Board shall seek the aid and cooperation of all civic organizations in the city to encourage city beautification and to beautify the highway entrances to the city. 
(e)  The Park Board shall recommend to the city council passage of ordinances regarding parks and recreation. 
(Code 1966, § 22-16; Code 2001, § 82-29) 
Secs. 82-30-82-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 82-56. - Established. 
    The rules and regulations in this article are established for the government and protection of the city's public parks and playgrounds. 
(Code 1966, § 22-1(a); Code 2001, § 82-56) 
Sec. 82-57. - Additional enforcement. 
    Compliance with the rules and regulations in this article is a condition of the use of the city's public parks and playgrounds. A person found by a city peace officer or employee of the city's Parks and Recreation Department to have violated these rules and regulations may be ejected from the park by said city employee, and it shall be unlawful for any person so ejected to reenter on the same day. 
(Code 1966, § 22-1(b); Code 2001, § 82-57) 
Sec. 82-58. - Driving vehicles or animals in parks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or propel any vehicle or motor vehicle or drive any horse or other large animal in, over or through any park or trail, excepting upon paved streets or driveways, or to drive or propel along or over any park drives, trails, or parkways any heavy laden vehicles or any vehicles carrying merchandise, goods, material or rubbish or any moving van or truck. 
(Code 1966, § 22-1(a)(2); Code 2001, § 82-58) 
Sec. 82-59. - Injuring property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or deface any structure, monument, statue, vase, fountain, wall, fence, railing, vehicle, bench, tree, shrub, fern, plant, flower or other property in any public park or playground. It shall further be unlawful to mine or drill for oil, gas or other minerals on the surface of any public park in the city. 
(Code 1966, § 22-1(a)(3); Code 2001, § 82-59; Ord. No. 79-2009, 10-20-2009) 
Sec. 82-60. - Parking on park roads. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon any paved park road or drive when official signs giving notice thereof are duly erected. 
(Code 1966, § 22-1(a)(6); Code 2001, § 82-60) 
Sec. 82-61. - Prohibited projectiles in parks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in any park, except in an area specifically designated for such activity, to: 
(1)  Shoot or launch arrows, bullets, pellets, bolts, rocks, or other projectiles from a bow, crossbow, firearm, compressed air gun, cannon, or slingshot; 
(2)  Discharge or launch model rockets, fireworks, or other combustion-propelled devices; or 
(3)  Practice or play golf. 
(Code 2001, § 82-61; Ord. No. 51-2012, § 1, 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 82-62. - Sales of goods or wares. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within a park or playground to sell or offer for sale any goods or wares. 
(Code 1966, § 22-1(a)(8); Code 2001, § 82-62) 
Sec. 82-63. - Signs and other advertising devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or erect any structure, sign, bulletin board, post, pole or advertising device of any kind whatever in any park or playground or to attach any notice, bill, poster, sign, wire, rod or cord to any tree, shrub, fence, railing, post or structure therein. However, the city council may permit erection of temporary decorations on occasions of public celebration or holidays. 
(Code 1966, § 22-1(a)(9); Code 2001, § 82-63) 
Sec. 82-64. - Tethering or pasturing animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to tether or pasture any cow, horse, mule or domestic animal in or upon any park or playground. 
(Code 1966, § 22-1(a)(10); Code 2001, § 82-64) 
Sec. 82-65. - Walking, standing or sitting on flowerbeds, monuments, fountains or railings. 
    It shall be unlawful to walk, stand or sit on any border, flowerbed, monument, vase, fountain, railing or fence in any park or playground. 
(Code 1966, § 22-1(a)(11); Code 2001, § 82-65) 
Sec. 82-66. - Radio-controlled model aircraft. 
    Radio-controlled model aircraft shall not be flown in Lake Wichita Park west of the existing concrete runway, as extended, or within 500 feet of either of the softball backstops located east of the runway, as extended, when any such backstop is being used. 
(Code 1966, § 22-1(a)(12); Code 2001, § 82-66) 
Sec. 82-67. - Closing of parks during certain hours. 
    All city-owned parks within the city, except for those located at Lake Arrowhead, shall be closed every day from 12:00 midnight until 5:00 a.m. It shall be unlawful for anyone to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in such parks during such period when they are closed. However, if anyone applies for permission to carry out an activity in a park during such hours and the director of parks and recreation determines that such activity will not create a disturbance or public nuisance, the director shall have authority to issue a special permit for such activity. 
(Code 1966, § 22-3; Code 2001, § 82-67) 
Sec. 82-68. - Possession, consumption of alcoholic beverages in parks. 
(a)  The possession of alcoholic beverages and the consumption of alcoholic beverages in any park in the city and in all public street rights-of-way abutting any such park is prohibited. 
(b)  There is exempted from the operation of subsection (a) of this section alcoholic beverages at the Weeks Park municipal golf course if: 
(1)  The alcoholic beverage is purchased from the city or other entity licensed to sell alcoholic beverages on the premises; or 
(2)  The possession or consumption is at an event or function approved in advance by the city manager. 
(c)  There is exempted from the operation of subsection (a) of this section any function held in the picnic shelter or the Log Cabin at Lucy Park or the picnic shelter at Weeks Park when such picnic shelter is reserved for such function with the Parks and Recreation Department in advance and the director of parks and recreation has authorized the consumption of alcoholic beverages at such function. The Parks and Recreation Department shall authorize such consumption unless the persons seeking such authority have, in the past, been guilty of breaches of the peace. 
(Code 1966, § 22-4; Code 2001, § 82-68) 
Sec. 82-69. - Prohibited activities around waterfalls. 
    No person shall walk, skate or ride a bicycle, scooter or skateboard off the paved trails and steps connecting to the waterfalls between the I-44 service road on the east and a point 200 feet west of the waterfalls. No person shall climb the ornamental rockwork around the waterfalls or ride a bicycle, roller skates, scooter or skateboard on the switchback trail leading up to the observation area on the top of the waterfalls or on the paved steps immediately west of the waterfalls. No person shall ride a bicycle, roller skates, scooter or skateboard on the trail around the pond in Lucy Park off Terrace Drive. It shall be unlawful for any person who is riding a bicycle, roller skates, scooter or skateboard on a park trail in any city park to fail to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians on such park trail. 
(Code 1966, § 22-5; Code 2001, § 82-69) 
Secs. 82-70-82-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LAKES AND RIVERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 82-96. - Scope of article. 
    The rules and regulations in this article are established for governing and protecting the public while engaged in aquatic sports and boating on the lakes owned or controlled by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 22-27; Code 2001, § 82-96) 
Sec. 82-97. - Swimming in certain areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to swim or bathe in any ornamental water fountains, ponds, streams or lakes situated in any city parks within the city, except Lake Wichita and the areas of Lake Arrowhead which are not designated as a no swimming area by subsection (b) of this section. It shall also be unlawful for any person to permit any animal to wade, bathe or swim in ponds in Lucy Park and all public fountains situated within the city. 
(b)  The area from the spillway at Lake Arrowhead to a point 2,000 feet downstream shall be designated a no swimming area. The Department of Parks and Recreation may post appropriate signs to designate such areas as no swimming areas. 
(Code 1966, § 22-31; Code 2001, § 82-97) 
Sec. 82-98. - Fishing in Lucy Park pond. 
    Fishing in Lucy Park pond is prohibited. An appropriate sign shall be erected within the park indicating that fishing in the pond is unauthorized. 
(Code 1966, § 22-32.1; Code 2001, § 82-98) 
Sec. 82-99. - Camping near Lake Wichita. 
    No person shall camp within 200 feet of the edge of Lake Wichita at the spillway level or within 200 feet of the canal. 
(Code 1966, § 22-34; Code 2001, § 82-99) 
Sec. 82-100. - Parking on Lake Wichita Dam. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or park a motor vehicle on the Lake Wichita Dam except city, county, and state vehicles and such others as are authorized by the director of public works. 
(Code 1966, § 22-40; Code 2001, § 82-100) 
Sec. 82-101. - Dumping of refuse, trash or debris in Wichita River. 
    No person shall deposit, place or dump or cause to be deposited, placed or dumped any trash, refuse, debris, dead animals, tin cans, worn out automobiles or parts thereof or any waste materials of any kind or character upon the banks or in the bed of the Wichita River within the corporate city limits. 
(Code 1966, § 17-24; Code 2001, § 82-101) 
Sec. 82-102. - Pollution of lakes. 
(a)  The term "litter" shall mean garbage, including animal and vegetable wastes, resulting from the preparation, cooking and consumption of food; and trash, including boxes, crates, cloth, paper, cans, bottles, and any other refuse or debris and specifically including moss, weeds, or other marine vegetation growths which may cut loose and set adrift in the course of attempting to kill off such growth. 
(b)  There shall not be dumped, thrown, drained or discharged, directly or indirectly, into the city water supply any sewage, industrial waste, oil, effluent, waste, gas, liquid, herbicide, pesticide, litter, soil, solid, or other matter of a nature, or in quantities, or in a concentration that by itself, or in conjunction with any other such matter, does or tends to render the waters of the city water supply unfit or undesirable for use as a domestic, agricultural, industrial, or commercial source or supply of water, or that does, or tends to cause the waters to become unsanitary, odorous, polluted, discolored, or contaminated, or that does, or tends to render such waters undesirable or unfit for recreational purposes. The doing of any act prohibited hereby shall hereafter be referred to as "pollution." The term "pollution" refers to water quality criteria as established by the State Natural Resources Conservation Commission or as determined by the director of the Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public Health District or his/her designated representative. 
(c)  Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code § 217.042, each of the acts prohibited hereby is declared to be a public nuisance and unlawful; and any person committing any act prohibited hereby, or failing to do any act required by this section, shall be guilty of violating the provisions of this section. 
(Code 2001, § 82-102; Ord. No. 82-2000, § 2, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 40-2001, § 1, 5-1-2001) 
State Law reference- Authority to enforce nuisance prohibitions within 5,000 feet outside the city limits, Texas Local Government Code 217.042. 
Secs. 82-103-82-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOATS AND BOATING 

Sec. 82-131. - Securing of boats. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave a boat unattended on any lake owned or controlled by the city unless such craft is secured to a dock, anchor, buoy or boathouse. 
(Code 1966, § 22-57; Code 2001, § 82-131) 
Sec. 82-132. - Underwater obstructions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, on any waters owned or controlled by the city, to drive, place, put or erect any post, stake, pipe, pier, float or obstruction unless the top of the obstruction shall extend at least one foot above the high water mark. 
(Code 1966, § 22-58; Code 2001, § 82-132) 
Sec. 82-133. - Trotlines, nets and gang hooks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, on any waters owned or controlled by the city, to place, set or put trotlines, gang hooks or fish nets in any area except a no skiing area. 
(Code 1966, § 22-59; Code 2001, § 82-133) 
Secs. 82-134-82-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SOFTBALL COMPLEX 

Sec. 82-161. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish standard operating procedures and policies for the use of the city softball complex for private tournament rentals and practices. 
(Code 1966, § 22-90(a); Code 2001, § 82-161) 
Sec. 82-162. - Responsibility. 
    It is the responsibility of the softball complex renter to ensure that the contents of this article are adhered to by all parties involved in the tournament. In addition to these procedures, those teams and individuals registered in the Parks and Recreation Department city leagues must adhere to the adult softball league rules and regulations, available in the Parks and Recreation office. 
(Code 1966, § 22-90(b); Code 2001, § 82-162; Ord. No. 11-2002, § 1, 2-5-2002) 
Sec. 82-163. - Tournaments. 
(a)  The program coordinator will be responsible for scheduling and coordinating all tournaments to be held at the softball complex. Tournaments must be scheduled at least one month in advance of the requested dates. 
(b)  Tournament size and play shall be limited to a minimum of 36-team double elimination and a maximum of 65 games round robin. Tournaments and events of lesser size may be held, with approval of the parks and recreation director, but are subject to relocation to another city facility up to two weeks prior to the requested tournament date, if the complex is needed to host a larger tournament meeting the 36-team requirement. 
(c)  Tournament play will be conducted on Friday, Saturday, and Sunday. Requests for alternate or additional days must be approved by the program coordinator. 
(d)  Renters of the softball complex may exercise the option to close the city-operated concession stand during the period of rental for the purpose of selling food and drink items from a portable trailer. Renters exercising this option shall comply with all applicable Health Department regulations and shall enter into an agreement with the city which shall provide a payment to the city from the renter of not less than 16 percent of the gross receipts derived from the sale of food or drink from the renter's concessions, or the renter may elect to have the city operate the concession and pay the renter 50 percent of the net profit. 
(e)  The renter or the renter's team members assisting with the tournament, or anyone under the renter's direction or with the renter's knowledge shall not attempt to perform any major or extensive field repairs. During inclement weather, burning, dragging, digging, or hauling of soil to make fields playable without permission or supervision of the athletic coordinator will not be permitted. If a tournament is rained out, provisions have been made so that, in most cases, the tournament can be made up during an open weekend set aside. 
(f)  Reservation procedures shall be as follows: 
(1)  All deposits must be paid by either cashier's check, money order, accepted credit card, or in cash. 
(2)  Beginning on the first Monday in December of each year, tournament directors may begin requesting dates for holding tournaments on a first come, first served basis. At this time, tournament directors will execute a reservation contract. They must designate the kind of tournament to be conducted and pay a reservation security deposit as established by separate ordinance. This deposit is to ensure a tournament is held on the dates reserved. If, before 30 days of 12:00 noon on Tuesday prior to the tournament, the tournament director informs the program coordinator the tournament has been cancelled, 85 percent of the deposit will be refunded. After this time the deposit will be forfeited. If the tournament materializes, the tournament director then must pay, by 12:00 noon on Tuesday prior to the tournament, a cleanup, damage and loss deposit as established by separate ordinance which, upon completion of the tournament, satisfactory inspection by the Parks and Recreation Department and financial settlement by the tournament director, will be returned along with the reservation security deposit. Any loss, cleanup or damage costs will be deducted from the deposit. 
(3)  For those persons who cannot reserve a date because it has already been reserved, a waiting list will be maintained in the office of the program coordinator. If a reserved tournament is cancelled, persons on the waiting list will be contacted in chronological order. After a person on the waiting list has been contacted, within 24 hours the person must make a deposit as established by separate ordinance with the Parks and Recreation Department to cover reservation security. The person will have until 12:00 noon Tuesday, two weeks prior to the tournament, to cancel if enough teams cannot be obtained in order to receive a full deposit refund. Subsection (g)(2) of this section shall then apply. If the first person on the waiting list declines the date which has become available, the next person in line will be contacted. Persons on the waiting list will hold their position until moved to the reservation board. They will not move to the bottom of the list. 
(g)  A copy of the tournament bracket must be submitted to the program coordinator and the following fees paid no later than 12:00 noon Wednesday, the week of the scheduled tournament: 
(1)  Scorekeeper's booths/meeting room rental. A rental fee and damage deposit as established by separate ordinance is required. The deposit will be returned in full or in part upon inspection by the program coordinator. 
(2)  Field rental. Field rental shall be as established by separate ordinance per field per day. This cost covers field preparation at the beginning of each day, materials, and restroom cleanup. 
(3)  Light use fee. The light use fee shall be established by separate ordinance and charged per hour of light utilization per field per night. The starting time for light fees shall be 6:00 p.m. October through March, and 8:00 p.m. April through September. 
Note- If, upon inspection by the program coordinator at the completion of the tournament, any damage has been caused to the facility by tournament participants or spectators, the tournament director will be charged for the actual cost of repairs. 
(h)  There will be no curfew in effect at the complex; however, sufficient time must be set aside for maintenance between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. The maintenance time must be coordinated with the program coordinator upon submittal of brackets. 
(i)  The Parks and Recreation Department will prepare the fields prior to each day's play. Preparation includes dragging, watering, marking and leveling. 
(j)  Any additional maintenance work required for a tournament will require a charge in addition to the rental fee to cover labor expenses. 
(k)  All equipment used during the tournament belonging to the Parks and Recreation Department must be returned to its proper location on the morning of the first working day immediately following the tournament. 
(l)  Collection of admission fees and sale of items not in conflict with the city concession sales, as determined and approved by the director of parks and recreation, is permitted; however, the renter must pay to the city by the next working day, in cash, cashier's check, money order or Visa/MasterCard, the following percentage of gross sales: 
(1)  The city will receive ten percent of gross sales collected in admission fees, entry fees, registration fees and for donations in lieu thereof collected at the complex. 
(2)  The city will receive five percent of gross sales involving programs, clothing, amusements, artwork, souvenirs, etc. 
(m)  Signs and advertising will be permitted by the renter at the softball complex if displayed in a tasteful manner. Requests must be submitted in detail, including locations and methods of posting, to the parks and recreation director for approval. Signs and advertising must be attached by rope or string only. No tape, tacks or nails are permitted to affix signs. All signs, advertising, rope or string must be removed upon completion of the rental period. 
(n)  The renter shall adhere to these policies. Failure to abide will affect future consideration of complex rental to the renter. 
(Code 1966, § 22-91; Code 2001, § 82-163; Ord. No. 11-2002, § 1, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 12-2006, § 1, 2-7-2006; Ord. No. 73-2009, § 1, 10-6-2009; Ord. No. 13-2010, 3-2-2010) 
Sec. 82-164. - Practices. 
(a)  Reservations of available fields at the softball complex must be made in person at the Parks and Recreation athletic office from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, from the second full week of February to the last full week of October. 
(b)  Teams will not be permitted to make more than one reservation per weekday and one reservation per weekend. 
(c)  Reservations for Monday may be made on the previous Friday. Reservations for any day of the week may be made Monday through Friday of that week. 
(d)  Persons may come to the Parks and Recreation office on any weekday to inquire about field availability for that evening and, if available, may reserve it, provided they have not previously made a reservation for that week. 
(e)  Practices will be limited to 11/2 hours per day per team. Practice times are as follows: 
5:30 p.m.-7:00 p.m. 
7:00 p.m.-8:30 p.m. 
8:30 p.m.-10:00 p.m. 
All teams must relinquish the field at the ending time of their reservation, not later. 
(f)  All teams will be given either a reservation card or receipt of payment upon making the reservation in the athletic office. This card/receipt must be in the team's possession during practice and presented to city staff upon request for verification. Teams practicing without a valid reservation must vacate the field when asked. 
(g)  Practices unable to be held due to inclement weather or light failure will be rescheduled upon presentation of the reservation card/receipt to the Parks and Recreation office within three working days of the canceled practice. If playing field conditions are questionable due to rain, the program coordinator will make the final decision on practices. 
(h)  Practice fees shall be as established by separate ordinance. Charges must be paid at the time reservations are made. 
(i)  All four fields at the complex will be available for practice reservations at the times listed in subsection (e) of this section. These fields will not be available for reservation if they are scheduled for city league or tournament games or extensive maintenance. 
(j)  Teams making practice reservations are subject to cancellation at any time for usage other than practice. Teams being canceled will have the choice of the following: 
(1)  Being relocated to a park athletic field, if available; 
(2)  Being rescheduled at the complex or a park athletic field upon presentation of the reservation card/receipt to the Parks and Recreation office within three working days of cancellation; or 
(3)  If a fee was paid, refund in full will be made. 
(Code 1966, § 22-92; Code 2001, § 82-164; Ord. No. 66-2001, § 1, 7-17-2001; Ord. No. 11-2002, § 1, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 12-2006, § 1, 2-7-2006) 
Sec. 82-165. - Rules of conduct. 
(a)  No alcohol is to be brought on the premises of the softball complex. 
(b)  Beer is not permitted on the field or player benches. 
(c)  Smoking will not be allowed on the field or on player benches. 
(d)  Profanity, vulgarity, unnecessary roughness, or misconduct of any kind will not be permitted at the complex. The renter is responsible for controlling or reporting any problems immediately to the police. Failure to do so will affect future rentals to the renter. 
(Code 1966, § 22-93; Code 2001, § 82-165; Ord. No. 11-2002, § 1, 2-5-2002) 
Sec. 82-166. - Player equipment. 
(a)  Players are permitted to wear tennis, rubber sole or plastic turf-type cleated shoes at the softball complex. 
(b)  Metal spiked shoes are not permitted in the complex (except fast pitch tournaments). 
(c)  Players will not be permitted to play barefoot or without shirts. 
(d)  Players may wear approved shorts such as Bermuda or lower thigh length. Cutoffs, jogging, gym or tennis shorts are not permitted. 
(e)  Teams must be in uniform in that game jerseys must be the same basic color and trim with numbers permanently affixed on the back, which shall not exceed two digits and which shall be a minimum of six inches high. No duplicate numbers are permitted. 
(Code 1966, § 22-94; Code 2001, § 82-166) 
Sec. 82-167. - Vehicles in designated areas. 
    When official signs are erected indicating no vehicles in certain areas in or around the softball complex, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1966, § 22-95; Code 2001, § 82-167) 
Secs. 82-168-82-221. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SCOTLAND PARK RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK 

Sec. 82-222. - Scope. 
    This article is established as the regulations governing the use of Scotland Park Overnight Recreational Vehicle Park. 
(Code 1966, § 30-10.3(a); Code 2001, § 82-221) 
Sec. 82-223. - User fee. 
    The user fee at the Scotland Park RV Park shall be per site and established by separate ordinance. Checkout is at 2:00 p.m. The recreational vehicle and/or tow vehicle license number shall be recorded on the envelope provided, and the envelope, with the fee, shall be deposited in the designated box. Said user fee shall be placed within the collection box immediately upon occupation of a space at the RV park. 
(Code 1966, § 30-10.3(a)(1); Code 2001, § 82-223; Ord. No. 59-2004, § 1, 8-3-2004; Ord. No. 77-2008, § 1, 12-2-2008) 
Sec. 82-224. - Limitations on use. 
    By order of the city-county public health unit, the Scotland Park Overnight Recreational Vehicle Park may be used only by recreational vehicles that have water- and sewage-holding capabilities due to the lack of public restrooms. 
(Code 1966, § 30-10.3(a)(2); Code 2001, § 82-224) 
Sec. 82-225. - Usage requirements. 
(a)  Vehicles must be parked only in designated spaces at the Scotland Park Overnight Recreational Vehicle Park. 
(b)  Vehicles may not be left unattended for more than 24 hours. 
(c)  Maximum park usage is 72 hours per two-week period; provided, however, a request for an extension for a specific number of days may be requested from the Parks and Recreation Department. Such request will be granted unless the park is full and extended stay would not be in the best interest of the city. 
(d)  Campsites accommodate one family or party unit of not more than eight persons. 
(e)  Persons under 18 years of age may stay overnight only if they are accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or with the parent's or guardian's written permission. 
(Code 1966, § 30-10.3(a)(3); Code 2001, § 82-225) 
Sec. 82-226. - Sanitation and refuse. 
(a)  All garbage, papers, cans, bottles and rubbish must be disposed of in containers provided for the disposal thereof or removed from the area in the Scotland Park Overnight Recreational Vehicle Park. 
(b)  The drainage of gray water from any vehicle is prohibited. 
(c)  The disposal of any body waste in or on any portion of the recreational vehicle park, other than in the sanitary dump station provided for that purpose, is strictly prohibited. 
(Code 1966, § 30-10.3(a)(4); Code 2001, § 82-226) 
Sec. 82-227. - Peace and quiet. 
    In order to maintain peace and quiet for the enjoyment of the campers at the Scotland Park Overnight Recreational Vehicle Park, the following activities are prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. daily: 
(1)  Excessive noise from entertainment equipment which would disturb persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
(2)  Vehicle traffic, except for emergency purposes only. 
(3)  Persons conducting themselves in such a manner as to disturb campers who are sleeping. 
(Code 1966, § 30-10.3(a)(5); Code 2001, § 82-227) 
Sec. 82-228. - Rules of conduct. 
    The following general regulations shall be enforced for the Scotland Park Overnight Recreational Vehicle Park: 
(1)  No person shall light or build an open fire on the premises. Only charcoal-kindled fires in grills are permitted. 
(2)  No alcoholic beverages may be consumed on the premises. 
(3)  Public nudity or disrobing is prohibited. 
(4)  Solicitation of funds, distribution of circulars, assemblies and demonstrations and the sale of items is prohibited unless permission is given by the director of parks and recreation. 
(5)  Loaded firearms are prohibited. 
(6)  All pets must be on a leash or confined. 
(Code 1966, § 30-10.3(a)(6); Code 2001, § 82-228) 
Secs. 82-229-82-234. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SKATE PARK 

Sec. 82-235. - Established. 
    The rules and regulations in this article are established for the government and protection of the city's Skate Park. 
(Code 2001, § 82-235; Ord. No. 42-2008, § 1, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 82-236. - Compliance. 
    Compliance with the rules and regulations in this article is a condition of the use of the city's Skate Park. A person found by a city peace officer or employee of the city's Parks and Recreation Department to have violated these rules and regulations may be ejected from the park by said city employee, and it shall be unlawful for any person so ejected to reenter on the same day. 
(Code 2001, § 82-236; Ord. No. 42-2008, § 1, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 82-237. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Helmet means a head covering certified to an appropriate safety standard. For a person riding a bicycle, the term "helmet" means a CPSC-certified helmet. For a person using a skateboard or in-line skates, the term "helmet" means an ASTM F-1492-certified helmet. 
    Motorized mobility device means a device designed for transportation of a person with physical disabilities that: 
(1)  Has three or more wheels; 
(2)  Is propelled by a battery-powered motor; 
(3)  Has not more than one forward gear; and 
(4)  Is not capable of speeds exceeding eight miles per hour. 
    Outside obstacle means any ride feature that is not part of the permanent, concrete Skate Park, including, but not limited to, portable or makeshift ramps. 
    Skate Park means all areas of the park, including the parking lot, sidewalks, grassy areas, landscaped areas and the Skate Park surface. 
    Skate Park surface means both the shaped and flat concrete areas of the Skate Park. The phrase excludes the sidewalks and parking lot area. 
(Code 2001, § 82-237; Ord. No. 42-2008, § 1, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 82-238. - Closing of Skate Park during certain hours. 
(a)  The Skate Park shall be closed from every day from 12:00 midnight to 8:00 a.m. and during any time when signage is posted closing the Skate Park for cleaning or maintenance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in such Skate Park during such period when it is closed. However, if anyone applies for permission to carry out an activity in the Skate Park during such hours, and the director of parks and recreation determines that such activity will not create a disturbance or public nuisance, the director shall have authority to issue a special permit for such activity. 
(Code 2001, § 82-238; Ord. No. 42-2008, § 1, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 82-239. - Permitted use of Skate Park. 
(a)  Only skateboards, in-line skates and BMX bicycles without pegs may be used on the Skate Park surface. It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize any other wheeled or non-wheeled apparatus on the Skate Park surface, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Bicycles with bicycle pegs; 
(2)  Sleds; 
(3)  Quad roller skates; 
(4)  Ice skates; 
(5)  Motorized or nonmotorized scooters; and 
(6)  Motorcycles, dirt bikes or all-terrain vehicles. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize a skateboard, in-line skates, a bicycle or any other wheeled or non-wheeled apparatus on surfaces in the Skate Park other than the Skate Park surface and parking lot. The operation of a nonmotorized wheelchair or motorized mobility device by a person with physical disabilities is exempt from this section. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than an agent of the city in the course of his official duties to be on the Skate Park surface during electrical storms, or during the performance of maintenance, or when the Skate Park surface is wet or covered by ice or snow. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to host or participate in any competitive event at the Skate Park unless the event has the prior approval of the Parks and Recreation Department. 
(Code 2001, § 82-239; Ord. No. 42-2008, § 1, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 82-240. - Use of Skate Park by children. 
(a)  No child under six years of age is permitted on the Skate Park surface except during city-approved activities scheduled for that age group. It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian to permit a child under six years of age to be on the Skate Park surface unless the child is attending a city-approved activity scheduled for that age group. 
(b)  Every child over six and under ten years of age on the Skate Park surface must be accompanied by an adult over 17 years of age who is directly supervising the activities of that child. It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian to permit a child over six and under ten years of age to be on the Skate Park surface unless the child is accompanied by an adult over 17 years of age who is directly supervising the activities of that child. 
(Code 2001, § 82-240; Ord. No. 42-2008, § 1, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 82-241. - Helmet required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any wheeled apparatus in the Skate Park unless that person is wearing a helmet. 
(b)  In the case of a child under ten years of age, it shall be unlawful for a parent, guardian, or adult over 17 years of age directly supervising the activities of that child to allow the child to operate any wheeled apparatus in the Skate Park unless that child is wearing a helmet. 
(c)  The operation of a nonmotorized wheelchair or motorized mobility device by a person with physical disabilities is exempt from this section. 
(d)  The lawful operation of a motor vehicle in the Skate Park parking lot is exempt from this section. 
(e)  The lawful operation of a motor vehicle by a city employee in the course of his official duties is exempt from this section. 
(Code 2001, § 82-241; Ord. No. 42-2008, § 1, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 82-242. - Unlawful possession in Skate Park. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess tobacco products, alcoholic beverages or glass containers in the Skate Park. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or unleash an animal on the Skate Park surface. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or utilize an outside obstacle on the Skate Park surface. 
(Code 2001, § 82-242; Ord. No. 42-2008, § 1, 8-19-2008) 
Secs. 82-243-82-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFF-LEASH DOG FACILITY IN LAKE WICHITA PARK 

Sec. 82-250. - Established. 
    The rules and regulations in this article are established for the government and protection of the city's off-leash dog facility in Lake Wichita Park. 
(Code 2001, § 82-250; Ord. No. 15-2011, § 1, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 82-251. - Compliance. 
    Compliance with the rules and regulations in this article is a condition of the use of the city's off-leash dog facility in Lake Wichita Park. A person found by a city peace officer or employee of the city's Parks and Recreation Department to have violated these rules and regulations may be ejected from the park by said city employee, and it shall be unlawful for any person so ejected to reenter on the same day. 
(Code 2001, § 82-251; Ord. No. 15-2011, § 1, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 82-252. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dog means a domesticated animal that is a member of the canine family. 
    Motorized mobility device means a device designed for transportation of a person with physical disabilities that: 
(1)  Has three or more wheels; 
(2)  Is propelled by a battery-powered motor; 
(3)  Has not more than one forward gear; and 
(4)  Is not capable of speeds exceeding eight miles per hour. 
    Off-leash dog facility means the fenced area of Lake Wichita Park accessed by double gate entries and established for the use of owners and dogs that are not leashed. 
    Outside obstacle means any play or training feature that is not part of the permanent off-leash dog facility, including, but not limited to, wading pools, training equipment, and portable or makeshift kennels or cages. 
    Owner means a person who owns or has custody or control of a dog. 
    Showing aggression means growling, barking or snapping more than momentarily, or biting, scratching or attacking for any period of time. 
(Code 2001, § 82-252; Ord. No. 15-2011, § 1, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 82-253. - Hours of off-leash dog facility. 
(a)  The off-leash dog facility shall be closed every day from dusk until dawn and during any time when signage is posted closing the off-leash dog facility for cleaning or maintenance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in the off-leash dog facility during such period when it is closed. However, if anyone applies for permission to carry out an activity in the off-leash dog facility during such hours, and the director of parks and recreation determines that such activity will not create a disturbance or public nuisance, the director shall have authority to issue a special permit for such activity. 
(Code 2001, § 82-253; Ord. No. 15-2011, § 1, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 82-254. - Use of off-leash dog facility. 
(a)  Only dogs accompanied by an owner at least 16 years of age are permitted to be within the off-leash dog facility, whether or not the dog in question is leashed. An owner will only be considered to be accompanying a dog if both the person and the dog are within the fenced confines of the off-leash dog facility, and the dog is in the visible presence of the owner at all times. An owner may not accompany more than two dogs in the off-leash dog facility at any one time. Dogs must wear collars or harnesses bearing a current rabies vaccination tag and a city license tag at all times while in the off-leash dog facility. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring a dog weighing 30 pounds or more into the designated small dog area of the off-leash dog facility. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring a dog weighing less than 30 pounds into the designated large dog area of the off-leash dog facility. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to host or participate in any competitive event at the off-leash dog facility unless the director of parks and recreation determines that such competitive event will not create a disturbance or public nuisance, and issues a special permit for such competitive event. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a dog leashed in the off-leash dog facility. Dog leashes must be removed within the double gate entry and dog released without the leash into the off-leash pen. Only one owner at a time may utilize the double gate entry to leash and unleash a dog. 
(Code 2001, § 82-254; Ord. No. 15-2011, § 1, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 82-255. - Care of off-leash dog facility by users. 
(a)  Owners must immediately clean up and dispose of waste left by any accompanied dog. It shall be unlawful for an owner to leave the off-leash dog facility without first cleaning up and disposing of all waste left by an accompanied dog. 
(b)  Owners must stop any accompanied dog from digging and must fill any holes caused by an accompanied dog. It shall be unlawful for an owner to leave the off-leash dog facility without first filling any holes caused by an accompanied dog. 
(Code 2001, § 82-255; Ord. No. 15-2011, § 1, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 82-256. - Health rules for off-leash dog facility. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring a dog which does not have current rabies vaccination into the off-leash dog facility. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring a dog which has a contagious condition, disease, parasites, or fresh wounds into the off-leash dog facility. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring a female dog in season into the off-leash dog facility, whether or not the female dog in question is leashed. 
(Code 2001, § 82-256; Ord. No. 15-2011, § 1, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 82-257. - Bites, scratches and aggression in the off-leash dog facility. 
(a)  All bites and scratches by a dog within the off-leash dog facility must be reported to the Animal Control Division of the health district. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to report to the Animal Control Division that a dog accompanied by him in the off-leash dog facility bit or scratched a person or another dog within 24 hours of the bite or scratch incident. 
(b)  Dogs showing aggression toward people or other dogs must be removed immediately. It shall be unlawful for an owner to fail to move immediately to leash and remove from the off-leash dog facility any dog showing aggression. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any dog deemed to be a vicious dog or a dangerous dog by any state or local government or agency into the off-leash dog facility. 
(Code 2001, § 82-257; Ord. No. 15-2011, § 1, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 82-258. - Use of off-leash dog facility by children. 
(a)  No child under eight years of age is permitted in the off-leash dog facility except during city-approved activities scheduled for that age group. It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian to permit a child under eight years of age to be in the off-leash dog facility, unless the child is attending a city-approved activity scheduled for that age group. 
(b)  Every child over eight and under 16 years of age in the off-leash dog facility must be accompanied by an adult over 17 years of age who is directly supervising the activities of that child. It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian to permit a child over eight and under 16 years of age to be in the off-leash dog facility unless the child is accompanied by an adult over 17 years of age who is directly supervising the activities of that child, or unless the child is attending a city-approved activity scheduled for that age group. 
(Code 2001, § 82-258; Ord. No. 15-2011, § 1, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 82-259. - Possession unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess food for humans or dogs, including dog treats, tobacco products, alcoholic beverages or glass containers in the off-leash dog facility. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or unleash an animal other than a dog within the off-leash dog facility. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or utilize an outside obstacle in the off-leash dog facility. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a skateboard, skates, a bicycle, a scooter or any other wheeled apparatus in the off-leash dog facility. The operation of a nonmotorized wheelchair or motorized mobility device by a person with physical disabilities is exempt from this section. 
(Code 2001, § 82-259; Ord. No. 15-2011, § 1, 3-15-2011) 
Chapter 86 - PUBLIC LIBRARY 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Detaining library property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to detain any library material or materials belonging to the city public library for 15 days after notice in writing from the library staff, mailed with proper postage affixed in the United States to the last known address provided to the library as the permanent residence of the holder of the library card. The notice shall be given only after the expiration of time by which the policy of the library regulates the period of time the materials may be kept. 
(Code 1966, § 26-8; Code 2001, § 86-1) 
Sec. 86-2. - Gifts and endowments. 
(a)  If gifts and endowments are made for the benefit of the public library, such gifts or endowments shall be used only for the purposes of the library and in accordance with any restrictions established by the donor. Such funds shall be received, maintained and spent in accordance with the policies established by the city's chief accounting officer. 
(b)  Property acquired through gifts or endowments shall become the property of the city unless otherwise provided by the donor. 
(Code 1966, § 26-6; Code 2001, § 86-36) 
Secs. 86-3-86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIBRARY ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 86-31. - Created; composition. 
    There is created and established a Library Advisory Board. This board shall be composed of nine members, each of whom shall be a city resident and who shall serve without pay. In addition, the library administrator, and the president of the Friends of the Library shall serve as nonvoting ex officio members of the board. 
(Code 1966, § 26-1; Code 2001, § 86-31; Ord. No. 24-2017, 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 86-32. - Appointment; terms; vacancies; removal. 
(a)  The members of the Library Advisory Board shall be appointed by the city council and shall hold office for staggered terms of three years. All members' terms shall end on July 31. 
(b)  All vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the city council and shall be for the remainder of the term of the vacating member. 
(c)  No member shall be allowed to hold office for more than two consecutive full terms. 
(d)  A member of the Library Advisory Board shall be automatically removed if the member is absent without cause for three consecutive regularly scheduled meetings. In addition, any member of the Library Advisory Board may be removed at any time by a five-sevenths majority vote of the city council, and no reason need be given for such removal. 
(Code 1966, § 26-2; Code 2001, § 86-32) 
Sec. 86-33. - Organization. 
(a)  The city council shall select from the Library Advisory Board a chair. 
(b)  The Library Advisory Board shall adopt such rules and regulations for the orderly conduct of its affairs as it may see fit, consistent with this chapter and the Charter and other city ordinances. 
(c)  The library administrator shall act as secretary of the board, without additional compensation. The secretary shall keep a record of all transactions of the board and shall provide the board with all information necessary for the performance of its duties. 
(Code 1966, § 26-3; Code 2001, § 86-33) 
Sec. 86-34. - Meetings. 
    Meetings of the Library Advisory Board shall be held at least quarterly, with the dates and times of meetings to be determined by the members of the board. Special meetings of the board may be called from time to time by the chair of the board, the library administrator, the city manager, the mayor, or a majority of the city council. A majority of the total membership, not considering ex officio members, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all matters to be considered by the board. The minutes of all meetings shall be transmitted to the city council. The minutes shall clearly show all actions taken or recommendations made by the board and shall include summaries of minority views where appropriate. 
(Code 1966, § 26-4; Code 2001, § 86-34) 
Sec. 86-35. - Duties. 
    The Library Advisory Board shall have the advisory duty to: 
(1)  Encourage the development of the public library through planning a long range library program and encouraging public interest and support therein. 
(2)  Make from time to time such general studies of library programs and operations as may be useful in keeping the public library efficient and adequate to the needs of the city. 
(3)  Recommend to the library administrator, the city manager, and the city council policies and programs for the advancement and enhancement of the library. 
(4)  Cooperate with all other public and private groups in advancing the best interests of the public library. 
(5)  Provide a means by which citizens may participate in and make recommendations concerning the public library. 
(Code 1966, § 26-5; Code 2001, § 86-35) 
Chapter 90 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Standards of sanitation, Texas Health and Safety Code § 341.001 et seq.; Solid Waste Disposal Act, Texas Health and Safety Code § 361.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garbage means solid waste consisting of putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, handling, and sale of produce and other food products. 
    Municipal solid waste means solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community, commercial, institutional, and recreational activities, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, and all other solid waste other than industrial solid waste as defined in state law. 
    Occupied means reasonably ready for immediate move-in or a structure on the property. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum or similar materials collected from any premises within the city limits. 
    Type I landfill means the standard landfill for disposal of municipal solid waste. 
    Yard waste means leaves, grass clippings and yard debris, brush, including clean woody vegetative material that results from landscaping maintenance and land clearing operations. This does not include stumps, roots, or shrubs with intact root balls. 
(Code 1966, § 17-2; Code 2001, § 90-1; Ord. No. 07-2019, 4-2-2019) 
Sec. 90-2. - City service mandatory for residences. 
(a)  All city residents are required to place all municipal solid waste in receptacles required by article II of this chapter, and the municipal solid waste shall be collected by the City Sanitation Division. The Sanitation Superintendent may waive the requirements of this subsection when the economic and physical conditions justify such waiver. 
(b)  The owner, occupant, tenant, manager or lessee of every home, single-family housing unit, multiple-family housing unit, mobile/manufactured home, apartment complex, condominium, or mobile/manufactured home park shall be billed at the rates set out in division 4 of article II of this chapter for municipal solid waste collection service as long as such premises are occupied or city water service is provided to such owner, occupant, tenant, manager or lessee by a separate city-owned water meter. The billing to the owner or manager of each multiple-family housing unit, or apartment complex, shall include all occupied or unoccupied apartment units not having a separate city-owned water meter. Homes and units that have not yet received a certificate of occupancy or have never been occupied are exempt from the obligation of this subsection to obtain and pay for city-provided municipal solid waste collection service. 
(c)  A mobile/manufactured home park shall be billed based on occupied spaces not having separate city-owned water meter. The mobile/manufactured home park owner shall be required to report the number of occupied spaces to the solid waste supervisor on a quarterly basis. A mobile/manufactured home park may be considered a commercial customer and be served with dumpster service only at the discretion of the Director of Public Works or his designee. 
(d)  RV parks shall be considered commercial customers and be served with dumpster service only. 
(e)  Any person violating any provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as set out by section 1-14. 
(Code 1966, § 17-2.1; Code 2001, § 90-2; Ord. No. 12-2011, § 1, 2-15-2011; Ord. No. 07-2019, 4-2-2019) 
Secs. 90-3-90-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-32. - Schedule. 
(a)  Municipal solid waste situated at residences shall be picked up twice per week. 
(b)  Municipal solid waste services rendered to commercial and industrial areas shall be as needed. Any business operated in a private home shall be placed in the commercial category. 
(Code 1966, § 17-12; Code 2001, § 90-32; Ord. No. 42-2017, § 1, 10-17-2017) 
Sec. 90-33. - Hauling or disposal of solid waste. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than the Sanitation Division to collect or dispose of municipal solid waste or to haul or transport or convey said municipal solid waste within the city except as specified in this article or as expressly authorized by law. 
(Code 2001, § 90-33; Ord. No. 80-2007, § 1, 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 42-2017, § 1, 10-17-2017) 
Sec. 90-34. - Burning prohibited unless pursuant to permit issued by fire chief. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to burn municipal solid waste or yard waste within the city limits. 
(b)  The fire chief may issue a permit to burn trees and brush to the owner of a property exceeding 50 acres within the city or property located in the floodway (as depicted on the flood insurance rate map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency), conditioned on compliance with the requirements of the fire chief that are shown on the face of said permit and the following provisions: 
(1)  Any open burning shall occur at least 500 feet from any residence; 
(2)  Any open burning shall occur only on the day and time and exact locations shown on the face of the permit; 
(3)  All open burning shall be closely supervised on the site of the burning by personnel equipped to promptly extinguish all fires started pursuant to the permit; 
(4)  All open burning shall be conducted in compliance with all state requirements concerning air pollution, including, but not limited to, Title 30, Environmental Quality, TAC § 111.219(3), (4), (6), and (7) (30 TAC § 111.219(3), (4), (6), (7)); and 
(5)  Open burning material shall consist only of trees, brush, grass, leaves, branch trimmings; and other plant growth generated from the property upon which the burning is occurring. 
(c)  The fire chief may refuse to issue a permit to burn trees and brush if the fire chief determines that open burning pursuant to said permit will pose an unreasonable risk of conflagration, danger to neighboring property, air pollution, or other danger to health or safety. 
(d)  It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section and the open burning provisions of the Fire Code adopted by this Code, including section 307 of the Fire Code, that a person was burning in compliance with all conditions of a permit to burn trees and brush issued pursuant to this section. 
(e)  This section and the remainder of this Code is found to be consistent with the Texas Clean Air Act (see Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 382, subch. E, Authority of Local Governments) and Title 30, Environmental Quality, TAC § 111.219 (3), (4), (6) and (7) (30 TAC § 111.219(3), (4), (6), (7)). 
(Code 1966, §§ 17-18, 27-1; Code 2001, § 90-35; Ord. No. 69-2011, § 1, 12-6-2011; Ord. No. 42-2017, § 1, 10-17-2017) 
Editor's note- ; Ord. No. 42-2017, § 1, adopted October 17, 2017, repealed the former § 90-34 and renumbered the former § 90-35, as § 90-34, as herein set out. The former § 90-34 pertained to deposits on streets or alleys; use of sanitary landfill required and derived from Code 1966, § 17-17; Code 2001, § 90-34. 
Secs. 90-35-90-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RECEPTACLES 

Sec. 90-61. - Preparation of wastes for collection. 
    The city will not collect municipal solid waste or organic recycling material where it is not prepared for collection and placed as designated by this division. 
(Code 1966, § 17-13; Code 2001, § 90-61) 
Sec. 90-62. - Required. 
(a)  Each owner, occupant, tenant or lessee receiving automated curbside collection shall be provided a suitable refuse container by the city. Each owner, occupant, tenant or lessee is responsible for keeping the container in a clean and sanitary condition. The City Sanitation Division will make all necessary repairs to the container that may be required from normal use. 
(b)  Each owner, occupant, tenant or lessee receiving automated curbside collection shall utilize the container provided by the City Sanitation Division. One replacement container will be provided at no charge unless it is determined by the Sanitation Division supervisory staff that the container was lost, stolen or destroyed due to abuse or neglect. All municipal solid waste must be placed completely inside the container and the lid tightly closed prior to collection. The sanitation superintendent shall determine those residences that continually exceed the single container volume (96 gallons) and make arrangements for them to receive a secondary container. Fees and charges are established by separate ordinance. 
(c)  Each owner, occupant, tenant or lessee receiving alley collection refuse service shall place the household refuse within the three cubic yard container provided by the city. Each user of the system shall endeavor to keep the container lid closed so that flies and insects may not have access to the solid waste contained therein. It shall be unlawful for anyone to use an alley container unless such person is a resident in that city block backing onto the alley or an agent or employee of a person in the block. 
(d)  Any customer requesting container system service shall provide adequate access to the container site, as approved by the sanitation superintendent. Each user of the system shall bag his trash and garbage to prevent blowing litter and keep the container lid closed so that flies and insects may not have access to the solid waste contained therein. If at any time the requested container service level is determined to be inadequate to meet required service demands, the sanitation superintendent shall have the authority to increase the number of containers and/or frequency of collections. Containers must be properly loaded with doors closed for pickup to occur. The customer shall be responsible for the cleanliness around the container and shall ensure boxes (cardboard/wood) are broken down prior to being placed in the container. 
(Code 1966, §§ 17-3, 17-4; Code 2001, § 90-62; Ord. No. 100-2001, § 1, 10-16-2001) 
Sec. 90-63. - Maintenance. 
    The commercial and residential containers for municipal solid waste collection shall be kept in a sanitary condition and closed tightly at all times so that flies and other insects may not have access to the municipal solid waste contained therein. 
(Code 1966, § 17-5; Code 2001, § 90-63; Ord. No. 100-2001, § 1, 10-16-2001) 
Sec. 90-64. - Placement for city collectors. 
(a)  Municipal solid waste automated containers, container racks, or permanent or semi-permanent container holders of any nature shall not be allowed to remain on the curb, except during collection as set forth below. 
(b)  Containers for automated curbside collection shall be placed at a point adjacent to the street on the side so designated by the Sanitation Division to facilitate cost effective and efficient service. Containers shall be placed at the curb no earlier than 5:00 p.m. on the day before the scheduled collection day and no later than 7:00 am on the scheduled day of collection. Every resident shall ensure the container is at least five feet from any horizontal obstruction as well as 12 feet from any vertical obstruction. Containers shall be removed from the curb no later than 11:59 p.m. on the day of collection. 
(Code 1966, § 17-6; Code 2001, § 90-64; Ord. No. 100-2001, § 1, 10-16-2001; Ord. No. 34-2004, § 1, 4-20-2004) 
Sec. 90-65. - Meddling with receptacles; pilfering, scattering contents or junking. 
    The meddling with municipal solid waste cans, recycling containers, yard waste or rubbish receptacles or in any way pilfering, scattering contents or junking in any alley or street within the city limits is prohibited. 
(Code 1966, § 17-7; Code 2001, § 90-65; Ord. No. 100-2001, § 1, 10-16-2001) 
Sec. 90-66. - Organic recycling. 
    Any owner, occupant, tenant or lessee may request automated 96-gallon organic recycling containers, which will be supplied by the City Refuse Division free of charge. The organic recycling containers will be serviced once per week by the city for a monthly fee established by separate ordinance. Persons served by an organic recycling automated container shall place yard waste and other organic materials, such as, kitchen food waste and paper products: junk mail, cardboard, newspaper, paper plates and cups and magazines completely within the container with the lid closed. The following items are not allowed in the organic recycling container: plastic bags, dirt, rocks, concrete, metal, coals, hot ash, styrofoam, rubber, metal, plastic, glass, aluminum cans, bottles, garden hoses, spray cans, paint, solvents, flammable liquids or oil. Only citizens participating in the organic recycling program may receive free compost during distribution events. Each customer seeking free compost must provide a valid I.D. and their current water bill showing the recycling charge. 
(Code 1966, § 17-8; Code 2001, § 90-66; Ord. No. 100-2001, § 1, 10-16-2001; Ord. No. 54-2008, § 1, 9-16-2008; Ord. No. 80-2008, § 1, 12-16-2008) 
Secs. 90-67-90-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPECIFIC WASTES 

Sec. 90-96. - Removal of construction, remodeling or cleanup waste. 
(a)  Rock, scrap building materials, or other trash resulting from construction or remodeling or from a general cleanup of vacant or improved property or from sizeable amounts of trees, brush, or debris cleared from property will not be removed by the city as a regular service but may be done for the owner on payment of extra fees at a rate established by separate ordinance. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, all types of trash, refuse and rubbish will be carried by the city during various cleanup campaigns proclaimed by the city. During a cleanup campaign, no additional charges will be levied for picking up properly bundled or bagged trash, municipal solid waste or rubbish. 
(c)  During the term of any cleanup campaign in which no charge will be levied, it shall be unlawful for the user to load or allow to be loaded in the trailer or disposer anything that will extend above the height or beyond the side of it. 
(d)  Material described in subsection (a) of this section that is hauled in a truck or trailer having a gross vehicle weight of 12,500 pounds or higher shall be disposed of at the city sanitary landfill only. 
(Code 1966, § 17-14; Code 2001, § 90-96; Ord. No. 100-2001, § 1, 10-16-2001; Ord. No. 72-2005, § 1, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 80-2007, § 2, 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 54-2008, § 2, 9-16-2008; Ord. No. 54-2011, § 2, 9-20-2011; Ord. No. 42-2017, § 2, 10-17-2017) 
Sec. 90-97. - Disposal of animal wastes. 
    Manure from private stables, cowlots, poultry yards, pigeon lofts, or other animal habitats must be kept in a separate suitable container and not dumped in the alleys or retained on the premises to become a nuisance. It shall be disposed of by the owner of the premises. It shall be the duty of the superintendent of sanitation to see that the removal is promptly done when so ordered. 
(Code 1966, § 17-15; Code 2001, § 90-97) 
Secs. 90-98-90-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RATES, CHARGES AND BILLING PROCEDURE 

Sec. 90-126. - Charges for city collection. 
    The rates for gathering and removal of municipal solid waste from all premises within the city shall be calculated as determined by separate ordinance. 
(Code 1966, § 17-19; Code 2001, § 90-126; Ord. No. 35-2001, § 1, 4-17-2001; Ord. No. 101-2001, § 1, 10-16-2001; Ord. No. 72-2005, § 2, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 80-2007, § 3, 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 54-2008, § 3, 9-16-2008; Ord. No. 54-2011, § 3, 9-20-2011; Ord. No. 70-2012, § 1, 12-4-2012) 
Sec. 90-127. - Due date of charges. 
    All sanitary service charges shall be due and payable as provided in section 106-281. 
(Code 1966, § 17-20; Code 2001, § 90-127; Ord. No. 54-2011, § 3, 9-20-2011) 
Sec. 90-128. - Commercial landfill and transfer station charges. 
    The charges for commercial landfill and transfer station charges shall be established by separate ordinance. 
(Code 2001, § 90-128; Ord. No. 89-2002, § 3, 10-15-2002; Ord. No. 10-2005, § 1, 2-15-2005; Ord. No. 72-2005, § 3, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 13-2011, § 1, 2-15-2011; Ord. No. 54-2011, § 3, 9-20-2011) 
Secs. 90-129-90-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LANDFILL 

Sec. 90-156. - Unauthorized entry. 
    City employees and city officers directing operation of the city functions and persons delivering municipal solid waste to the city sanitary landfill are allowed on the site. All other persons are prohibited therefrom, and any such person shall be prosecuted as a trespasser. 
(Code 1966, § 17-21; Code 2001, § 90-156) 
Sec. 90-157. - Unauthorized separation or collection of material. 
    All junk and other material at the sanitary landfill is the city's property, and no person is allowed to separate and collect, carry off or dispose of such material except under the direction of the designated officials of the Sanitation Division. 
(Code 1966, § 17-22; Code 2001, § 90-157) 
Secs. 90-158-90-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RECYCLABLE MATERIALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Recyclable material, Texas Health and Safety Code § 361.001 et seq. 

Sec. 90-186. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nonprofit organization means any entity which has been declared as tax exempt under rule 26 United States Code Annotated section 501c. 
    Recyclable materials means materials which are capable of being reprocessed or being manufactured and diverted to reuse and include, without limitation, office and high-grade paper, corrugated paper, newspaper, telephone books, cardboard, plastics, aluminum, various metal, ferrous metal, glass and tin. 
    Recyclable materials transporter means any entity who collects recyclable materials from recycling containers not located on the transporter's place of business, for the purpose of transportation off site. 
    Recycling container means any container authorized by the director of public works for the collection of recyclable materials, which is suitable for emptying by automated equipment by a recyclable materials transporter. 
    Recycling site means a specific geographic site where one or more recycling containers may be placed and maintained by a licensee. 
    Solid waste means all putrescible and all nonputrescible solid, semisolid and liquid waste, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, certain industrial waste, demolition and discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered treated or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, and other discarded solid or semisolid waste. 
(Code 1966, § 17-67; Code 2001, § 90-186) 
Sec. 90-187. - Inspection and enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the superintendent of sanitation to make regular inspection trips at regular intervals to determine whether recycling containers are being properly maintained and to further determine if the containers are of the kind required by this article. The director of the Department of Health shall assist in the enforcement of this article and shall have the power to make inspections to determine whether or not the recycling container material is being properly collected, transported and disposed of in a sanitary manner. 
(Code 1966, § 17-72; Code 2001, § 90-187) 
Sec. 90-188. - License and permit required. 
(a)  License required for recycling sites. No person, except duly authorized city agents and employees, shall place and maintain recycling containers in the city without a written license for each recycling site issued by the Department of Public Works and without having paid the required fee as prescribed in subsection (b) of this section. Open top containers of 12 cubic yards or larger, placed at industrial sites for purposes of recycling of industrial process scrap, shall not require a license under this article. 
(b)  License fee. The license fee for each recycling site shall be established by separate ordinance. Every nonprofit organization that places recycling containers located on property owned by the nonprofit organization shall be exempt from this license fee. A maximum of 200 recycling site licenses shall be issued at any point in time. 
(c)  Permit required for transporter. No recyclable materials transporter, except duly authorized city agents and employees, shall collect or transport recyclable materials without a permit issued by the Department of Public Works. Such permit shall list the location and number of recycling sites the permittee is serving under the permit. As a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit for collection of recyclable materials by a recyclable materials transporter, a surety bond in the amount of $2,000.00 and a certificate of insurance for property liability in the amount of $500,000.00 shall be executed by the person desiring such recycling permit. The bond shall be with a corporate surety company licensed to do business in the state. The bond shall be made payable to the city and shall indemnify the city against any damage to public property, public liability and any cleanup that may arise as the result of activities related to recycling pursuant to this article. Such surety bond shall also be conditioned upon and liable for strict compliance with the terms of this article and the permits granted under this article. 
(Code 1966, § 17-68; Code 2001, § 90-188) 
Sec. 90-189. - Revocation of license and/or permit. 
    Any license or permit issued under this article may be revoked by the director of public works for a violation of this article or any city ordinance by the licensee or the operator of any vehicle of such licensee. Any such license issued may be revoked for failure to comply with the regulations pertaining to collection of recyclable materials within the city. Revocation shall be effected by written notice by the director of public works to the licensee or permittee, and the director shall immediately take up the license or permit revoked. Within five days after revocation, an appeal may be made to the city council for reinstatement. The city council shall give the applicant a hearing, and after a hearing shall sustain the action of the director of public works if it finds as a fact that the applicant or an operator of his vehicle committed the act for which the director revoked the license. Otherwise, the action of the director shall be reversed, and the applicant's license shall be reinstated. 
(Code 1966, § 17-73; Code 2001, § 90-189) 
Sec. 90-190. - Container requirements. 
    It shall be the duty of every person operating under a recycling license within the city to place leakproof recyclable containers that conform to a color scheme as directed by the director of public works. Every recycling container licensed pursuant to section 90-188 shall have a logo placed on the container that identifies the licensee and the licensee's place of business and phone number in letters at least one inch in height which are clearly legible and readable. No recycling container may exceed 30 cubic yards or be less than three cubic yards in volume. 
(Code 1966, § 17-69; Code 2001, § 90-190) 
Sec. 90-191. - Maintenance of containers. 
    The person issued a license pursuant to this article shall keep the recycling containers in a sanitary condition and closed tightly at all times so that rodents, flies or other insects may not have access to the materials contained therein. The cover shall only be removed while emptying additional recyclable material therein or while the person collecting the recyclable materials is removing such materials or unloading the materials for collection. The contents of all receptacles shall be so protected that the wind cannot blow out and scatter the contents over the city streets, alleys or premises. All areas where a recycling container is maintained must be kept in a sanitary and clean manner. 
(Code 1966, § 17-70; Code 2001, § 90-191) 
Sec. 90-192. - Placement of receptacles. 
    No recycling receptacle shall be placed or be maintained in the public right-of-way. A list of locations of all recycling receptacles shall be filed with the director of public works, listing the number and location of all recycling receptacle units. 
(Code 1966, § 17-71; Code 2001, § 90-192) 
Sec. 90-193. - Disposal of non-recyclable materials in containers. 
    No person shall deposit, place or dump or cause to be deposited, placed or dumped any solid waste in any of the designated recycling containers placed and maintained within the city. 
(Code 1966, § 17-74; Code 2001, § 90-193) 
Secs. 90-194-90-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ORGANICS, COMPOST AND MULCH 

Sec. 90-221. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Vendor means any organization that has registered with the Sanitation Division. 
    Wichita Falls Organics means those materials, compost or mulch produced at the Wichita Falls Organics recycling facility. This is the trade name used for marketing purposes. 
    Wichita Falls Organics recycling facility means the portion of the Wiley Road Landfill permitted and used for composting operations. 
(Code 1966, § 17-76; Code 2001, § 90-221; Ord. No. 42-2017, § 2, 10-17-2017) 
Sec. 90-222. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who violates any section of this article will have his registration revoked and may be prohibited from future purchases of Wichita Falls Organics. 
(Code 1966, § 17-82; Code 2001, § 90-222; Ord. No. 42-2017, § 2, 10-17-2017) 
Sec. 90-223. - Criteria. 
    Wichita Falls Organics meets or exceeds all Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) criteria for use by the general public. It is the responsibility of the vendor to provide the customer with information on how to properly use Wichita Falls Organics. 
(Code 1966, § 17-81; Code 2001, § 90-223; Ord. No. 42-2017, § 2, 10-17-2017) 
Sec. 90-224. - Registration. 
    Required. No person, except duly authorized city agents and employees, shall distribute or market materials generated by the Wichita Falls Organics recycling facility without a registration on file with the Sanitation Division. The purpose of registration is to ensure that all vendors marketing this product comply with all applicable federal, state and local rules and regulations. Failure to comply with these rules and regulations is grounds for revoking the vendor's registration. 
(Code 1966, § 17-77; Code 2001, § 90-224; Ord. No. 42-2017, § 2, 10-17-2017) 
Sec. 90-225. - Purchase of Wichita Falls Organics. 
    Wichita Falls Organics may be purchased during normal operating hours at the landfill office. The purchase price will be established by separate ordinance. A limited quantity of material may be available and will be available on a first come, first served basis. Although the city will make every effort to maintain adequate inventory, the availability of compost or related products is not guaranteed or assured. 
(Code 1966, § 17-78; Code 2001, § 90-225; Ord. No. 80-2008, § 2, 12-16-2008; Ord. No. 42-2017, § 2, 10-17-2017) 
Sec. 90-226. - Resale of Wichita Falls Organics. 
    Registered vendors may resell Wichita Falls Organics at their discretion. Resale must be made under the Wichita Falls Organics trade name and logo, both of which must be displayed on all packaged or bagged compost. Premixing these materials with other soils and selling under another trade name is prohibited. The vendor will provide the city with a list of users when required by TCEQ regulations, and will provide these users any notices required by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). 
(Code 1966, § 17-79; Code 2001, § 90-226; Ord. No. 42-2017, § 2, 10-17-2017) 
Sec. 90-227. - City use of Wichita Falls Organics. 
    Wichita Falls Organics may be used by city departments at the discretion of the sanitation superintendent. Use on city property, demonstration sites and as samples is authorized. Other uses, as determined by the sanitation superintendent, are also authorized. 
(Code 1966, § 17-80; Code 2001, § 90-227) 
Chapter 94 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate and control the use, for whatever purpose, of the streets and other public places of the city, § 7(p). 
State Law reference- Exclusive control over public grounds, Texas Local Government Code § 282.001; municipal streets, Texas Transportation Code § 311.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 94-1. - Unlawful congregating on streets and obstructing pedestrian traffic. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to congregate or stand upon any street or sidewalk in the city in such manner and for such length of time as to obstruct or inconvenience pedestrians who may be going to and from in any direction on such streets or sidewalks. It shall be the duty of all persons on the streets or sidewalks to keep up such locomotion as not to impede or discommode others who may be passing in either direction. 
(Code 1966, § 20-19; Code 2001, § 94-1) 
Sec. 94-2. - Washing vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to clean or wash any automobile, buggy, wagon, tractor, truck, or any other vehicle of any kind or character on any street, alley, or sidewalk in the city. 
(Code 1966, § 20-20; Code 2001, § 94-2) 
Sec. 94-3. - Trespass on city property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass upon, enter into or upon any of the property owned or controlled by the city without the consent of the city or some authorized city officer, agent or employee, provided that the term "property," as used in this section, shall not be construed to mean any public highway, street, park or public place in the city. 
(Code 1966, § 20-17.1; Code 2001, § 94-3) 
Sec. 94-4. - Activities on multipurpose events center and grounds. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to skateboard, roller blade, roller skate, bicycle or operate a go-cart on the multipurpose events center (MPEC) grounds and facilities, save and except on the parking lots of the multipurpose events center or in an activity approved by the multipurpose events center director for an organization or individual who reserves the multipurpose events center or its grounds for such purpose. 
(Code 1966, § 20-12; Code 2001, § 94-4) 
Sec. 94-5. - Flying of model airplanes in designated areas only. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fly or operate a model airplane propelled by a motor or engine of any kind or character within the city limits, save and except in an area designated by the Parks and Recreation Department and in accordance with the rules and regulations of such department. 
(Code 1966, § 20-14; Code 2001, § 94-5) 
Sec. 94-6. - Spitting on sidewalk or in public places. 
    It is unlawful for any person to spit or expectorate upon any public sidewalk within the city limits or to spit or expectorate in any depot, opera house, post office, city hall, courthouse or other public building within the city limits or to spit or expectorate upon the floor or walls of any streetcar or other public conveyance within the city. 
(Code 1966, § 20-15; Code 2001, § 94-6) 
Sec. 94-7. - Camping. 
(a)  The term "camp," as used in this section, shall include stopping for the purpose of preparing a meal or for the purpose of remaining overnight, or the erection of a tent or other structure as a place of abode upon a public street or public property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to camp on the streets, alleys and public property within the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to pitch camp or camp upon any property within the city that is privately owned, without first obtaining permission from the owner of such property. 
(Code 1966, § 20-3; Code 2001, § 94-7) 
Sec. 94-8. - Cutting or carrying off shrubbery, trees, bushes or plants. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without the permission of the owner, keeper, or person in charge, to go into or upon any public park, common, street, alley or curb or into or upon any private grounds or premises in the city and dig or pull from the ground or destroy, break, cut or carry away any tree, shrub, bush or plant planted or growing therein. 
(Code 1966, § 20-6; Code 2001, § 94-8) 
Sec. 94-9. - Illegal dumping of refuse. 
    No person shall deposit, place or dump or cause to be deposited, placed or dumped any refuse at a place that is not an approved solid waste receptacle, including on a public street, alley, right-of-way, other public or private property, or into an inland water of the state within the corporate city limits. For this section, "refuse" includes nonputrescible solid waste (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste materials. Combustible refuse includes paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, brush, or similar materials; noncombustible refuse includes glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, and similar materials that will not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600 degrees Fahrenheit to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit). An approved solid waste receptacle is any container or location provided by the city for the purpose of placing refuse and municipal solid waste and including roll-out carts and dumpsters. 
(Code 1966, § 20-7; Code 2001, § 94-9; Ord. No. 35-2015, § 1, 8-4-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 35-2015, § 1, adopted Aug. 4, 2015, changed the title of § 94-9 from "Depositing trash, glass, debris or waste materials" to read as set out. 
State Law reference- Texas litter law, Texas Health and Safety Code § 365.001 et seq. 
Sec. 94-10. - Safety devices required for work over streets and sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to clean the walls or windows or to repair any building over and above the city sidewalks, streets and alleys without first providing himself with a suitable and safe ladder, scaffold or safety belt so as to prevent the falling of such person or any materials being used by such person upon the city sidewalks, streets and alleys. 
(Code 1966, § 27-2; Code 2001, § 94-10) 
Sec. 94-11. - Shrubbery, trees, or vines overhanging streets and sidewalks. 
    Any person owning, occupying or controlling any lot or other land within the corporate city limits upon which there is planted or growing any tree, hedge, bush or vine or owning, occupying or controlling any lot or other land abutting upon any curb within the corporate city limits upon which curb there is planted or growing any tree, hedge, bush or vine shall prune or train the branches or limbs of any such tree, hedge, bush or vine so that any of the branches or limbs projecting over any street, alley, sidewalk or public passageway shall be not less than 12 feet above the surface of such street, alley or public passageway and not less than seven feet above the surface of any sidewalk. 
(Code 1966, § 27-3; Code 2001, § 94-11) 
Sec. 94-12. - Obstructing gutters with trash. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, dump or deposit in the gutter or drainway of any street, sidewalk or alley within the corporate city limits any trash, weeds, grass, tin cans, or other substances in such manner as to obstruct or tend to obstruct the free flow of water through such gutter. 
(Code 1966, § 27-4; Code 2001, § 94-12) 
Sec. 94-13. - Storage of material, equipment, goods, wares or merchandise on streets, sidewalks and alleys. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to store or cause to be stored any building material, equipment, tools, vending machines, popcorn poppers, goods, wares, merchandise, or item of any kind or character upon any street, alley or sidewalk within the city without the consent of the city council, except as authorized by Appendix A - Subdivision and Development Regulations, Section 6.13 and Appendix B - Zoning, Sections 5980-5986. 
(Code 1966, § 27-5; Code 2001, § 94-13; Ord. No. 44-2016, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 94-14. - Duty of property owner for safe condition and repair of sidewalks, curbs and driveways. 
    It shall be the duty of any property owner or person making special use of any sidewalk or curb for ingress or egress purposes, loading elevators, downspout drains or any other specific use of whatsoever kind or character to keep such sidewalks, parkways, curbs and driveways abutting such property in a good and safe condition and free from any defects and hazards of whatsoever kind and character. 
(Code 1966, § 27-6; Code 2001, § 94-14) 
Sec. 94-15. - Motor-assisted scooters. 
(a)  Definition. As used in this section, the term "motor-assisted scooter" means a self-propelled device: 
(1)  With at least two wheels in contact with the ground during operation; 
(2)  With a braking system capable of stopping the device under typical operating conditions; 
(3)  With a gas or electric motor not exceeding 40 cubic centimeters; 
(4)  With a deck designed to allow a person to stand or sit while operating the device; 
(5)  With the ability to be propelled by human power alone; and 
(6)  That does not include a pocket bike or mini-motorbike. 
(b)  Requirement for operation. 
(1)  A motor-assisted scooter may be operated only on a street, highway or alley for which the posted speed limit is 35 miles per hour or less. The vehicle may cross a road or street at an intersection where the road or street has a posted speed limit of more than 35 miles per hour only if the operator walks the vehicle across the street while observing all applicable pedestrian laws. 
(2)  A person shall not operate a motor-assisted scooter on a street or highway during the hours the street or highway is a designated school zone. 
(3)  A motor-assisted scooter may only be operated on a street, highway or alley from sunrise till sunset, as defined by state law. 
(4)  A person operating or riding on a motor-assisted scooter on a street, highway or alley must wear protective headgear at all times. 
(5)  A person operating a motor-assisted scooter on a street, highway or alley must do so following all state provisions applicable to the operation of a bicycle. 
(c)  Adult supervision. 
(1)  A motor-assisted scooter may not be operated on a street, highway or alley by a person younger than ten years of age. 
(2)  A person shall not recklessly allow a child in their care, who is under the age of ten years old, to operate a motor-assisted scooter on a street, highway or alley. 
(Code 2001, § 94-15; Ord. No. 119-2003, § 2, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 92-2005, § 1, 11-15-2005) 
State Law reference- Motor-assisted scooters, Texas Transportation Code § 551.351 et seq. 
Sec. 94-16. - Pocket bike or mini-motorbike. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "pocket bike" or "mini-motorbike" means a self-propelled vehicle that: 
(1)  Is equipped with an electric motor or internal combustion engine having a piston displacement of less than 50 cubic centimeters; 
(2)  Is designed to propel itself with not more than two wheels in contact with the ground; 
(3)  Has a seat or saddle for the use of the operator; 
(4)  Is not designed for use on a highway; and 
(5)  Is ineligible for a certificate of title under by Texas Transportation Code ch. 501. 
(b)  The term "pocket bike" or "mini-motorbike" does not include: 
(1)  A moped or motorcycle; 
(2)  An electric bicycle or motor-driven cycle, as defined by Texas Transportation Code § 541.201; 
(3)  A motorized mobility device, as defined by Texas Transportation Code § 542.009; 
(4)  An electric personal assistive mobility device, as defined by Texas Transportation Code § 551.201; or 
(5)  A neighborhood electric vehicle, as defined by Texas Transportation Code § 551.301. 
(c)  A pocket bike or mini-motorbike shall not be operated on any: 
(1)  Highway, road, street or alley; 
(2)  Path set aside for the exclusive operation of bicycles; or 
(3)  Sidewalk. 
(Code 2001, § 94-16; Ord. No. 92-2005, § 2, 11-15-2005) 
Sec. 94-17. - Golf carts for holiday parcel delivery. 
(a)  From 12:00 midnight on November 15 until 11:59 p.m. on December 31 of each year, an employee or agent of an entity whose primary business is the delivery of parcels may operate golf carts on public highways that have speed limits of not more than 35 miles per hour. Pursuant to Texas Transportation Code § 551.405, golf carts so operated may cross intersections, including a road or street that has a posted speed limit of more than 35 miles per hour, but under no circumstances is a golf cart to be operated pursuant to this section on, at or across an intersection with any of the following roadways: 
(1)  Southwest Parkway; 
(2)  Kell Boulevard East; 
(3)  Kell Boulevard West; 
(4)  Kemp Boulevard; 
(5)  Seymour Highway; 
(6)  Old Jacksboro Highway; 
(7)  Midwestern Parkway; 
(8)  Call Field Road; 
(9)  Fairway Boulevard; or 
(10)  Missile Road. 
(b)  Any golf cart operated pursuant to this section must be equipped with headlamps, tail lamps, reflectors, a parking brake, and mirrors. 
(c)  The operator of a golf cart pursuant to this section must possess a valid drivers' license that authorizes said person to operate a motor vehicle on public highways. 
(d)  The operator of a golf cart pursuant to this section must obey all state and local traffic laws. 
(e)  As used in this section, the terms "golf cart" and "public highway" have the meanings assigned by Texas Transportation Code § 502.001. 
(Code 2001, § 94-17; Ord. No. 72-2011, § 1, 12-20-2011) 
State Law reference- Golf carts, Texas Transportation Code § 551.401 et seq. 
Sec. 94-18. - Street medians. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Medians. A strip of land, whether raised or flush, between the lanes of opposing traffic on a divided street. 
(b)  Generally. 
(1)  Raised medians shall not be allowed except when required by the thoroughfare plan or other government agency. 
(2)  Any required raised median shall be made of solid material that requires no routine maintenance nor designed to contain vegetation including, but not limited to grass, shrubs, or trees. 
(3)  Flush medians shall have the surrounding pavement structure extended across the entire median. The flush median shall be delineated with approved pavement markings. 
(4)  City manager or designee may approve a variance to the items above where circumstances allow. 
(Ord. No. 17-2017, § 1, 6-6-2017) 
Secs. 94-19-94-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION AND REPAIR OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS, CURBS, DRIVEWAYS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 94-41-94-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CURBS AND DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 94-96. - Scope of certain sections. 
    The design standards in sections 94-97 through 94-99 shall govern the location, construction, demolition and/or repair of curbs, gutters, driveway approaches and other construction in the right-of-way of streets or alleys for all property except residential development. 
(Code 1966, § 27-24.1; Code 2001, § 94-96) 
Sec. 94-97. - Construction and repair. 
    Construction and/or repairs of curbs, gutters, driveway approaches and other construction in the right-of-way of streets or alleys shall be in accordance with the latest revision of the city standard specifications in effect at the date of issuance of the permit, which are on file in the office of the Department of Public Works. Construction or repairs not meeting these requirements shall be removed at the expense of the permittee. 
(Code 1966, § 27-24.2; Code 2001, § 94-97) 
Sec. 94-98. - Driveway approaches. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section that the location and angle of a driveway approach in relation to the street or intersection shall be such that a vehicle leaving the abutting property may turn into the lane of traffic moving in the desired direction and be channeled within such lane before crossing the intersection or proceeding along the street and that a vehicle entering the abutting property may turn out of the nearest lane of traffic without interfering with other traffic. 
(b)  Location and angle of intersection. The location and angle of intersections shall be as follows: 
(1)  No driveway approach shall be permitted to encroach upon any municipal facility. However, the relocation of municipal facilities may be authorized by the director of community development if the construction of a driveway approach under section 94-96 through this section shall encroach thereon, and provided that such relocation shall be completed by and at the expense of the applicant and in accordance with specifications provided by the director of community development in the permit issued therefor. 
(2)  At street intersections, no curb cut for a driveway approach shall be permitted within 30 feet of the extended curbline (see plate A). This distance shall be increased to 50 feet at the intersection of two major collectors or higher functional classification streets. The driveway shall be placed to provide a minimum tangent of 20 feet between driveway curb return and street radius. 

(3)  Where sidewalks exist or are to be constructed, the beginning of the driveway approach shall not commence nearer the corner than the inside edge of the sidewalk, and in no case shall it violate the condition of subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(4)  The interior angle formed by the extension of the axis of the driveway approach and the centerline of the street shall fall between 45 degrees and 90 degrees. 
(5)  Adjacent driveway approaches shall be separated by a safety island of 25 feet minimum width as shown on plate A. 
(6)  On interior lots, the tangent point of the driveway curb at the street curbline shall not extend beyond a property line. 
(c)  Driveway approach width. The driveway approach width shall be as follows: 
(1)  Where adjacent owners are using or will use off-street parking as a common parking lot or when there are no physical barriers to prevent the use of the parking area as a common parking lot, the area in question shall be deemed to be one tract devoted to one use for purposes of section 94-96 through this section. 
(2)  The width or throat of a driveway approach shall not be greater than 35 feet for commercial or public establishments, measured at right angles to the axis of the driveway approach, except that a driveway for a service station shall not be greater than 40 feet. 
(3)  Driveway approaches for motor vehicle docks and buildings with vehicle doorways may be as wide as 60 feet. Where more dock space is required, the driveway approach shall be separated by a traffic island meeting the requirements of section 94-96 through this section. Approaches built under this subsection need not be limited as to number of driveway approaches but must comply with all other provisions of section 94-96 through this section. 
(d)  Number of driveway approaches allowed. The number of driveway approaches allowed shall be as follows: 
(1)  Not more than two driveway approaches shall be permitted on any tract with a frontage of 100 feet or less. 
(2)  Not more than three driveway approaches shall be permitted on any tract with frontage of more than 100 feet but less than 300 feet. 
(3)  Not more than four driveway approaches shall be allowed for any tract with more than 300 feet but less than 600 feet. 
(4)  For tracts with frontage in excess of 600 feet, one additional approach may be allowed for each additional 300 feet of frontage in excess of 600 feet. 
(e)  Angle or recessed parking prohibited. Driveway approaches shall not be constructed or used for angle or recessed parking. To qualify for a driveway approach, the approach must provide access to a vehicle doorway, dock, or an off-street parking lot with sufficient room for the vehicle to maneuver and reenter the street front first from the parking lot. 
(f)  Exceptions. It is the intent of section 94-96 through this section that exceptions to subsections (a) through (e) of this section be granted only for extreme circumstances and only when the public interest would be served by such exceptions. The director of public works is authorized to permit those exceptions which meet the requirements of subsections (a) through (e) of this section. 
(g)  Appeals. If the applicant is dissatisfied with the decision of the director of public works, he may appeal such decision to the city council. The city council shall consider all evidence submitted by the applicant and the director of public works and shall make a final decision as to whether or not an exception shall be granted. 
(h)  Effect of noncompliance. If the applicant shall refuse to obey the final decision of the director of public works or the city council, the building inspector shall refuse to issue the applicant a building permit. 
(Code 1966, § 27-24.5; Code 2001, § 94-98; Ord. No. 56-2006, § 1, 7-18-2006) 
Sec. 94-99. - Authority to alter curb cut of adjacent property. 
(a)  Where the use, convenience, and necessity of the public require, the director of community development shall have authority to order the owner or agent in charge of the property adjacent to which subcuts are maintained to alter the curb cut in such manner as he shall find reasonably necessary under the circumstances and, where the nature of the use of the abutting property is changed, to order the owner or agent in charge of such property to alter or construct the curb cuts in such manner as he shall find reasonably necessary under the circumstances. 
(b)  The notice required by this section shall: 
(1)  Require compliance by the permittee within 90 days after the notice is received. 
(2)  Be in writing. 
(3)  Be served upon the permittee by United States registered mail. 
(Code 1966, § 27-25; Code 2001, § 94-99; Ord. No. 56-2006, § 1, 7-18-2006) 
Sec. 94-100. - Requirements for curb and gutter and exceptions. 
(a)  Generally. Curbs and gutters, where required under appendix A, shall be installed by the subdivider on both sides of all interior streets and on the subdivision side of all streets forming part of the boundary of the subdivision. Curbs and gutters shall be constructed to city specifications. 
(b)  Exceptions to curb and gutter requirements for residential developments. 
(1)  Curbs and gutters shall not be required for blocks where 75 percent or more of the combined developed property front footage, including the proposed property front footage, on that side of the block have no curb and gutter. This shall not include subdivisions where new street or new street extensions are being constructed. 
(2)  Curbs and gutters shall not be required where the lot frontage is a minimum of 200 feet, and the lot, tract or parcel is a minimum of two acres, and is on a street frontage where no other curb and gutter exist. If the lot, tract or parcel is subdivided to allow smaller lots, there shall be installed curb and gutter along all frontages that are included in the subdivision and along boundary streets as applicable. This requirement shall apply even if only a portion of the lot frontages following a replatting are less than the minimum allowed. 
(3)  Curbs and gutters shall not be required if exempted or prohibited on rights-of-way owned or under the control of state or federal government entities. 
(4)  Curbs and gutters shall not be required if jointly determined by the Department of Community Development and Department of Public Works that the installation of curb and gutter is technically unfeasible or will not serve the intent of this provision. 
(Code 2001, § 94-100; Ord. No. 56-2006, § 1, 7-18-2006) 
Secs. 94-101-94-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 94-126. - Intent. 
    Sidewalks are intended to provide for safe pedestrian movement. 
(Code 2001, § 94-126; Ord. No. 7-2003, § 1, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 94-127. - Requirements for sidewalks. 
    Any person constructing any improvements for any purpose on a lot or remodeling any improvement when the cost of such remodeling is equal to at least 50 percent of the value of such improvement before remodeling, as determined by the tax appraised value, shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on all streets on which the lot abuts, regardless of the type of construction or proposed use of the facility unless otherwise exempted in this division. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on any street, regardless of classification, designated as a safe school route for schoolchildren by the Traffic Safety Commission. 
(3)  Sidewalks shall be constructed on all streets, regardless of classification, with the construction of any improvements designed and/or modified for use as a commercial and/or industrial establishment unless otherwise provided in this division. If the commercial and/or industrial improvement is to be constructed on a corner lot, sidewalks shall be constructed on all streets on which the lot abuts. Commercial and/or industrial improvements constructed and/or modified within an area-zoned industrial shall meet the requirements for sidewalks as contained in this division. 
(4)  Sidewalks shall be required in all new subdivisions in which new street dedications are proposed within the plat of the subdivision, and along boundary streets as required. 
(5)  Any lot that is considered unbuildable to place a structure upon due to topography, or where there is a requirement for stormwater detention/retention facilities or similar such requirement, or where there is proposed an entryway, park or similar situation, shall have sidewalks installed at the initial phase of development according to provisions in this division. 
(6)  Where a property owner has acquired an adjacent lot within a platted subdivision and has no intent to improve the lot, said property owner shall be required to install sidewalks on such lot within one year, subject to the provisions in this division. 
(Code 2001, § 94-127; Ord. No. 7-2003, § 2, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 94-128. - Sidewalk construction and location. 
(a)  The sidewalk shall have an obstruction-free width of not less than four feet. Where mailboxes, utility poles, streetlights or other obstacles exist, additional width shall be provided to ensure a minimum of a three-foot width for barrier-free access. 
(b)  Sidewalks shall be constructed within the street right-of-way with the edge of the sidewalk one foot from and parallel to the right-of-way. The director of public works may approve an alternate location within the street right-of-way when there exist obstructions, there is a unique subdivision design, where it is necessary to be compatible with existing sidewalks, or under special conditions when the specified location is technically unfeasible. 
(c)  Construction of the sidewalks by the developer or by individual property owners shall be in accordance with standard city specifications. 
(d)  Where any property on one lot is to be developed in phases, the director of community development may exempt an entity from the obligation to install a sidewalk to the extent determined by the director of community development to match the frontage to remain undeveloped or unutilized. 
(Code 2001, § 94-128; Ord. No. 7-2003, § 3, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 36-2011, § 1, 7-19-2011) 
Sec. 94-129. - Exceptions to sidewalk requirements. 
(a)  Sidewalks shall not be required for blocks where 75 percent or more of the combined developed property front footage, including the proposed property front footage, on that side of the block have no sidewalks. This shall not include new subdivisions. 
(b)  Sidewalks shall not be required if the street or road is not classed as a collector street or have a higher classification, according to the thoroughfare plan, and where such street does not have curbs and gutters, nor are there long-range plans for the improvement of the street or road by any government agency. 
(c)  Sidewalks shall not be required for residential developments containing two or fewer dwelling units, where the lot frontage is a minimum of 200 feet, and the lot, tract or parcel is a minimum of two acres. If the lot, tract or parcel is subdivided to allow smaller lots, there shall be installed sidewalks along all frontages that are included in the subdivision and along boundary streets as applicable. This requirement shall apply even if only a portion of the lot frontages following a replatting are less than the minimum allowed. 
(d)  Sidewalks shall not be required if on rights-of-way owned or under the control of other government entities if said governmental entity has objected in writing to the placement of a sidewalk on its right-of-way. 
(e)  Sidewalks shall not be required if jointly determined by the Department of Community Development and Department of Public Works that the installation of sidewalks is technically unfeasible or will not serve the intent of this provision. 
(f)  Sidewalks shall not be required for new construction or modifications to a commercial and/or industrial improvement within an area zoned industrial, and which abuts on an interior industrial street within an area zoned and used as an industrial district. For the purpose of this provision, the term "interior industrial street" is defined as a street that lies wholly within the industrial district and does not abut subdivided or unsubdivided property outside of the industrial district. An interior street shall only provide for circulation within the industrial district and does not provide for access from adjacent areas. 
(Code 2001, § 94-129; Ord. No. 7-2003, § 4, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 56-2006, § 3, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 36-2011, § 2, 7-19-2011) 
Sec. 94-130. - Liability of property owner for defective sidewalks. 
    The abutting property owner or person enjoying the use of any property abutting on a sidewalk or curb that has become defective and resulted in causing damage or injury due to such defective condition, shall be primarily liable in damages for any loss or damage sustained as a result of such defective condition. 
(Code 2001, § 94-131; Ord. No. 7-2003, § 6, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 94-131. - Duty of abutting property owner to repair defective sidewalks. 
    Any sidewalk, parkway, driveway or curb that has become defective and unsafe and hazardous is declared a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for a property owner, after receiving at least 30 days' notice, to fail to repair any street, avenue, public alley, place or square or section or part thereof along which sidewalks, curbs, or driveways as declared a nuisance by the director of public works. Such expense shall be borne by the abutting property owner. 
(Code 2001, § 94-132; Ord. No. 7-2003, § 7, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 94-132. - Notice. 
    A notice signed by the director of public works, which notice may be served by any person designated by the Department of Community Development or Department of Public Works to serve the notice or which notice may be served by mailing by certified mail, return receipt requested, shall be deemed sufficient to accomplish the notification purpose in this section. The notice shall state that the damage to the sidewalk presents a hazardous condition for which the property owner is liable to correct according to city standards, and as required under this section. Such notice shall also state a time period to correct the defect and set the penalty for violation at $200.00 per day; each day the correction is not made past the designated period shall be a separate offense. Additional time may be granted by the Department of Public Works upon showing just cause. 
(Code 2001, § 94-133; Ord. No. 7-2003, § 8, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 94-133. - Duty to prevent sidewalk obstruction. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct a sidewalk within the limits of the city. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner of property abutting on a sidewalk, or the duty of any person enjoying the use of any property abutting on a sidewalk, to ensure that any use of said abutting property does not result in obstruction of a sidewalk. 
(c)  A sidewalk shall be deemed to be obstructed when there is less than a minimum of a three-foot, barrier-free width of pavement, separate from the street, available for safe pedestrian movement. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) of this section that the obstruction is due to: 
(1)  The necessary repair of the sidewalk, adjoining driveway or other feature of the adjoining property by the abutting property owner or person enjoying the use of abutting property. Such repair shall be deemed to be necessary if it is properly permitted or ordered by the director of public works; 
(2)  The necessary repair of any public utility by a government agency or utility company; or 
(3)  An effort by the abutting property owner or person enjoying the use of any property abutting on a sidewalk to prohibit use of a portion of the sidewalk that has become defective and could result in damage or injury due to such defective condition, until such time as the abutting property owner or person enjoying the use of any property abutting on a sidewalk is able to effect repair, as per his duty under section 94-131. 
(e)  Unlawful obstruction of a sidewalk includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Parking a vehicle in a driveway such that the vehicle blocks the portion of the sidewalk that also constitutes a portion of the driveway, and leaves less than a three-foot, barrier-free width of sidewalk available for use; and 
(2)  Piling or allowing the piling of branches, leaves, dirt or other items on the sidewalk such that it becomes obstructed. 
(Code 2001, § 94-134; Ord. No. 105-2007, § 2, 12-18-2007) 
Secs. 94-134-94-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MEDIAN CUTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 94-161. - Duties. 
    The Traffic Division shall perform the evaluation required under sections 94-162, 94-163 and 94-191. The receiving of the application and supervision of the project shall be the responsibility of the director of public works. 
(Code 2001, § 94-161) 
Sec. 94-162. - Locations for installation. 
    Median cuts may be installed only at the following locations: 
(1)  At the intersection of two dedicated streets that meet the criteria set out in section 94-163; and 
(2)  In conjunction with a left turn lane to serve as a common entrance to large traffic volume generators, such as a multicommercial shopping center or an industrial complex. Such traffic generators shall be characterized by a large expanse of parking areas, served by an internal roadway network generally adequate to absorb entering traffic without backups onto the surrounding city streets. The turning movements into entrances to these types of areas usually are quite similar to normal intersectional movements and should be treated as such. Median cuts of this nature will only be allowed after a thorough traffic engineering investigation has determined the feasibility of such cuts and their compliance with all median cut criteria. 
(Code 1966, § 27-33; Code 2001, § 94-162) 
Sec. 94-163. - Criteria for all cuts. 
    Criteria for all median cuts are as follows: 
(1)  The median cut shall be located so that it will leave a minimum of 300 feet of unbroken median strip along the roadway centerline, measured from the near nose of the closest existing median cut to the near nose of the proposed median cut. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the median cut shall include a 12-foot-wide left turn storage bay of a minimum of 50 feet in length, measured from the nose of the median cut, plus a taper no steeper than seven to one. The actual length of the left turn storage bay shall be determined by a traffic study conducted by the Traffic Division. Left turn storage bays for median cuts at street intersections may not be required if the director of community development and the director of aviation, traffic and transportation determine that such storage bays are not necessary at a particular location. 
(3)  Traffic controls, including any signalization, that are deemed necessary by the Traffic Division shall be installed at the median cut in accordance with city requirements. Whenever a proposed traffic signal at a median cut is to be located within 800 feet of an existing traffic signal, it shall be coordinated with the existing signal. 
(Code 1966, § 27-34; Code 2001, § 94-163) 
Sec. 94-164. - Left turn storage bays in existing median cuts. 
(a)  Left turn storage bays shall be constructed in street medians at existing median cuts under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When an owner or developer constructs a large traffic volume generator, such as a multicommercial shopping center or an industrial complex meeting the criteria set out in section 94-162(2) and section 94-191, and traffic entering such development turns left through an existing median cut which has no left turn storage bay. 
(2)  When a subdivider plats a subdivision abutting a street containing a median and the new subdivision contains a street which intersects the abutting street at an existing median cut and traffic will enter the new subdivision street by turning left off the abutting street through the median cut which has no left turn storage bay. 
(b)  Such left turn storage bays shall be 12 feet wide and shall have a minimum length of 50 feet, measured from the nose of the median cut, plus a taper no steeper than seven to one. The actual length of the left turn storage bay shall be determined by a traffic study conducted by the Traffic Division. 
(c)  Such owner, developer or subdivider shall, at his sole expense, have construction plans prepared for the storage bay, which plans must be approved by the director of community development and the director of aviation, traffic and transportation. The construction of all required surface and underground improvements, except installation of traffic signals, shall be performed by a bonded contractor at the sole cost and expense of such owner, developer or subdivider, who shall also make all necessary arrangements for and pay all the costs of the relocation of any existing utilities and improvements that may be required to be relocated. If it is deemed necessary by the Traffic Division that traffic controls, including signalization, be installed, the cost of all such traffic control materials and equipment, plus the cost of engineering design and installation labor, shall be paid to the city by such owner, developer or subdivider. The cost of the engineering design and installation labor pertaining to such traffic controls is determined to be an amount equal to 25 percent of the cost of material and equipment. 
(Code 1966, § 27-38.1; Code 2001, § 94-164) 
Secs. 94-165-94-190. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Cuts Serving Large Traffic Generators 

Sec. 94-191. - Additional criteria. 
    Additional criteria for those median cuts which serve large volume traffic generators are as follows: 
(1)  The driveway which is served by the median cut shall have a peak hour traffic volume in excess of 100 vehicles per hour in one direction during at least ten peak hours per week. 
(2)  The driveway which is served by the median cut shall serve an establishment that has a parking lot area that contains a minimum of 300 vehicular parking stalls. 
(3)  The driveway which is served by the median cut shall serve a property that has a minimum of 300 feet of frontage along the street right-of-way line. 
(Code 1966, § 27-35; Code 2001, § 94-191) 
Sec. 94-192. - Application procedures. 
    The following procedures shall be used in applying for a median cut which serves large volume traffic generators: 
(1)  Formal application for a median cut shall be made in writing to the director of aviation, traffic and transportation. 
(2)  Upon approval by the director of aviation, traffic and transportation and the director of community development, the applicant shall, at his sole expense, have construction plans prepared for the median cut. The geometric design and construction shall meet city requirements. Such plans shall be submitted in the form and number of copies required by the director of community development. Such plans must be approved and endorsed by the director of community development; the director of aviation, traffic and transportation; and the city manager. 
(3)  The applicant shall furnish the city a performance bond with a surety acceptable to the city or cash in lieu of such bond in an amount equal to cover the cost, as estimated by the director of community development, of all improvements required to be installed. Such bond will be released after all construction is completed and accepted by the director of community development and the director of aviation, traffic and transportation. 
(4)  The applicant shall acquire all necessary permits, such as street excavations, sewer connections, etc., required by the city or other agency for installation of the median cut. 
(5)  When all of the requirements of this section have been met, the applicant shall receive a median cut permit from the Department of Community Development. The fee for the median cut permit shall be established by separate ordinance and shall cover the cost of permit processing that will be performed by the Department of Community Development permit office. No construction work shall be commenced on a median cut until the median cut permit has been issued. 
(Code 1966, § 27-36; Code 2001, § 94-192) 
Sec. 94-193. - Costs borne by applicant. 
    The construction of all required surface and underground improvements, except installation of traffic controls, at any median cut which serves a large volume traffic generator shall be performed by a bonded contractor at the sole cost and expense of the applicant. The applicant shall make all necessary arrangements for and shall pay all costs of the relocation of any existing utilities and improvements that may be required to be relocated. Engineering design and the installation of traffic controls at such median cuts shall be performed by the city. The cost of all such traffic control materials and equipment, plus the cost of engineering design and installation labor, shall be paid to the city by the applicant. The cost of the engineering design and installation labor pertaining to such traffic controls is determined to be an amount equal to 25 percent of the cost of material and equipment. 
(Code 1966, § 27-37; Code 2001, § 94-193) 
Sec. 94-194. - Appeal upon denial of application. 
    If an application for a median cut to serve a large volume traffic generator is denied by the city administrative staff and the applicant wishes to appeal such decision, he will notify in writing the director of aviation, traffic and transportation of his intention to appeal within ten days after the denial. The applicant will then present his appeal to the Traffic Safety Commission at its next regular meeting. The recommendation of the Traffic Safety Commission regarding the appeal will be forwarded through the city manager to the city council for its consideration. After the applicant and the administrative staff have been given an opportunity to be heard concerning the matter, the city council shall decide the appeal, and such decision will be final. 
(Code 1966, § 27-38; Code 2001, § 94-194) 
Secs. 94-195-94-220. - Reserved. 
Secs. 94-221-94-255. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, adopted September 5, 2017, repealed Art. II., Div. 6, §§ 94-221-94-227, which pertained to alley paving program procedure and derived from Code 1966, §§ 27-38.2-27-38.8; Code 2001, §§ 94-221-94-227. 
Secs. 94-228-94-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, adopted September 5, 2017, amended Art. III, §§ 94-256-94-258, 94-286-94-289 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 94-256-94-258, 94-286-94-289, pertained to excavations, and derived from Code 1966, §§ 27-39-27-45; Code 2001, §§ 94-256-94-258, 94-286-94-289. 

Sec. 94-256. - Statement of purpose. 
(a)  Public and private uses of public right-of-way for location of facilities employed in the provision of public services should, in the interests of the general welfare, be accommodated; however, the city must ensure that the primary purpose of the rights-of-way, passage of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, is maintained to the greatest extent possible. In addition, the value of other public and private installations, roadways, city utility system, facilities and properties should be protected, competing uses must be reconciled, and the public safety preserved. The use of the public right-of-way corridors by private users is secondary to these public objectives and to the movement of traffic. This article is intended to strike a balance between the public need for efficient, safe transportation routes and the use of public rights-of-way for location of public and private facilities. The article thus has several objectives: 
(1)  To ensure that the public safety is maintained and that public inconvenience is minimized. 
(2)  To protect the city's infrastructure investment by establishing repair standards for the pavement, facilities, and property in the public rights-of-way, when work is accomplished. 
(3)  To facilitate work within the public right-of-way through the standardization of regulations. 
(4)  To maintain an efficient permit process. 
(5)  To conserve and fairly apportion the limited physical capacity of the public right-of-way held in public trust by the city. 
(6)  To establish a public policy for enabling the city to discharge its public trust consistent with the rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition, and technological development. 
(7)  To promote cooperation among the service providers and the city in the occupation of the public right-of-way, and work therein, in order to eliminate duplication that is wasteful, unnecessary or unsightly, lower the service providers' and the city's costs of providing services to the public, and preserve the physical integrity of the streets, alleys, easements and highways by minimizing pavement cuts. 
(8)  To assure that the city can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  This article does not grant any rights to use or occupy the city's right-of-way but is intended to impose reasonable regulations on the use of the public right-of-way by persons authorized by license and hold harmless agreements, franchises and/or by law to place and maintain equipment and facilities within the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-257. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Antenna. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services. 
    Applicable codes. 
(1)  Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization; and 
(2)  Local amendments to those codes to the extent not inconsistent with this chapter. 
    Backfill. The placement of new dirt, select fill, or other material in an Excavation, or the return of Excavated dirt, select fill or other material to an Excavation. 
    City. The City of Wichita Falls, its officers, employees and departments. 
    City engineer. The city engineer or his/her designee(s). 
    Closure. A complete or partial closing of one or more lanes of traffic for any period of time. 
    Collocate and collocation . The installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole. 
    Construction. Any of the following activities performed by any person within a public right-of-way: 
(1)  Installation, reconstruction, laying, placement, repair, upgrade, maintenance or relocation of facilities or other improvements; 
(2)  Modification or alteration to any surface, subsurface or aerial space within the public right-of-way; 
(3)  Performance, restoration, or repair of pavement cuts or excavations; or 
(4)  Other similar construction work. 
    Contractor. A person hired or retained to do construction for a service provider. 
    Decorative pole. A streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to nondiscriminatory municipal codes. 
    Design district. An area that is zoned, or otherwise designated by municipal code, and for which the city maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis. 
    Drainage easement. Easement solely for the conveyance of stormwater and shall not be combined with utility easements and/or access easements 
    Duct or conduit. A single enclosed raceway for cables, fiber optics, wires or other similar facilities. 
    Emergency. Any event which may threaten public health or safety, including, but not limited to, damaged or leaking water or gas piping systems, damaged, plugged, or leaking sanitary sewers or storm sewers, damaged electrical and telecommunications facilities, unsafe overhead pole structures or any other condition that requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities to restore service to a customer. 
    Emergency activity. Circumstances requiring immediate construction or operations to: 
(1)  Prevent imminent damage or injury to the health or safety of any person or to the public right(s)-of-way; 
(2)  Restore service; or 
(3)  Prevent the loss of service. 
    Excavate or excavation. To dig into or in any way remove or penetrate any part of a right-of-way. 
    Facilities. Any and all of the wires, cables, fibers, duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, pipes, connections, underground and overhead passageways and other equipment, structures, plants, and appurtenances and all associated physical equipment placed in, on, or under the public right-of-way of the city. Facilities specifically exclude landscaping materials, irrigation systems and materials used by the United States Postal Service or any other governmental entity. 
    Historic district. An area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district under municipal, state, or federal law. 
    Law. Common law or a federal, state, or local law, statute, code, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance. 
    Macro tower. A guyed or self-supported pole or monopole greater than the height parameters prescribed by Section 284.103 of the Texas Local Government Code and that supports or is capable of supporting antennas. 
    Micro network node. A network node that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches. 
    Municipally owned utility pole. A utility pole owned or operated by a municipally owned utility, as defined by Section 11.003, Texas Utilities Code, and located in a public right-of-way. 
    Municipal park. An area that is zoned or otherwise designated by municipal code as a public park for the purpose of recreational activity. 
    Network node. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term: 
(1)  Includes: 
(a)  Equipment associated with wireless communications; 
(b)  A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and 
(c)  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular collocation; and 
(2)  Does not include: 
(a)  An electric generator; 
(b)  A pole; or 
(c)  A macro tower. 
    Node support pole. A pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node. 
    Pavement cut. An excavation in a sidewalk or improved surface of the public right-of-way to include the street, alley, drive-approaches and parking areas. 
    Permit. A written authorization for the use of the public right-of-way required from a municipality before any person, service provider or contractor may perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project over which the municipality has police power authority. 
    Person. An individual, corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company or association, and other such entity who owns, installs, maintains, or controls facilities or service lines. 
    Pole . A service pole, municipally owned utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole. 
    Private easement. An easement or other real property right that is only for the benefit of the grantor and grantee and their successors and assigns. 
    Public right-of-way. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the municipality has an interest. The term does not include: 
(1)  A private easement; 
(2)  A drainage easement; or 
(3)  The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. 
    Public right-of-way management ordinance. An ordinance that complies with an ordinance that complies with Texas Local Government Code 284, Subchapter C. 
    Public right-of-way rate. An annual rental charge paid by a network provider to a municipality related to the construction, maintenance, or operation of network nodes within a public right-of-way in the municipality. 
    Service line. Line connecting the service provider's utility or meter to the customer's point of utilization or consumption. 
    Service pole. A pole, other than a municipally owned utility pole, owned or operated by a municipality and located in a public right-of-way, including: 
(1)  A pole that supports traffic control functions; 
(2)  A structure for signage; 
(3)  A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and 
(4)  A pole or similar structure owned or operated by a municipality and supporting only network nodes. 
    Service provider. Any person using the public right-of-way including, but not limited to, any wholesale or retail electric utility, gas utility, telecommunications company, cable company, wireless service provider, water utility, storm water utility, wastewater utility, or a person that does not provide wireless services but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider for network nodes, or node support poles, regardless of whether or not the service provider is publicly or privately owned or required to operate within the city pursuant to a franchise. The term "service provider" does not include persons performing installation or maintenance of service lines not owned by a service provider. 
    Thoroughfare. A public right-of-way that is a public traffic arterial or collector street. 
    Transport facility. Each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes. 
    Utility pole. A pole that provides: 
(1)  Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or 
(2)  Services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by Section 51.002, Utilities Code. 
    Wireless service. Any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node. 
    Wireless service provider. A person that provides wireless service to the public. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-258. - Public rights-of-way construction. 
    No person shall commence or continue with the construction of facilities within the public rights-of-way in the city except as provided by the ordinances of the city. All construction activity in public rights-of-way will be in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-259. - Registration of service provider. 
(a)  A service provider with existing facilities within the public right-of-way must register with the city within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter. Any service provider who does not have existing facilities within the public right-of-way and who wishes to install new facilities must first register with the city. Registration shall be in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Prior to registration, a service provider must be either a certificated telecommunications provider under Texas Local Government Code Chapter 283, have a certificate of convenience and necessity under Texas Water Code Chapter 13, have a franchise, interlocal or license agreement with the city or be authorized by state statute to operate facilities within the public right-of-way. Registration shall otherwise be denied. 
(2)  The registration must be on a form furnished by the director of community development and made in the name of the service provider that owns the facilities. The form must be filled out completely and accurately. Any omissions or inaccuracies on the form may be cause for denial of the registration at the city's discretion. 
(3)  If information provided as part of the registration changes, the service provider must inform the director of community development in writing not more than 30 days after the date the change occurs. 
(4)  The service provider shall include the following with the registration: 
a.  The name of the public service provider using the public right-of-way, including any business name, assumed name, or trade name the service provider operates under, or has operated under within the past five years. 
b.  If the public service provider is a certificated telecommunications provider, a copy of the certification issued by the Texas Public Utilities Commission to provide local exchange telephone service. 
c.  A copy of any franchise, agreement or license issued by the city or statute authorizing the service provider to use the public right-of-way. 
d.  The name and mailing address of the officer or agent designated as the person authorized to receive service of process on behalf of the service provider. 
(5)  The service provider must provide proof of insurance and appropriate bonds. The requirements for insurance and bonds are provided in section below. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-260. - Service provider insurance requirements. 
(a)  A service provider shall obtain and maintain insurance throughout the time it has facilities in public rights-of-way. The city reserves the right to review the insurance requirements, and to reasonably adjust insurance coverage and limits when the city attorney determines that changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims history of the industry or the public service provider require adjustment of the coverage. Insurance policies shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
Workers' Compensation and Employer's Liability Insurance 
Workers' Compensation Statutory Limit Employer's Liability $100,000.00 
Each Accident $100,000.00 Disease - Each Employee $500,000.00 Disease - Policy Limit (Employer's Liability not required if policy limit is greater than $10,000,000.00)  
Liability Insurance 
Commercial General Liability $1,000,000.00 
Per Occurrence (No standard coverages are to be excluded by endorsement) The policy shall provide blanket contractual liability insurance for all written contracts and shall include coverage for products and completed operations liability, independent contractor's liability; coverage for property damage from perils of explosion, collapse or damage to underground utilities, commonly known as XCU coverage.  
Automobile Liability Insurance 
Commercial Auto 
Liability Policy $500,000.00 Combined 
Single Limit (Including coverage for owned, hired, and non-owned autos)  
Umbrella Liability 
(Following Form and 
Drop Down Provisions Included) $5,000,000.00 
Each Occurrence  
(b)  In addition to the above requirements, the insurance required under this section shall: 
(1)  Be written with the City of Wichita Falls as an additional insured, except on worker's compensation and employer's liability insurance, using an endorsement Form GC 20 26 or broader; 
(2)  Provide for a 30-day notice of cancellation to the city, for nonpayment of premium, material change, or any other cause; 
(3)  Be written through companies duly authorized to transact that class of insurance in the State of Texas. Insurance is to be placed with insurers with a Best Rating of no less than A-:VII; 
(4)  Waive subrogation rights for loss or damage so that insurers have no right to recovery or subrogation against the City of Wichita Falls, it being the intention that the required insurance policies shall protect the city, its officers, and employees and be primary coverage for all losses covered by the policies; and 
(5)  Provide that notice of claims shall be provided to the director of community development by certified mail. 
(c)  The policy clause "Other Insurance" shall not apply to the city if the city is an additional insured under the policy. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, the city will accept a self-insurance program of the public service provider if the approved in advance by the city and: 
(1)  Provides the equivalent coverage as required herein if the service provider demonstrates by written information that it has adequate financial resources to be a self-insured entity as reasonably determined by the city; or 
(2)  In the case of a cable service provider who holds a state-issued certificate of authority and is self-insured under the provisions of state law, such self-insurance program provides the same defense and claims processing as required by this section. 
(e)  A certificate of insurance providing proof of coverage shall be provided to the director with the registration form. 
(f)  If a public service provider is subject to statutory limitations for damages resulting from liability less than the minimum coverages provided in division (B)(1) above, the public service provider shall not be required to provide proof of insurance coverages in excess of the statutory requirements. 
(g)  The requirements for insurance may be satisfied by service providers with a current franchise or license or other agreement if their current franchise or license adequately provides for insurance coverage which will afford equivalent protection for the city. The requirements for bonds may be satisfied by service providers with a current franchise, interlocal or license agreement if the agreement adequately provides for bonds. 
(h)  After registration has been completed, a separate construction permit for each work location must be obtained from the director of community development. Nothing in this section relieves a service provider from obtaining a construction permit under this chapter to perform work in the public right-of-way, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-261. - Service provider bonding requirements. 
(a)  A service provider that has assets in excess of $20,000,000.00 may annually submit a written request for a waiver from the bonding requirements. The request for a waiver shall be filed not later than the November 1 before the calendar year for which the waiver is sought. 
(1)  The request shall set forth in detail the basis for the request including but not limited to: 
a.  The service provider's performance history in the city; 
b.  Documentation, in a form acceptable to the city, that demonstrates that the public service provider has assets in excess of $20,000,000.00; and 
c.  Documentation, in a form acceptable to the city, that demonstrates that the public service provider has assets or reserves sufficient to cover the amount of the bonds. 
(2)  Within 30 business days of receipt of a written request for a waiver, the director of community development, with good cause, may grant a waiver to the bonding requirements. In making this decision, the Director shall take into account, among other things: 
a.  The service provider's record of performance in the city's right-of-way; 
b.  The service provider's record of compliance with this chapter; 
c.  A showing of financial responsibility by the service provider to complete the proposed project; and, 
d.  Any other factors deemed relevant to management of the city's right-of-way. 
(b)  A bond may not be required from a service provider for any work consisting of aerial construction except that a bond as provided for herein may be required of a provider that cannot demonstrate a record of at least four years' performance of work in any municipal public right-of-way free of currently unsatisfied claims by a municipality for damage to the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-262. - Persons other than service provider bond requirements. 
(a)  A bond shall accompany an application for a permit required under this division. The bond shall be payable to the city and shall be approved by the city attorney as to form and sufficiency. 
(b)  The bond shall be conditioned as follows: 
(1)  All sidewalks, curbs, curb cuts, driveways, or streets on the public right-of-way which are to be constructed, reconstructed, or repaired by such person, during the time for which the bond is written, shall be done and completed in accordance with plans and specifications and all ordinances relating thereto and to the satisfaction of the director of public works. 
(2)  The quality of materials used in the construction of all such curbs, curb cuts, driveways or streets on the public right-of-way shall be such as is prescribed by the specifications governing each improvement, and such sidewalks, curbs, curb cuts, driveways, or streets on the public right-of-way shall stand the ordinary wear and tear of traffic without deterioration for a term of two years from the completion thereof. 
(3)  The city shall be held harmless from any and all losses, damages, judgments or decrees that the city may sustain or be subjected to, directly or indirectly, because of any faulty construction of such sidewalks, curbs, curb cuts, driveways, or streets on the public right-of-way or work connected therewith or for the failure of such obligor, his agents or employees to guard and light properly all openings and obstructions that may be made or placed in the street or where the work is to be constructed, during the time that the work is being done or in connection therewith. 
(4)  The obligor, upon the completion of each sidewalk, driveway, curbing, curb cut or street on the public right-of-way, shall remove all building material and accumulation of debris from the street in which any sidewalk, curb, curb cut, or street on the public right-of-way is built arising through or in connection with such construction. 
(c)  The city is authorized to bring suit in the name of the city for the use and benefit of such person against the obligor of such bond and to prosecute the action to final judgment and execution, provided that such action, if done at the insistence of any person, shall involve the city in no expense. No more than one bond of the amount specified in this section shall be required of any one person during the term of the bond, unless recovery shall be had upon such bond in any action at law as provided in this section so as to exhaust the obligation contained in such bond, in which event, the mayor shall require a new bond to be executed. Such new bond shall be governed by the same formalities and conditions as prescribed in this section, provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve such person from complying with the city specifications which are on file in the office of the department of public works and state law. 
(d)  If the work is to consist of sidewalks, curbs, curb cuts, or driveways only, the amount of the bond shall be $2,000.00. If the work is to consist of any other type of paving, the amount of the bond shall be $10,000.00. However, the city shall have the right to require an additional bond on any work done under contract for the city, provided the additional bond is required in the special instructions to bidders. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-263. - Construction permit. 
(a)  Prior to any construction in the public right-of-way by a service provider or any other person, a construction permit shall be obtained, except as provided herein, or as waived by the director of public works. The permit will be issued in the name of the person who owns or will own the facilities to be constructed. The permit application must be completed and signed by the owner of the facilities to be constructed. 
(1)  Emergency repairs related to existing facilities may be undertaken without first obtaining a permit in accordance with section 94-273 below. 
(2)  A construction permit is not required if the activity in the public right-of-way consists exclusively of: 
a.  Installation and maintenance of a service line if the connection does not require a pavement cut in the right-of-way; or 
b.  Replacing or upgrading a network node or network node support pole to the same size; or 
c.  If installation of micro network node is strung on lines between poles or node support poles; or 
d.  The replacement of a single damaged pole and associated work within a 10-foot radius of the damaged pole; or 
e.  Installation of aerial lines on existing poles; or 
f.  Repair and maintenance of existing facilities unless such repair or maintenance requires a pavement cut, the closure of a traffic lane for a period greater than eight hours, excavation or boring. 
(3)  An applicant for a permit required under this division shall file with the director of community development an application showing the following: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or agent in charge of the property abutting the proposed work area. 
b.  The name and address of the party doing the work. 
c.  Plans shall provide the following information, except when only replacing existing drive approaches, sidewalk or curb and gutter. 
i.  The proposed location and route of all facilities to be constructed or installed and the design plan for public right-of-way construction. 
ii.  Plans shall be on a scale acceptable to the city engineer. 
iii.  Detail of the location of all right-of-way and utility easements which applicant plans to use. 
iv.  Detail of all known facilities in approximate relationship to applicant's proposed route. 
v.  Detail of what applicant proposes to install, such as conduits, ducts, pipe and duct size, number of interducts, valves, pull boxes, etc. 
vi.  Detail of plans to remove and replace asphalt, brick or concrete in streets, alleys, and easements. Plans shall include city standard construction details. 
vii.  Drawings of any bores, trenches, handholes, manholes, switch gear, transformers, pedestals, etc. including depth located in public rights-of-way. 
viii.  Handholes and/or manholes typical of the type of manholes and/or handholes applicant plans to use or access. 
ix.  Complete legend for drawings submitted by applicant, or a legend standard may be filed with city engineer for reference. 
x.  The Construction methods to be employed for the protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public right-of-way, and the dates and times work will occur, all (methods, dates, times, etc.) are subject to approval of the city engineer. 
xi.  A written schedule identifying the planned work and, anticipated phasing if applicable. 
xii.  If required by law, two sets of plans prepared by a licensed professional engineer must be submitted with permit application. 
d.  An estimate of the cost of the operation. 
e.  Such other information as the director of community development shall find reasonably necessary to the determination of whether a permit shall be issued. 
(b)  All construction in the public right-of-way shall be in accordance with the construction permit and the requirements of this article. The director of public works shall have access to the work and to such further information as the director of public works may reasonably require to ensure compliance with the permit. 
(c)  Prior to commencement of any work under the permit service provider shall provide the director of public works with the name, address and phone number of the contractor(s) and subcontractor(s) who will perform the actual construction together with the name and phone number of an individual with the contractor(s) and subcontractor(s) who will be available at all times during construction. 
(d)  A copy of the construction permit and approved engineering plans shall be maintained at the construction site and made available for inspection by the director of public works at all times when construction work is occurring. 
(e)  All construction work authorized by permit must be completed in the time specified in the construction permit. If the work cannot be completed in the specified time periods, an extension from the director of public works may be requested. If the request for an extension is made prior to the expiration of the permit, work under the permit may continue while the request for an extension is pending. 
(f)  A copy of any permit or approval issued by federal or state authorities for work in federal or state right-of-way located in the city, must be provided if the work will extend into the public right-of-way. 
(g)  An application for a permit must be submitted before the commencement of the proposed work as follows: 
(1)  Twenty-one days for projects requiring no permanent structure(s) and less than 1,000 linear feet of facilities; and 
(2)  Sixty-days for all other projects. 
The required time periods may be waived by the director of public works. 
(h)  The city shall advise the service provider in writing of its final decision, and, if denied, the basis for that denial, including specific provisions of this Code or applicable law on which the denial was based, and send the documentation to the service provider on or before the day the city denies the application. The service provider may cure the deficiencies identified by the city and resubmit the application within 30-days of the denial without paying an additional application fee. The city shall approve or deny the revised application within 90-days of receipt of the amended application. The subsequent review by the city shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the original denial. 
(i)  The director of public works or the applicant may request a pre-construction meeting with the construction contractor. 
(j)  If the city fails to act on an application within the review period specified in this section, the application shall be deemed approved. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-264. - Service line permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person except service provider's registered under section 94-259 to excavate and/or make pavement cuts in any public right-of-way for the purpose of service line installation or maintenance without first: 
(1)  Making application for a service line permit from the director of community development agreeing to the repair and restoration of the public right-of-way in accordance with the prescribed city specifications; 
(2)  Providing a plan for the service line excavation and restoration of said public right-of-way; 
(3)  Providing the bond requirements detailed in this article; and 
(4)  Providing evidence of insurance as required by the permit application. 
(b)  The director of public works upon investigation of the location, purpose, extent and time of the disturbance of the surface of the public right-of-way may grant or, for an expressed reason, refuse permission for the service line permit. 
(c)  All excavations and/or pavement cuts in public right-of-way shall be maintained and repaired in accordance with this article and city standards. 
(d)  The person doing the excavation and/or pavement cuts shall be fully responsible for safeguarding persons and property from damages or injury. 
(e)  If applicable, any persons doing excavation and/or pavement cuts shall minimize disruptions to access to adjacent property by coordinating their schedule with other persons in the vicinity working in the public right-of-way. When coordination conflicts occur, the director of public works shall coordinate the work to reduce access problems. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-265. - Fees. 
    Before any permit shall be granted under this division, a fee as provided by separate ordinance shall be paid by the applicable person, service provider, or contractor to the director of community. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-266. - General public rights-of-way use and construction. 
(a)  Minimal interference. Work in the public right-of-way shall be done in a manner that causes the least interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of adjacent property users, owners, and residents. Service provider's facilities shall be constructed or maintained in such a manner as not to interfere with sewers, water pipes, or any other property of the city, or with any other pipes, wires, conduits, pedestals, structures, or other facilities that have been constructed in the public right-of-way by, or under, the city's authority. The service provider's facilities shall be located, erected, and maintained so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, obstruct the free use of the public right-of-way or other public property, and shall not interfere with the travel and use of public places by the public during the construction, repair, or removal thereof except as authorized by this article or the director of public works. This subsection shall not be construed to require relocation of any facility that was completed or under construction on the effective date of this article, provided nothing in this subsection reduces or restricts the city's right to require a service provider to relocate facilities as required by other law. 
(b)  Locations and notifications: 
(1)  A permit does not relieve a person or service provider of the responsibility to coordinate with other utilities and to protect existing facilities. Any person or service provider working in the public right-of-way is responsible for obtaining line locates from all affected utilities or others with facilities in the public right-of-way prior to any excavation. 
(2)  Any person or service provider shall be responsible for verifying the location, both horizontal and vertical, of all facilities. When required by the director of public works, any person or service provider shall verify location by potholing, hand digging or another method approved by the director prior to any excavation or boring. 
(3)  Before beginning excavation in any public right-of-way, a service provider shall contact the Texas Underground Facility Notification Corporation to the extent required by V.T.C.A., Utilities Code Ch. 251, make inquiries of all ditch companies, utility companies, districts, local governments, and all other service providers that might have facilities in the area of work to determine possible conflicts. 
(4)  Any person or service provider shall support and protect all pipes, conduits, ducts, poles, wires, structures, pavement, other apparatus and equipment and property improvements and landscaping which may be affected by the work from damage during construction or settlement of trenches subsequent to construction. 
(c)  Underground construction versus use of poles. 
(1)  In areas where all facilities are installed underground at the time of service provider's construction, all service provider's facilities shall also be placed underground at no expense to the city, unless otherwise approved by the director of public works. Related equipment, such as pedestals, must be placed in accordance with the city's applicable code requirements and rules, including all visibility easement requirements. In areas where existing facilities are aerial, the service provider may install aerial facilities. 
(2)  For above-ground facilities, the service provider shall utilize existing poles wherever reasonable. 
(d)  Wireless network nodes. Prior to the installation of any wireless network node within the incorporated boundary of the city, a network provider shall enter into an agreement with the city. All wireless network nodes shall meet the requirements of Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284. 
(e)  Collocate network nodes. A network provider seeking to collocate network nodes may, at the network provider's discretion, file a consolidated application and receive permits for up to 30 network nodes. Provided, however, the city's denial of any node within a single application shall not affect other nodes submitted in the same application. The city shall grant permits for any and all nodes in a single application that it does not deny, subject to the requirements of this section. 
(f)  Historic district. A network provider shall obtain advance approval from the landmark commission prior to collocating network nodes; or installing new node support poles in areas designated as a historic district if the district has decorative poles. As a condition of approval, the landmark commission may require new network nodes or new node support poles to be concealed in such a way as they do not detract from the historic nature of the district. 
(g)  Access and use of municipal owned utility poles. Prior to the installation of any network node on city owned service poles, a network provider shall enter into a wireless network node city service pole agreement with the city. 
(1)  The service provider must provide a design load analysis for all network nodes to be installed on city service poles. 
(2)  The network node shall be removed or relocated at the owner's expense as required to allow for the relocation or maintenance of city service poles. 
(h)  Private easements. Any person, service provider and network provider shall comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions in areas that apply to those facilities. 
(i)  Excavation safety. On construction projects in which excavation exceeds a depth of four feet, the service provider must have detailed plans and specifications for excavation safety systems. The term excavation includes trenches, structural or any construction that has earthen excavation subject to collapse. The excavation safety plan shall be designed in conformance with state law and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) standards and regulations. 
(j)  Erosion control. The service provider shall be responsible for providing stormwater management and erosion control that complies with city, state and federal guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-267. - Minimizing the impacts of work in the public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Any person, service provider or contractor shall conduct work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. In the performance of the work, any person, service provider or contractor shall take appropriate measures to reduce noise, dust, and unsightly debris. No work shall be done between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in residential areas, except with the written permission of the director of public works, or in case of an emergency. 
(b)  Any person, service provider or contractor shall maintain the work site so that: 
(1)  Solid waste and construction materials are contained on the construction site. 
(2)  Solid waste is removed from a construction site daily so that it does not become a health, fire, or safety hazard. 
(3)  Solid waste receptacles and storage or construction trailers shall not be placed in any public right-of-way without specific approval of the director of public works. 
(c)  Any person, service provider or contractor shall protect trees, landscape, and landscape features. All protective measures shall be provided at the expense of the person, service provider or contractor. 
(d)  Any person, service provider or contractor shall protect from injury any public right-of-way and adjoining property by taking all necessary measures. Service provider or contractor shall, at its own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences, or other property likely to be damaged during the work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property resulting from failure to properly protect and carry out work in the public right-of-way. 
(e)  As the work progresses, all public right-of-way and private property shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess dirt, rock, and other debris. All clean-up operations shall be done at the expense of the person, service provider or contractor. Any person, service provider or contractor shall restore any disturbed area to its original condition. 
(f)  Any person, service provider or contractor shall ensure neighborhood parking adjacent to a work site is not adversely impacted and maintain a public walkway approved by the director of public works around a construction site that blocks a public sidewalk or path. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-268. - Facility locations. 
(a)  All facilities in new developments shall be located in accordance with the subdivision and development regulations unless an alternative location has been approved by the director of public works. Such utility locations are hereby adopted as standard locations for utilities in new developments. The intent of these items is that they serve as a standard for service providers whose routine business requires the installation, repair, or relocation of utilities. 
(b)  Facilities to be installed in previously developed streets and alleys should be located the same as in new developments when possible. If the location shown cannot be used by the service provider, the new or replacement facilities shall be a minimum of four feet horizontal from the outer pipe of existing water, sewer or stormwater utilities. If crossing city facilities, other facilities shall be two feet below the outer pipe of existing water, sewer or stormwater utilities. Other locations must be approved by the director of public works. 
(c)  Underground facilities shall have a minimum 24 inches of cover. When placed under pavement structures, the facility shall be a minimum 24 inches below the bottom of the pavement structure. Facilities and service lines shall cross perpendicular to the pavement and have a minimum two-foot separation from the pavement structure if running longitudinal. All underground facilities shall be traceable by standard practices. 
(d)  Guy wires, anchors, and other above-ground facilities shall not be less than 16 feet in height as it crosses any street or 14 feet as it crosses any alley, eight feet in height over a sidewalk area and shall be located not less than two feet from the back of street curbs or edge of street paving. If an encroachment is less than eight feet in height over a sidewalk area, the sidewalk must be widened at the service provider or contractors expense to provide the necessary clearance as approved by the director of public works. All aerial facilities shall be located above or behind all traffic signal heads with no impact on the visibility of the traffic signal head. 
(e)  All poles shall be located a minimum of two feet behind the back of the curb and gutter. 
(f)  Network node. A network node minimum spacing shall be 300 feet. Network node poles shall be located within two feet of the ROW unless located in a dedicated utility easement. Network node poles shall not encroach into or block the sidewalk. Sidewalk relocation shall be approved by the director of public works at the expense of the network provider as required. All network pole mounted node equipment shall be placed eight feet above the ground. Each network node shall be identified with a four-inch by six-inch metal tag with the service provider name and contact information. 
(g)  A network provider shall ensure that each new, modified, or replacement utility pole or node support pole installed in a public right-of-way in relation to which the network provider received approval of a permit application does not exceed the lesser of: 
(1)  Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole located within 500 linear feet of the new pole in the same public right-of-way; or 
(2)  Fifty-five feet above ground level. 
(h)  A network provider may not install a new node support pole in a public right-of-way without the municipality's discretionary, nondiscriminatory, and written consent if the public right-of-way is in a municipal park or adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is: 
(1)  Not more than 50 feet wide; and 
(2)  Adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. 
(i)  Any person, service provider or contractor replacing, repairing or adding a drive approach must comply with the requirements set in section 94-98 of this chapter and meet the city standards. 
(j)  Any person, service provider or contractor replacing, repairing or adding curb and gutter must comply with the requirements set in section 94-100 of this chapter and meet the city standards. 
(k)  Any person, service provider or contractor replacing, repairing or adding sidewalk must comply with the requirements set in section 94-127 of this chapter and meet the city standards. 
(l)  Any person, service provider or contractor replacing, repairing or adding alley pavement must comply with the city standards as approved by the director of public works. 
(m)  Any person, service provider or contractor replacing, repairing or adding medians or making a median cut must comply with the requirements set in article II division 5-Median Cuts of this chapter and meet the city standards. 
(n)  Temporary facilities may be located in nonstandard locations as authorized by the director of public works. 
(o)  Any encroachment of a facility within the sidewalk or path area of a public right-of-way must comply with all requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act at the expense of service provider. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-269. - Traffic control. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, no person, service provider or contractor may partially or completely close or obstruct a public street or alley without approval for a temporary street closure from the traffic engineering division at the time an application for either a construction or service line permit, unless an emergency exists. 
(b)  All traffic control barricading and methods shall comply with the most recent version of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control devices or any successive publication thereto. No person, service provider or contractor shall block access to and from private property, block vehicles, block access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water valves, underground vaults, valve housing structures, or any other vital equipment unless the person, service provider or contractor provides the director of public works with written verification of written notice delivered to the owner or occupant of the facility, equipment, or property at least 48 hours in advance, except in case of an emergency. 
(c)  When necessary for public safety the service provider or contractor shall employ flag persons whose duties shall be to control traffic around or through the construction site. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-270. - Requirements for excavations and pavement cuts. 
(a)  Permanent repairs of pavement cuts in the right-of-way shall be completed by the person, service provider or contractor in accordance with city standard specifications for utility construction in city right-of-way and easements. Failure to comply within 14 days of notification by the city shall result in the use of the person's or service provider's bond and the requirement of additional bond(s) and/or the denial of future permits. 
(b)  The person, service provider or contractor shall be responsible for maintaining all excavations and pavement cuts in such a manner as to avoid a hazard to vehicular and pedestrian traffic until permanently repaired. 
(1)  Any person, service provider or contractor shall be required to maintain the interim repairs until final repairs are completed. 
(2)  When further repairs are deemed necessary by the director of public works to correct a hazardous situation the person, service provider or contractor responsible for the excavations and/or pavement cuts shall be notified immediately. If the person, service provider or contractor does not make the repair or provide an acceptable schedule within eight hours of being notified, the repairs can be performed by the city and billed to the person, service provider or contractor. 
(c)  All damage caused directly or indirectly to the street surface or subsurface outside the pavement cut area shall be regarded as a part of the pavement cut. These areas, as established by the director of public works, will be included in the total area repaired. 
(d)  The person, service provider or contractor shall notify the director of public works immediately of any damage to other facilities as well as the owner of the affected facility. 
(e)  All excavations, pavement cuts, and refilling or repairing done in pursuance of this article shall be made under the supervision of the director of public works. It shall be the duty of the director of public works to require the work to be done in compliance with the city standards, requirements of this article and all other sections of this Code and city ordinances. 
(f)  The person, service provider or contractor who shall dig any hole, ditch or trench or make any excavation in any of the city streets or alleys shall not leave such excavation, hole, ditch, or trench open at any time after sundown of any day without having the hole, ditch or trench properly guarded by placing approved warning devices in accordance with the Texas Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices and may be required to put up a temporary fence or other obstruction so as to prevent persons or animals falling into such excavation. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-271. - Construction and restoration standards for newly constructed or overlayed streets and alleys. 
(a)  No service provider or contractor shall be allowed to open trench excavation or potholing of facilities in the pavement or pavement structures of any public right-of-way for a period of three years from the completion of new street construction or overlay of streets except in compliance with the provision of this section. 
(b)  Any application for a construction permit to excavate in public right-of-way subject to the requirements of this section shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A detailed and dimensional engineering plan that identifies and accurately represents the public right-of-way and property that will be impacted by the proposed excavation, as well as adjacent streets, and the method of construction. 
(2)  The street or alley width including curb and gutter over the total length of each city block that will be impacted by the proposed construction. 
(3)  The location, width, length, and depth of the proposed excavation. 
(4)  The total area of existing street or alley pavement, and/or improved surfaces in each individual city block that will be impacted by the proposed excavation. 
(5)  A written statement addressing the criteria for approval set forth in subsection (c) below. 
(c)  No construction permits for excavation in the public right-of-way that effects a newly constructed or overlayed street or alley shall be approved unless the director of public works finds that all of the following have been met: 
(1)  Boring or jacking without disturbing the pavement is not practical due to physical characteristics of the street or alley or other facilities. 
(2)  Alternative facilities alignments that do not involve excavating the street or alley are found to be impracticable. 
(3)  The proposed construction cannot reasonably be delayed until after the three-year deferment period has lapsed. 
(d)  The streets or alleys shall be restored and repaired in accordance with design and construction standards provided by the director of public works or as established and adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-272. - Abandonment of facilities. 
    Any service provider that intends to abandon its use of any facilities within the public right-of-way shall notify the director of public works in writing of the intent to abandon facilities. Such notice shall describe the facilities to be abandoned, a date of abandonment, and the method of removal of the facilities and for restoration of the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-273. - Emergency procedures. 
    Any service provider maintaining facilities in the public right-of-way may proceed with emergency repairs upon existing facilities without a permit when circumstances demand that the work be done. Emergency maintenance operations shall be limited to circumstances involving the preservation of life, property, or the restoration of customer service. Any service provider or contractor commencing operations under this section shall submit detailed construction locations and repair methods no later than ten business days after initiating the emergency maintenance operation to the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-274. - Record plans. 
(a)  If installations do not follow the plans originally submitted under section 94-263 above, the service provider shall provide the director of public works with updated construction drawings within 90-days of completion of facilities in the public right-of-way. The plans shall be provided to the city with as much detail and accuracy as available to the service provider. The detail and accuracy must concern issues such as location, size of facilities, materials used, and any other health, safety and welfare concerns. The detail will not include matters such as capacity of lines, customers, or competitively sensitive details. If information submitted includes information designated as trade secrets or as confidential, the information may not be disclosed by the city without the consent of the public service provider unless it is compelled to disclose the information by the Texas Attorney General pursuant to the Texas Public Information Act or by a court order. 
(b)  This requirement, or portions of this requirement, may be waived by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-275. - Conformance with public improvements. 
    Whenever by reasons of widening or improvements to public right-of-way, water or sewer line projects, drainage improvements, or other public works projects, it shall be deemed necessary by the city to remove, alter, change, adapt, or conform the underground or overhead facilities of a public right-of-way user to another part of the public right-of-way, such alterations shall be made by the owner of the facilities at its expense unless provided otherwise by state law or a franchise agreement within the time limits set by the director of public works working in conjunction with the owner of the facilities. Facilities not moved within the approved schedule set by the director of public works, shall be moved by city at facility owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-276. - Improperly installed facilities. 
(a)  Any person doing work in the public right-of-way shall properly install, repair, upgrade and maintain facilities in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Facilities shall be considered to be improperly installed, repaired, upgraded or maintained if: 
(1)  The installation, repairs, upgrade or maintenance endangers people or property; 
(2)  At the time of installation the facilities did not meet applicable city, state or federal codes; 
(3)  The facilities are not capable of being located using standard practices; 
(4)  The facilities are not located in the proper place at the time of construction in accordance with the permit and engineering plans approved by the director of public works. 
(c)  Facilities determined by the director of public works to have been improperly installed, repaired, upgraded or maintained shall be properly installed, repaired, upgraded or maintained immediately upon receipt of notice from the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-277. - Restoration of property. 
(a)  Users of the public right-of-way shall restore property affected by construction of facilities to a condition that is equal to or better than the condition of the property prior to the performance of work. 
(b)  Restoration must be to the reasonable satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. 
The restoration shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Replacing city parks department maintained landscaping with the type of ground cover and other landscaping damaged during work, or better, either by planting, sodding, or seeding, as directed; 
(2)  Installation of all manholes and handholes, as required; 
(3)  All bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other holes shall be filled in, covered, or barricaded daily, unless other safety requirements are approved; 
(4)  Compaction and leveling of all trenches and excavations; 
(5)  Restoration of site to city specifications; 
(6)  Restoration of all city maintained sprinkler systems, retaining walls, planters, and other public improvements. 
(c)  All locate flags shall be removed during the cleanup process by the service provider or contractor at the completion of the work. 
(d)  Restoration must be made in a timely manner as specified by the director of public works. If restoration is not satisfactory or performed in a timely manner all work in progress, except that related to the problem, including all work previously permitted but not completed may be halted and a hold may be placed on any permits not approved until all restoration is complete. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-278. - Indemnification. 
(a)  Except as to certificated telecommunication providers, or a public service provider whose current franchise contains an indemnity which provides that it is controlling over this provision, each person and public service provider installing, maintaining, removing or repairing facilities in the public right-of-way shall promptly defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from and against all damages, costs, losses or expenses including any and all claims, lawsuit, judgments, costs, liens, losses expenses, fees (including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of defense) proceedings, actions demands, causes of action, liability, and suits of any kind and nature, including personal or bodily injury (including death), property damage, or other harm for which recovery of damages is sought, that is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be caused solely by the negligent act, error, or omission of the public service provider or any agent, officer, director, representative, employee, affiliate, or subcontractor of the public service provider or their respective officers, agents, employees, directors, or representatives, or any other person while installing, repairing, maintaining, or removing facilities in a public right-of-way. 
(b)  The indemnity provided by this section does not apply to any liability resulting from the negligence of the city or its officers, employees, contractors, or subcontractors. If the public service provider and the city are found jointly liable by a court of competent jurisdiction, liability shall be apportioned comparatively in accordance with the laws of this state without, however, waiving any governmental immunity available to the city under state law and without waving any defenses of the parties under state law. 
(c)  The provisions of this indemnity are solely for the benefit of the city and are not intended to create any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any person or entity. 
(d)  A permittee who is a certificated telecommunication provider as defined in Texas Local Government Code Chapter 283, as amended, shall give the city the indemnity provided in Texas Local Government Code § 283.057, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-279. - Denial, suspension, revocation, or extension of permit. 
(a)  Denial of a permit. A permit (construction and service line) may be denied for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Not having proper insurance for the required amounts. 
(2)  Consistently failing to perform in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(3)  Requesting to cut a city-maintained street that can be crossed by jacking, boring or tunneling. 
(4)  Proposing barricading, channelizing, signing, warning or other traffic control procedures or equipment that does not comply with the requirements of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(5)  The activity or the manner in which it is to be performed shall violate a city ordinance or a state or federal law. 
(6)  Failure to furnish all of the information required under this article or, except for good cause shown, to file the registration or construction or service line permit applications within the time prescribed. 
(7)  Misrepresenting or falsifying any information in the registration or construction or service line permit applications. 
(8)  Failing to provide a surety bond or other acceptable security or comply with the performance guarantee. 
(9)  Owing outstanding debts to the city. 
(10)  Lack of available space in the public right-of-way. 
(11)  Proposed activity will substantially interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic and no procedures have been implemented to minimize the interference. 
(b)  Suspension of a permit. The director of public works may suspend any or all permits granted to allow work in the public right-of-way for the following reasons subject to the procedural guidelines noted in this article and any agreement that applies to the service provider, or its contractors, using the public right-of-way, as well as any limitations imposed by federal or state law: 
(1)  Failing to comply with an order; or 
(2)  The recognition that a permit was issued in error; or 
(3)  Failing to comply with restrictions or requirements placed on the permit; or 
(4)  Any safety violation which create peril to the public; or 
(5)  Violating any provision of this article. 
(c)  The director of public works may reinstate a previously suspended permit when the conditions that caused such permit to be suspended are remedied to the satisfaction of the director. 
(d)  Revocation of a permit. If no work has begun on a permitted project within 30 calendar days of issuance of the permit, the permit shall be null and void, and a new permit shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-280. - Authority; enforcement; offenses. 
(a)  The director of public works is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this article and to promulgate regulations to aid in its administration and enforcement that are not in conflict with other provisions of this Code, or state or federal law. 
(b)  The director of public works is authorized to enter upon a construction site for which a permit is granted or, where necessary, private property adjacent to the construction site, for purposes of inspection to determine compliance with the provisions of the permit and this article. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 94-281. - Penalty and injunction. 
(a)  Any violation of a provision of this article is declared to be a violation of an ordinance involving health and safety. Accordingly, it shall be punishable by a fine in an amount as provided by section 1-14 of this Code. 
(b)  If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the city attorney may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations of this article or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 35-2017, § 1, 9-5-2017) 
Secs. 94-282-94-315. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NAMING OF STREETS AND NUMBERING OF PARCELS AND BUILDINGS 

Sec. 94-316. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cul-de-sac means a minor street not more than 600 feet in length, having but one vehicular access to another street and terminated by a vehicular turnaround of not less than 100 feet in diameter in residential areas and not less than 200 feet in diameter in commercial and industrial areas. 
    Minor loop means a minor street having ten or less platted lots which originates or terminates on the same through street. 
    Prefix means an alphabetic letter which is applied when a street crosses a baseline. The purpose of the prefix is to indicate the compass direction from a baseline described in city Ordinance No. 390. 
    Primary number means a number of not more than five digits and which is assigned to a parcel so that a parcel can be uniquely identified on the street on which it is platted. 
    Street name means a word not exceeding 12 characters which has been established by city ordinance, by dedication, or, for a private street, by official approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    Street type means a word or abbreviation of a word not exceeding four characters used to classify a street name into categories such as "street," "avenue," "circle," "lane," and other similar descriptors. 
    Suffix means an alphabetic letter and/or a set of numbers not exceeding three characters which is used to uniquely identify separate buildings upon parcels and/or separate activities within buildings. 
(Code 1966, § 27-51; Code 2001, § 94-316) 
Sec. 94-317. - Withholding of municipal services. 
    No municipal services shall be rendered to any parcel or building which does not comply with the addressing and numbering conventions set forth by this article. 
(Code 1966, § 27-60; Code 2001, § 94-317) 
Sec. 94-318. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person, whether owner, agent, or occupant, who shall, after 20 days' written notice from the director of community development, fail or refuse to number correctly any house owned, occupied, or controlled by such person; who shall fail or refuse to number any house which has been removed from one lot to another or which has been repaired; who shall number any house otherwise than in conformity with this article; who shall obliterate, conceal or obscure any house number by paint or other means; or who shall name, rename or extend any private street without official approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined as provided in section 1-14. Each day in violation beyond the 20-day period shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1966, § 27-61; Code 2001, § 94-318) 
Sec. 94-319. - Numbering convention. 
(a)  For the purpose of numbering and, more particularly, locating all buildings and parcels in the city, all streets in the city shall be considered as even hundreds in the numbering scheme according to the relative position of each street or avenue, and the parcel and building numbers in the blocks next to such streets and avenues shall be the units and tens of the complete number. 
(b)  All numbering of the city shall proceed eastward, westward, northward, and southward from the baseline described in city Ordinance No. 390 in accordance with such schedules, except as modified by section 94-321. 
(c)  Where possible, lots and buildings shall be uniquely identified by a street number of no more than five digits. 
(d)  Separate buildings may be uniquely identified by the use of an alphabetic letter used in combination with a primary street number. This convention shall be approved by the director of the community development only when strict compliance with this article would result in severe confusion. 
(e)  Residential dwelling units within a single residential building on a single parcel shall be numbered in sequence starting with the number one. This shall include duplexes. The number one-half shall not be permitted as a unique identifier. 
(f)  Residential units within a complex of multiple-residential structures shall be numbered uniquely in hundred series numbered in consecutive order through the complex with the 100 series designating ground level, and the 200 series designating second-story units, etc. If the complex has over 100 units at any story level, thousand series numbers shall be used. 
(g)  Culs-de-sac and minor loops shall be numbered in consecutive order starting with the number one. 
(h)  Spaces within mobile home parks shall be numbered in sequence beginning with the number one. 
(Code 1966, § 27-52; Code 2001, § 94-319) 
Sec. 94-320. - Establishment of baseline. 
(a)  The baseline or dividing line separating east, west, north and south street numbers shall be identical with those baselines described in repealed Ordinance No. 390, passed and approved February 13, 1922, on record in the office of the City Clerk. These baselines are described as follows: 
(1)  The baseline or dividing line separating east and west street numbering shall, on the north side of the Wichita River, be Webster Street and is extended north to the city limits. South of the Wichita River the baseline shall be Patterson Street and Mill Street along the east line of the original townsite and Jalonic Addition, then with the centerline of section 10, J. A. Scott Survey south. This baseline is extended to follow the South Expressway southward to the city limits. 
(2)  The Wichita River shall be the baseline for numbering streets running north and south, which are west of the east line of sections 15 and 16 of the J. A. Scott Survey, and is extended to the city limits. East of the east line of sections 15 and 16 of the J. A. Scott Survey the baseline shall be Barwise Street on the north line of section 11 of J. A. Scott Survey, and is extended due east to the city limits. 
(3)  The numbering system established by Ordinance No. 390 for various individual streets which were in existence at the time shall remain in effect. 
(b)  All baselines shall automatically be extended when new territory is annexed to the city. 
(Code 1966, § 27-53; Code 2001, § 94-320) 
Sec. 94-321. - Future additions to corporate limits. 
    When future extensions to the city are made or new additions are placed on record, it shall be the duty of the director of community development to prepare numbers for such extensions or additions. Such numbers shall correspond to the general scheme of the numbering contained in this article. The following conditions shall govern street numbering unless otherwise covered in other sections of this article: 
(1)  All streets bearing less than north 45 degrees east, or north 45 degrees west, shall assume the north/south numbering system. 
(2)  All streets bearing more than north 45 degrees east, or north 45 degrees west, shall assume the east/west numbering system established in this article. 
(3)  The longest segment (north/south, east/west, or diagonal) will determine whether the street will conform to a north/south or to an east/west numbering scheme. 
(Code 1966, § 27-54; Code 2001, § 94-321) 
Sec. 94-322. - Street naming conventions in new subdivisions. 
    Streets in new subdivisions shall conform with the following: 
(1)  Names of new public streets shall not duplicate or cause confusion with the names of existing streets, unless the new public street is a continuation of or is in alignment with an existing street, in which case the name of the existing street shall be used. 
(2)  The naming of private streets or drives is prohibited unless such names are approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Names of private streets and driveways may be recognized and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission if such names do not conflict with names of other public or recognized private streets within the city. It will be the owner's responsibility to reimburse the city for the construction and placing of signs of the same standards as those of the city, except that the color shall be white with black lettering. Names of existing or future private streets or drives shall not be changed, nor shall such streets or drives be extended without approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The owner shall also be responsible to the city for maintenance and replacement of the signs when needed. 
(3)  No minor streets, such as culs-de-sac, circles, and minor loops, shall carry the same primary street name as that of any previously dedicated or recognized private street. 
(4)  If a street crosses a baseline, it shall carry a prefix of "N," north; "S," south; "E," east; "W," west. The purpose of the prefix is to indicate direction from a baseline. 
(5)  All streets shall carry a name and one of the following street type identifiers: access road, avenue, bend, boulevard, circle, cove, court, curve, downs, drive, expressway, freeway, highway, lane, loop, parkway, path, pathway, place, ramp, road, row, street, square, trace, trail, terrace, way. 
(6)  Twelve characters shall be the maximum number of letters in a street name. 
(Code 1966, § 27-55; Code 2001, § 94-322) 
Sec. 94-323. - Reservation of numbers. 
    For the purpose of reserving address numbers along street segments, each 60 feet of frontage shall constitute a lot or a space for a parcel number. 
(Code 1966, § 27-56; Code 2001, § 94-323) 
Sec. 94-324. - Types of address numbers for business or residence houses. 
    All numbers on business or residence houses in the city shall be of a figure not less than three inches in height and approximately two or more inches in width and shall be so placed as to be seen plainly from the street. They shall be purchased and paid for by the owner or agent of the property. The figures shall be of durable metal, glass, or enamel, or they may be painted of neat design and durable material on the glass of the transom of the door. New subdivisions, upon completion of street construction, shall have the address of each residence painted on the curb with letters on a white backing. Perishable materials such as wood, paper, and cardboard and marking of pen, pencil, or other easily displaced substance shall not be deemed a compliance with this article. 
(Code 1966, § 27-57; Code 2001, § 94-324) 
Sec. 94-325. - Types of address numbers for complex of residential structures. 
    All building address numbers or building letters in a complex of residential structures shall be of a figure not less than 12 inches in height and approximately six inches or more in width and shall be so placed as to be seen plainly from the nearest vehicular access. The residential unit numbers within buildings shall comply with section 94-324. They shall be purchased and paid for by the owner or agent of the property. The building addresses shall be lighted, where possible, or composed of reflective material and of a color which provides a contrast to the background. A certificate of occupancy for the building shall not be granted until compliance with this section is determined by the building code administrator. 
(Code 1966, § 27-57.1; Code 2001, § 94-325) 
Sec. 94-326. - Duties of Department of Community Development. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the Department of Community Development to designate all address ranges in conformity with this article. Numbers shall be furnished the owner or agent of each new house built with its proper number in accordance with sequences determined by the director of community development before issuance of a building permit by the Building Inspections Division or when a parcel of land is finally platted for record. 
(b)  When any house is not correctly numbered or not numbered at all, the director of community development shall give such house its proper number and shall notify the owner, agent, or occupant to number such house correctly in accordance with this article. 
(c)  Questions of uncertainty as to the exact number or sequence of numbers or the meaning and intent of the textual provisions of this article shall be determined by the director of community development according to the rules and regulations which may be adopted for the purpose of consistency. 
(Code 1966, § 27-58; Code 2001, § 94-326) 
Sec. 94-327. - Placement and replacement of address numbers. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner or agent of a business or residence building to number properly and correctly the building and in like manner to number every new building in construction or constructed within five days after the building is completed or within two days after it is occupied. Buildings removed from one lot to another shall in like manner be renumbered according to the new location within five days after such removal and relocation or within two days after it is occupied. The owners, agents, or other persons making repairs or additions to buildings shall cause the number, or others of proper kind, to be replaced immediately if the repairs or improvements require temporary removal of the numbers. 
(Code 1966, § 27-59; Code 2001, § 94-327) 
Secs. 94-328-94-355. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL PRODUCE MARKET 

Sec. 94-356. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Artisan dealer means a person who offers for sale products which he makes. 
    Dealer means an artisan, floral, merchandise or wholesale produce dealer, whichever is applicable. 
    Establishment means a building, freight car, vacant lot, stand, vehicle, or other place where produce is offered for sale at wholesale. 
    Floral dealer means a person who offers for sale plants. 
    Load means that amount of products which is contained in a vehicle at time of entry into the municipal produce market. 
    Merchandise dealer means a person who offers for sale any product for which a special license is not required under this article. 
    Municipal produce market means that area which is described in section 94-359 and designated by the market manager as a public market place. 
    Plant means a flower or potted plant or bedding plant. 
    Produce means a fruit or vegetable. 
    Producer means a person who offers for sale produce which he has raised, grown, or produced on land which he or a member of his immediate family owns or leases. 
    Sale at wholesale means a transaction in which produce is sold to a retailer for resale or to someone other than the ultimate consumer. 
    Special event means a market activity which is at a time and place designated by the market manager to promote public awareness of the municipal produce market and which is not an ordinary market activity. 
    Stall means a marked or unmarked area which is designated by the market manager as a place for parking a vehicle for the purpose of offering for sale produce or other products. 
    Street means a public street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other public property. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices moved by human power. 
    Wholesale produce dealer means a person who: 
(1)  Offers for sale in the municipal market produce which is raised, grown, or produced by another, or on land outside the North Texas Southern Oklahoma area; or 
(2)  Operates an establishment for the sale at wholesale of produce in the city. 
(Code 2001, § 94-356; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-357. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who violates section 94-363 shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-14. Any person violating any of the other sections of this article shall be subject to suspension or loss of stall tenure in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated under this article. 
(Code 2001, § 94-357; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-358. - Use of streets for sales of produce. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the sale of vegetables, produce, or other perishable commodities to use any portion of any street, save and except the municipal produce market, for selling, vending or exchanging of vegetables, produce or other perishable commodities. 
(Code 2001, § 94-358; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-359. - Established; location. 
    There is established a municipal produce market on lots 8, 9 and the south half of lot 10 of block 162 of the original town site. The street address for the municipal produce market is 713 Ohio Street. 
(Code 2001, § 94-359; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-360. - Appointment of market manager. 
    The municipal produce market shall be under the direction of a market manager who may be appointed by the city manager or by an approved lease agreement. Duties of the market manager shall be those prescribed by section 94-361. 
(Code 2001, § 94-360; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-361. - Duties of market manager. 
    It shall be the duty of the market manager to: 
(1)  Exercise general supervision and control over the municipal produce market and the conduct of business therein, and enforce all of the terms of this article and the rules and regulations promulgated under this article. 
(2)  Assign stalls to the producers and dealers attending the municipal produce market and collect the rental fees for the use thereof. 
(3)  Enforce order in and about the municipal produce market. 
(4)  Remove from the market any person who is violent or disorderly or who in any way interferes with him in the performance of his duties or who disturbs the producers, dealers, buyers or any other person lawfully using the municipal produce market. 
(5)  Prescribe rules and regulations governing the conduct of business in the municipal produce market not inconsistent with this article. 
(6)  Establish the opening and closing hours of the municipal produce market and schedule and control the use of the market for special events. 
(7)  Allocate market stalls for producers and dealers. 
(8)  Schedule, control and collect fees, if appropriate, for other public uses within the municipal produce market. 
(Code 2001, § 94-361; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-362. - Fees for rental of stalls. 
(a)  The term "day," as used in this section, shall mean that period of time from the opening hour of the municipal produce market in the morning to the closing hour in the evening of any calendar day, such opening and closing hours to be established from time to time by the market manager. 
(b)  A producer who desires to use a stall in the municipal produce market shall apply to the market manager and pay a daily rental fee. Rental fees shall be established annually by the market manager with the approval of the city manager. 
(c)  A dealer who desires to use a stall in the municipal produce market shall apply to the market manager and pay a daily rental fee. Rental fees shall be established annually by the market manager with the approval of the city manager. 
(d)  Payment of a rental fee entitles a producer or dealer to the use of a stall for one day. The use of a stall is forfeited if a producer or dealer leaves the market and fails to notify the market manager of his intent to return. 
(e)  A producer or a dealer may request a monthly or weekly permit from the market manager. Rental fees shall be established annually by the market manager with the approval of the city manager. A monthly permit shall be in effect for one month with a renewal option at the end of the month. A weekly permit shall be in effect for seven days commencing with the first day of the business week. The number of permits issued will be limited and will be issued at the discretion of the market manager. A permit holder must obligate himself that he will sell fresh produce from the designated stall every day in which the market is open during the term of the permit. If the permit holder determines that he will not be able to sell produce on a particular day, he must notify the market manager at least 24 hours before the market is to open on that day. The market manager will then place that stall on the list available for rental on that day. If a permit holder fails to notify the market manager within the allotted time, he, upon review of the market manager, will forfeit his permit. The permit holder is guaranteed only that a stall will be available for his use each day during the term of the permit. A permit in no way guarantees the permit holder rights to any particular stall. Any days not used by the permit holder will be forfeited and will not be applied to any future permit period. 
(f)  Stall fees may be adjusted at the discretion of the market manager when unique situations, such as market cancellation due to climatic conditions, arise. 
(g)  Dealers or producers may be allowed to rent a maximum of two stalls. Agreement to rent a second stall shall be at the sole discretion of the market manager. 
(h)  Rental fees for the use of the market for purposes other than the selling of produce shall be set by the market manager. 
(Code 2001, § 94-362; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-363. - Producer certification; producer's employee. 
(a)  Each producer shall provide to the market manager a certificate from the producer's county agent certifying that the producer resides within the agent's county. 
(b)  A producer may send an employee in his stead to sell his produce, provided that the producer provides verification that the producer meets the requirement of a producer as stated in section 94-356. The producer must provide his employee with a signed statement of authorization. The statement of authorization shall indicate that the employee is authorized by the producer to be his representative at the municipal produce market. Employees of a producer must also meet and abide by all rules and regulations of the market. Any violation by an employee of a producer shall subject both the employee and the producer to suspension or banishment as determined by the market manager. 
(Code 2001, § 94-363; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-364. - Right to refuse stall rental; ejection of persons renting stalls; operation through agent after rejection. 
(a)  The market manager shall have the right to refuse to rent a stall to any producer or dealer who has been guilty of willful violations of this article or of any of the rules or regulations promulgated under this article. 
(b)  The market manager shall have the authority to eject any producer or dealer or any other person who willfully refuses to conform to this article or the rules and regulations promulgated under this article, without refunding to such producer or dealer the rental fee paid for a stall. 
(c)  No person shall sell on the municipal produce market any of the produce of a producer or dealer or act as the agent or employee of a dealer who has been barred from the municipal produce market by the market manager. 
(Code 2001, § 94-364; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-365. - Use of designated areas. 
(a)  No person shall use or occupy any areas of the municipal produce market not designated for his use by the market manager, and no person shall use or occupy any stall in the municipal produce market, other than the stall assigned to such person by the market manager. 
(b)  A person who uses or occupies a stall in the municipal produce market shall pay a rental fee prior to occupying the stall. Producers, dealers and market customers may use the driveways and parking areas of the market, but no person may use a driveway as a through street. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every person desiring to use the area designated for producers to first furnish the market manager with satisfactory evidence that the produce or product to be sold by him in the area designated for producers has been raised or grown or produced by him upon land or premises owned or leased by him or some member of his immediate family. The market manager may require a statement in writing signed by such person evidencing such facts, and any false statement made therein shall be deemed a violation of this article and the person making such false statement shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2001, § 94-365; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-366. - Rubbish, refuse and litter disposal. 
    No person shall throw, place or permit to be thrown or placed on the municipal produce market or any part thereof or the public streets adjacent thereto any rubbish, refuse or litter of any kind or any vegetable or produce which is likely to become dangerous or offensive to the public. All spoiled produce must be placed in plastic bags prior to being placed in designated disposal bins on the market premises. 
(Code 2001, § 94-366; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-367. - Use during closed hours. 
    No person shall enter, occupy, use or leave any produce, commodity, container, box, crate, basket, motor vehicle or other type of personal property of any description within the limits of the municipal produce market during such time as the market is closed, without the permission of the market manager. 
(Code 2001, § 94-367; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-368. - Holding stalls by trick, scheme or artifice. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person occupying a stall in the municipal produce market to resort to any trick or scheme or artifice, to ask prices which are unreasonable when compared to prices asked for similar products at that time, or to refuse to sell his merchandise for the purpose of holding a stall. Such action on the part of a person in holding a stall shall be sufficient cause for the market manager to forfeit all rights, including fees paid, to such stall by such person. 
(Code 2001, § 94-368; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-369. - Removal of unattended products. 
    If products are left unattended in a stall for two hours at the municipal produce market, the market manager may forfeit the renter's right to the stall and dispose of the products. 
(Code 2001, § 94-369; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-370. - Minimum quantities. 
(a)  No dealer at the municipal produce market may sell in a quantity less than the minimum quantity which is established from time to time by the market manager. 
(b)  No producer, when assigned to the area designated for wholesale sales, shall sell in any quantity less than the minimum, which shall be established from time to time by the market manager. 
(Code 2001, § 94-370; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-371. - Restrictions on types of products. 
    No person may offer for sale any product prohibited by the market manager. The market manager is authorized to determine the types of products which may not be sold in the municipal produce market. 
(Code 2001, § 94-371; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-372. - Consumption of alcohol. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he consumes beer or other alcoholic beverage in the municipal produce market and he received notice that the consumption was unlawful but failed to leave the market or relinquish possession of the alcohol. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the consumption was during a special event and in a special event area in which the market manager approved alcohol consumption. 
(Code 2001, § 94-372; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-373. - Price fixing. 
    A person, as a producer or dealer at the municipal produce market, commits an offense if he agrees to fix or raise prices of products with another producer or dealer. 
(Code 2001, § 94-373; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-374. - Animals prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, keeper, or person having the custody or control of any dog, cat, or other animal to cause or permit such animal to go into or upon the municipal produce market. 
(Code 2001, § 94-374; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-375. - Display of produce; sale of produce not fit for human consumption. 
(a)  All products shall be displayed in a sanitary and attractive manner at the municipal produce market. Produce displayed and the containers the produce is packaged in should meet the highest degree of cleanliness. The market manager is empowered to require producers to use sanitary containers for produce on display. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring, cause to be brought, sell, offer for sale, or expose for sale in the municipal produce market any produce unfit for human consumption or otherwise not suitable for sale on the municipal produce market because of age, disease, damage or other conditions affecting the wholesomeness of the produce. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into the producers' section of the municipal produce market or to sell, offer for sale, or expose for sale in the producers' section any produce which has been in cold storage or which has been artificially ripened, which is overripe or immature, which is damaged or diseased, or which is affected by any condition that would render the produce unsuitable for sale in the producers' section. The decision of the market manager shall be final in determining the quality, condition and wholesomeness of all produce of the municipal produce market. All produce shall be subject to inspection by the market manager at all times, and any person who fails or refuses to permit such inspection shall forfeit all rights to his stall and shall, upon instruction of the market manager, immediately vacate the stall. 
(Code 2001, § 94-375; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-376. - Vehicles blocking driveways. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop or stand a motor vehicle on any of the driveways in the municipal produce market in such a manner as to block or prevent the passing of other vehicles. 
(Code 2001, § 94-376; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-377. - Illegal parking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a loaded produce truck on any portion of the municipal produce market without payment of required applicable fees. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to park vehicles for loading purposes under sheds in any manner that will block driveways or cause congestion of traffic flow under sheds. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to park any unauthorized vehicle upon the municipal produce market. 
(Code 2001, § 94-377; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-378. - Display of broken or sliced melons or fruit. 
    Produce samples may only be distributed at the municipal produce market if sanitary operations outlined in the Texas Health and Safety Code as applied to municipally owned farmer's markets are met as determined by the Health District. 
(Code 2001, § 94-378; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012; Ord. No. 31-2012, § 1, 6-5-2012) 
Sec. 94-379. - Obstructing sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to place any barrel, box, crate, wood, vehicle, merchandise, or other substances on any sidewalk in the municipal produce market so as to obstruct, entirely or in part, passage along such sidewalk or any part thereof. 
(Code 2001, § 94-379; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-380. - Fraudulent sale or possession of inferior produce. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person at the municipal produce market, with intent to deceive or to defraud, to sell, offer for sale, expose for sale or to possess for sale any box, basket, crate, bag, or other container containing produce, merchandise or other commodity of a quality inferior to that with which such container is apparently filled. 
(Code 2001, § 94-380; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 94-381. - Cleanliness of wet fabric to cover produce. 
    All burlap bags, sacks, cloth or other fabric, when used while wet to protect produce by persons utilizing the municipal produce market, must be thoroughly laundered and cleaned before being used for such purpose. The decision of the market manager as to the cleanliness of such fabric shall be final. When the market manager has determined that a fabric is too dirty for use on produce, the owner thereof must have such fabric laundered and cleaned before he shall be authorized to use the fabric. 
(Code 2001, § 94-381; Ord. No. 28-2012, § 1, 5-1-2012) 
Chapter 98 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Taxation generally, §§ 74-98. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to levy, assess and collect taxes, Texas Const., art. 11, § 5; property tax code, Texas Tax Code § 1.01 et seq.; power of home-rule municipality to levy general or special property taxes for lawful purposes, Texas Tax Code § 302.001(c); local taxation, Texas Tax Code § 301.01 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 98-1. - Fiscal year designated. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin with October 1 of each year and shall end with September 30 of the following year. 
(Code 1966, § 2-7; Code 2001, § 98-1) 
State Law reference- Establishing a fiscal year, Texas Tax Code § 1.05. 
Secs. 98-2-98-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAX[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Property tax, Texas Tax Code § 1.01 et seq.; local taxation, Texas Tax Code § 301.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-31. - Signature of mayor on tax deeds. 
    The mayor shall be empowered and directed to sign all deeds for redemption of lots and lands sold to the city at any legal sale for the delinquent taxes due on such lots and lands, whenever the owners present to the mayor receipts for the payment of taxes, costs and penalties assessed against such property. 
(Code 1966, § 28-8; Code 2001, § 98-31) 
Charter reference- Tax suits generally, §§ 85-90; tax sales, § 91. 
State Law reference- Tax sales and redemption, Texas Tax Code § 34.01 et seq. 
Secs. 98-32-98-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FOR ELDERLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Homestead exemption for elderly authorized, Texas Tax Code § 11.13(d)-(f). 

Sec. 98-61. - Authorized. 
    Upon compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances, $18,000.00 of the appraised or market value of residence homesteads of married or unmarried persons 65 years of age or older shall be exempt from ad valorem taxes levied by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 28-6.1; Code 2001, § 98-61) 
Secs. 98-62-98-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Local hotel occupancy tax, Texas Tax Code § 351.001 et seq. 

Sec. 98-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consideration means the cost of the room in a hotel and does not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room or occupancy and does not include any tax assessed for occupancy thereof by any other governmental agency. 
    Hotel means a building in which members of the public obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term "hotel" includes a hotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodging house, inn, rooming house, or bed and breakfast. The term "hotel" does not include the following: 
(1)  A hospital, sanitarium, or nursing home; 
(2)  A dormitory or other housing facility owned or leased and operated by an institution of higher education or a private or independent institution of higher education, as those terms are defined by Texas Education Code § 61.003, used by the institution for the purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an educational program or activity at the institution; or 
(3)  An oilfield portable unit, as defined by Texas Tax Code § 152.001. 
    Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and if the use or possession extends for a period of less than 30 days. 
    Occupant means anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping. 
    Permanent resident means any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the current year or preceding year so long as there is no interruption of payment for the period. 
(Code 1966, § 28-26; Code 2001, § 98-91) 
Sec. 98-92. - Levy and use. 
(a)  There is levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any sleeping room furnished by any hotel where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day. Such tax shall be equal to seven percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room to such hotel. 
(b)  Such funds shall be expended as provided in Texas Tax Code § 351.001 et seq. 
(c)  No tax shall be imposed under this article upon a permanent resident. 
(Code 1966, § 28-21; Code 2001, § 98-92) 
State Law reference- Exemptions, Texas Tax Code § 351.008. 
Sec. 98-93. - Collection. 
    Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed in section 98-92 for the city. 
(Code 1966, § 28-22; Code 2001, § 98-93) 
State Law reference- Collection of the tax, Texas Tax Code § 351.004. 
Sec. 98-94. - Reports. 
    On the last day of the month, every person required in section 98-93 to collect the tax imposed in this article shall file a report with the director of finance showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding month, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies, and any other information as the director of finance may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. 
(Code 1966, § 28-23; Code 2001, § 98-94) 
Sec. 98-95. - Rules and regulations. 
    The director of finance shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied in this article and shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under this article. 
(Code 1966, § 28-24; Code 2001, § 98-95) 
Sec. 98-96. - Penalties. 
    If any person shall fail to collect the tax imposed in this article or shall fail to file a report as required in this article or shall fail to pay to the director of finance the tax as imposed in this article when the report for payment is due or shall file a false report, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by the Texas Tax Code. In addition such person who fails to remit the tax imposed by this article within the time required shall forfeit five percent of the amount due as a penalty and after the first 30 days shall forfeit an additional five percent of such tax; provided, however, that the penalty shall never be less than $1.00. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of six percent per annum beginning 60 days from the date due. 
(Code 1966, § 28-25; Code 2001, § 98-96) 
Secs. 98-97-98-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TAX FREEZE FOR HISTORIC PRESERVATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Historic sites exemption, Texas Tax Code § 11.24. 

Sec. 98-126. - Historic landmark tax freeze. 
    The city council may by ordinance approve a tax freeze on both the land and improvements for eligible historic landmarks or land and improvements within designated historic districts, which the city council determines is in need of tax relief to encourage its preservation. The qualifying historic landmark will be taxed on an annual assessed value equal to the assessed value on the tax year immediately before the rehabilitation was commenced. The tax freeze will begin the first day of the first tax year after the completion of the project for which there has been an approved design review, and where the improvements are in accordance with the approved design review. 
(Code 1966, § 28-30; Code 2001, § 98-126; Ord. No. 109-2001, § 1, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 98-127. - Eligibility. 
    To be eligible for a city property tax freeze as provided in this article, the property must be designated a local historic landmark by the city council or be contained within a locally designated historic district and shall meet all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The cost of the rehabilitation project must be: 
a.  For commercial projects or improvements, 50 percent of the assessed valuation of the structure for the year the rehabilitation is to begin or $100,000.00, whichever is less. The tax freeze shall not exceed five years following completion of the rehabilitation project. 
b.  For a single-family residence, 25 percent of the assessed valuation of the structure for the year the rehabilitation is to begin or $50,000.00, whichever is less. The tax freeze shall not exceed eight years following completion of the rehabilitation project. 
(2)  The plans and proposals for the rehabilitation project must be approved by the Landmark Commission. 
(3)  The historic landmark must not have been granted a previous property tax freeze under this article for the restoration or rehabilitation of the historic landmark. 
(4)  The rehabilitation project must begin within six months from the date of design review approval. 
(5)  Should the project receive tax increment finance (TIF) funds, no tax freeze as provided under this article shall be permitted. 
(Code 1966, § 28-31; Code 2001, § 98-127; Ord. No. 109-2001, § 1, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 98-128. - Historic landmark destruction or alteration. 
(a)  Where the city council determines that a historic landmark is totally or partially destroyed or altered by the willful act or negligence of the owner or his representative, the owner shall immediately repay to the city all of the tax revenues that were not paid because of the tax freeze. 
(b)  Where the historic landmark is totally or partially destroyed or altered other than by the willful act or negligence of the owner or his representative, the owner shall, within 60 days, request a demolition permit when reconstruction is not feasible or request a building permit to reconstruct or repair the historic landmark upon receiving approval of the reconstruction or repair plans from the Design Review Commission. 
(Code 1966, § 28-32; Code 2001, § 98-128) 
Secs. 98-129-98-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TAX INCREMENT FINANCING[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Property redevelopment and tax abatement, Texas Tax Code § 312.001 et seq.; Economic Development Act, Texas Tax Code § 313.001 et seq. 

Sec. 98-141. - General scope and description of zone area. 
    All tax increment financing zones described herein are established in accordance with those city ordinances which describe them, and encompass an area described in the associated ordinance for a period of time established by the city council. Depictions in this article are for informational purposes only. 
Sec. 98-142. - Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone Number Two. 
(a)  Reinvestment Zone Number Two is established in accordance with Ordinance Number 61-2005, § 6, 8-16-2005, approved on August 16, 2005, and expiring on July 31, 2025. Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone Number Two as depicted in this section in Figure 2. 
(b)  Figure 2. Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone Number Two. 

Sec. 98-143. - Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone Number Three. 
(a)  Reinvestment Zone Number Three is established in accordance with Ordinance Number 59-2009, § 4, 9-1-2009, approved on September 1, 2009, and expiring on December 31, 2029. Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone Number Three as depicted in this section in Figure 3. 
(b)  Figure 3. Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone Number Three. 

Chapter 102 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Rules of the road, Texas Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 102-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a public road other than a street or highway being a division within a block running parallel with and/or connecting with one or more streets. 
    Bicycle means every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels. 
    Commercial vehicle means every vehicle licensed or lawfully used for the transportation of property. 
    Crosswalk means that part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway; any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers, materials or freight. 
    Driver means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
    Intersection means the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at or approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. If such intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled. 
    Motorcycle means every vehicle having a saddle or seat for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
    Official time standard means Central Standard Time whenever certain hours are named in this chapter. 
    Official traffic control devices means all signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of the city traffic engineer for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic. 
    Park, when prohibited, means the stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading. 
    Passenger curb loading zone means a place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
    Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
    Police officer means every officer of the Police Department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Private road or driveway means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
    Railroad means a carrier of persons or property upon cars, operated upon stationary rails. 
    Railroad train means a steam engine, electric or other motor with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails. 
    Right-of-way means the privilege of the immediate use of the roadway. 
    Roadway means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel exclusive of the curb or shoulder. If a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" refers to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
    Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Stop, when required, means complete cessation of movement. 
    Stop, stopping or standing, when prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Through highway means every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways or streets is required by law to yield the right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided in this chapter. 
    Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, motorbuses, and other conveyances either singly or together while using any street for purposes of travel. 
    Traffic control signal means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1966, § 29-2; Code 2001, § 102-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Transportation Code §§ 541.001-541.401. 
Sec. 102-2. - Public streets designated. 
    All streets and parts of streets properly dedicated and accepted by the city are designated as public streets. 
(Code 1966, § 29-18; Code 2001, § 102-2) 
Sec. 102-3. - Railroad trains blocking streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the railroad train in such manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than ten minutes, except that this shall not apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching. 
(b)  Any passenger or other through train that is stopped at the railroad station must break so as to permit traffic to cross at any designated intersection while such train is stopped. 
(c)  If any emergency vehicle is denied a crossing because of a train being stopped or being pulled across such crossing, the person in charge of such train or the brakeman, fireman or engineer shall cause such crossing to be cleared immediately at the request of the driver of the emergency vehicle or any firefighter or police officer. 
(Code 1966, § 29-25; Code 2001, § 102-3) 
State Law reference- Trains blocking streets, Texas Transportation Code § 471.007. 
Sec. 102-4. - Oversized loads. 
    Vehicles carrying or pulling loads exceeding 12-foot maximum width and/or 95-foot in maximum length shall be prohibited from operating on public streets and highways within the city limits Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 30-2018, § 1, 7-17-2018) 
Secs. 102-5-102-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate traffic by means of police officers, Texas Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(1). 

Sec. 102-31. - Authority of chief of police. 
    The chief of police is empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the sections of this chapter and the provisions of other city traffic ordinances and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. 
(Code 1966, § 29-3; Code 2001, § 102-31) 
Sec. 102-32. - Authority of Fire Department officers to direct traffic. 
    Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1966, § 29-6; Code 2001, § 102-32) 
Sec. 102-33. - Installation and maintenance of traffic control devices. 
    The city Traffic Engineering Division shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals, and devices when and as required under this chapter and the city traffic ordinances to make effective this chapter and the provisions of such ordinances and may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as may be deemed necessary to regulate traffic under this chapter, the city traffic ordinances or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Code 1966, § 29-70; Code 2001, § 102-33) 
Sec. 102-34. - Accident investigation reports. 
    There shall be a charge of the higher of an amount established by separate ordinance or the maximum amount allowable in accordance with state law for each copy of the investigating officer's report of investigation made at the scene of an automobile accident. Such charge is to be paid in cash to the chief of police and shall be deposited in the city's general fund. 
(Code 1966, § 29-17(b); Code 2001, § 102-35) 
Sec. 102-35. - Permits required for parades and processions. 
    No procession or parade, excepting the forces of the United States Army or Navy, the military forces of this state, and the forces of the Police and Fire Departments, shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the traffic engineer and such other regulations as are set forth in this chapter which may apply. 
(Code 1966, § 29-19; Code 2001, § 102-36) 
Sec. 102-36. - Permits required for house moving. 
    Upon the issuance of a moving permit, the house mover shall cause notice to be given to the Traffic Engineering Department, telephone or light companies, chief of the Fire Department, or others whose property may be affected by such removal. The house mover shall set forth in all notices the route that will be taken, the time started, and the approximate time of completion. 
(Code 1966, § 29-20; Code 2001, § 102-37) 
Sec. 102-37. - Designation of crosswalks and establishment of safety zones. 
    The city Traffic Engineering Division is authorized to: 
(1)  Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as may be deemed necessary. 
(2)  Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as may be deemed necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(Code 1966, § 29-216; Code 2001, § 102-38) 
Sec. 102-38. - Establishment of traffic lanes. 
(a)  The city Traffic Engineering Division is authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. Overhead traffic lane signs are approved for the proper control of lane assignments. When such lanes are properly signed and marked, it is a violation of this chapter for any vehicle traveling straight through or turning left or right contrary to properly signed and marked lanes. 
(b)  Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane, except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. 
(Code 1966, § 29-217; Code 2001, § 102-39) 
Sec. 102-39. - Visibility sight triangle. 
(a)  Wherever the director of aviation, traffic and transportation shall find a tree, shrub, hedge or other natural growth of any sort or description located and growing within the boundaries of any public street in the city which interferes with the vision of automobile drivers or the drivers of other types of vehicles driving upon such streets, therefore constituting a traffic hazard, the director of aviation, traffic and transportation is therefore authorized to cause the traffic hazard to be abated by trimming or removing any such obstruction. 
(b)  The director of aviation, traffic and transportation is authorized to give written notice to the owner of any abutting property and afford such owner the opportunity to do the work of removing such hazard to traffic within a ten-day period of receipt of the notice, but shall not be compelled to await the owner's action when he shall find that the public safety requires the immediate abatement of such hazard. 
(c)  If any hazard is not removed after notice to the adjoining property owner, the director of aviation, traffic and transportation is authorized and directed to request the Parks and Recreation Department to furnish the workers and equipment to do whatever is necessary in the premises to remove such hazard, such work to be done immediately. 
(d)  If any interested person is dissatisfied with the action of the director of aviation, traffic and transportation, the person may, within the ten-day period of notice described in this section, file an appeal with the city Traffic Safety Commission for a full and complete hearing by such commission, and the interested property owner may in his discretion appeal the matter to the city council, whose judgment thereon shall be final. 
(e)  For the direction of the director of aviation, traffic and transportation, the minimum height of 12 feet of clearance of all hedges, shrubbery or tree limbs over any city street is determined to be the minimum height for any overhanging shrubbery or growth. 
(f)  On any corner lot or parkway adjacent thereto, a fence, wall, structure, sign, hedge, tree or obstruction of any nature erected, planted or maintained so as to interfere with sight lines at elevations between two feet and eight feet above the top of the adjacent roadway curb or, if there is no curb, from the average street grade, within a triangular area formed by the intersection of the adjacent curblines or, if none exists, the normal curblines and a point on each curbline 45 feet from the intersection shall be prima facie evidence that such fence, wall, structure, sign, hedge, tree or obstruction of any nature constitutes an obstruction to vision as regards to public traffic on the streets. The triangular area of visibility as provided for in this subsection is further described and depicted by the drawing following this subsection. Any such fence, wall, structure, sign, hedge, tree or obstruction of any nature erected, planted or maintained in violation of this subsection shall be removed upon written notice from the director of aviation, traffic and transportation, served upon the owner, agent or occupant of the premises where such obstruction has been erected, planted or maintained. If the obstruction is not removed within ten days after notice, it may be removed by the city at the expense of the property owner. The owner, agent or occupant shall be subject to a fine of not more than $200.00, and each day that such owner, agent or occupant suffers the obstruction to remain shall be deemed a separate offense. Any building or structure built in conformance with the city building codes or requirements which fall within this triangular area shall be exempt from this subsection. 

(Code 1966, § 29-215; Code 2001, § 102-40) 
Sec. 102-40. - Authority to impound motor vehicles for lack of insurance or driver's license. 
(a)  A police officer is authorized to remove or cause the removal of a motor vehicle from a public place to a place designated by the chief of police when the motor vehicle is involved in an accident or stopped by a police officer for an alleged violation of a city or state traffic law or other law applicable to the operation of a motor vehicle on the roadway and the motor vehicle's owner or operator fails to show: 
(1)  Evidence of financial responsibility as required under Texas Transportation Code § 601.001 et seq., as amended; or 
(2)  A valid driver's license appropriate for the type of vehicle operated by the operator of the motor vehicle. A suspended license is not considered to be valid. 
(b)  Prior to impoundment of the motor vehicle for failure to show evidence of financial responsibility, the police officer shall verify the status of financial responsibility by utilizing or obtaining the utilization of a verification program established pursuant to the Texas Transportation Code § 601.451 et seq. 
(c)  Prior to impoundment of the motor vehicle for failure to show a valid driver's license appropriate for the type of vehicle operated by the operator of the motor vehicle, the police officer shall verify the status of licensure by utilizing or obtaining the utilization of a database of valid motor vehicle licenses. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, the term "public place" means a place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, other than a privately owned parking area that is intended to provide parking for the residence of the operator of the vehicle. 
Secs. 102-41-102-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICE USE 

Sec. 102-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means: 
(1)  A fire department or police vehicle; 
(2)  A public or private ambulance operated by a person who has been issued a license by the Department of State Health Services; 
(3)  An emergency medical services vehicle: 
a.  Authorized under an emergency medical services provider license issued by the Department of State Health Services under Chapter 773, Health and Safety Code; and 
b.  Operating under a contract with an emergency services district that requires the emergency medical services provider to respond to emergency calls with the vehicle; 
(4)  A municipal department or public service corporation emergency vehicle that has been designated or authorized by the governing body of a municipality; 
(5)  A county-owned or county-leased emergency management vehicle that has been designated or authorized by the commissioners' court; 
(6)  A vehicle that has been designated by the department under Section 546.0065; 
(7)  A private vehicle of a volunteer firefighter or a certified emergency medical services employee or volunteer when responding to a fire alarm or medical emergency; 
(8)  An industrial emergency response vehicle, including an industrial ambulance, when responding to an emergency, but only if the vehicle is operated in compliance with criteria in effect September 1, 1989, and established by the predecessor of the Texas Industrial Emergency Services Board of the State Firemen's and Fire Marshals' Association of Texas; 
(9)  A vehicle of a blood bank or tissue bank, accredited or approved under the laws of this state or the United States, when making emergency deliveries of blood, drugs, medicines, or organs; 
(10)  A vehicle used for law enforcement purposes that is owned or leased by a federal governmental entity; or 
(11)  A private vehicle of an employee or volunteer of a county emergency management division in a county with a population of more than 46,500 and less than 48,000 that is designated as an authorized emergency vehicle by the commissioners' court of that county. 
    Hands-free device means speakerphone capability or a telephone attachment to other piece of equipment, regardless of whether permanently installed in/on the vehicle, that allows use of the wireless device without use of either of the operator's hands. 
    Operator means, as used in reference to a vehicle, a person who drives or has physical control of a vehicle. 
    Parked shall mean for the operator to completely cease movement of a vehicle in a lawful manner and location. For purposes of this section, "Parked" does not include or mean a vehicle stopped in a lane of traffic due to either a lawful traffic control device, or the conditions on the roadway, or traffic congestion patterns then existing. 
    Vehicle means a device that can be used to transport or draw persons or property on a highway. The term does not include: 
(1)  A device exclusively used on stationary rails or tracks; or 
(2)  Manufactured housing as that term is defined by Chapter 1201, Occupations Code. 
    Wireless communication device means a device that uses a commercial mobile service as defined by 47 USC 332 including but not limited to cell phones and other forms of electronic portable communication devices. 
(Ord. No. 05-2017, § 1, 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 102-67. - General requirements. 
(a)  An operator of a vehicle may not use a wireless communication device for any purpose while operating a vehicle on any street or highway within the City of Wichita Falls, unless employing a hands-free device. 
(b)  This section does not apply to: 
(1)  An operator of an authorized emergency vehicle using a wireless communication device while acting in an official capacity; 
(2)  An operator who is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission while operating a radio frequency device other than a wireless communication device; 
(3)  An operator using a wireless communication device who is legally parked; or 
(4)  An operator who is using a wireless communication device while the vehicle is on private property. 
(Ord. No. 05-2017, § 1, 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 102-68. - Affirmative defenses. 
(1)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution of an offense under this section if a wireless communication device is used to make an emergency call to: 
a.  An emergency response service, including a rescue, emergency medical or hazardous material response service; 
b.  A hospital; 
c.  A fire department; 
d.  A health clinic; 
e.  A medical doctor's office; 
f.  An individual to administer first aid treatment; or 
g.  A police department. 
(2)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution of an offense under this section if a person uses their fingers to activate the wireless communication device for the purposes of accepting an incoming phone call or to end a phone call, so long as the action does not require the person to hold the wireless communication device in the person's hand. 
(Ord. No. 05-2017, § 1, 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 102-69. - Fine. 
    Any person who violates any section of this article shall be guilty of a violation as provided in section 1-14 of the Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 05-2017, § 1, 2-21-2017) 
Sec. 102-70. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 56-2016, adopted 12-20-2016, repealed § 102-70, which pertained to the meetings of the traffic safety commission and derived from Code 1966, § 29-201; Code 2001, § 102-70. 
Sec. 102-71. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 56-2016, adopted 12-20-2016, repealed § 102-71, which pertained to the committees of the traffic safety commission and derived from Code 1966, § 29-202; Code 2001, § 102-71; Ord. No. 65-2001, § 2, 7-17-2001. 
Sec. 102-72. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 56-2016, adopted 12-20-2016, repealed § 102-72, which pertained to the purposes of the traffic safety commission and derived from Code 1966, § 29-203; Code 2001, § 102-72. 
Sec. 102-73. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 56-2016, adopted 12-20-2016, repealed § 102-73, which pertained to the powers and duties of the traffic safety commission and derived from Code 1966, § 29-204; Code 2001, § 102-73; Ord. No. 65-2001, § 3, 7-17-2001. 
Secs. 102-74-102-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIFIC STREET REGULATIONS 

Sec. 102-101. - Authority to place and obedience to markers, buttons or signs. 
(a)  The city Traffic Engineering Division is authorized to place markers, buttons, or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(b)  When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Code 1966, § 29-42; Code 2001, § 102-101) 
Sec. 102-102. - Authority to prohibit turns at certain intersections. 
(a)  The Traffic Engineering Division is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right or left turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, and the hours shall be plainly indicated on the signs or may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Code 1966, § 29-43; Code 2001, § 102-102) 
Sec. 102-103. - Load restrictions on certain streets. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified in the posted limits at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets so posted, which streets are on file in the office of the Traffic Engineering Division. 
(Code 1966, § 29-26; Code 2001, § 102-103) 
Sec. 102-104. - U-turns. 
(a)  A U-turn is a turning movement made by a vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon a street, road or alley. 
(b)  The Traffic Engineering Division shall have the authority to determine those official medians, openings and dead-end streets where U-turns would be unsafe and may place signs prohibiting U-turns at such places. The making of U-turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day. 
(c)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that U-turns are prohibited, no driver shall disobey them. 
(d)  No driver shall make a U-turn unless such movement can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1966, § 29-44; Code 2001, § 102-105) 
Sec. 102-105. - Designation of one-way streets and alleys. 
(a)  Whenever any city ordinance designates any one-way street or alley, the Traffic Engineering Division shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(b)  Upon the streets and parts of streets and in the alleys designated as provided in subsection (a) of this section, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. In accordance with this section and when properly signposted, traffic shall move only in the direction indicated upon the streets which are on file in the office of the Traffic Engineering Division. 
(Code 1966, § 29-45; Code 2001, § 102-106) 
Sec. 102-106. - Driving vehicles on sidewalks. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1966, § 29-52; Code 2001, § 102-107) 
Sec. 102-107. - State speed laws applicable. 
    The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within this city, except as this article, as authorized by state law, declares and determines upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas. In such event, it shall be prima facie unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared in this article when signs are in place giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1966, § 29-89; Code 2001, § 102-108) 
State Law reference- Speed limits, Texas Transportation Code § 545.351 et seq. 
Sec. 102-108. - Altered prima facie speed limits. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "highway" shall refer to all publicly dedicated streets, roads, and alleys within the city. 
(b)  In accordance with state law pursuant to engineering and traffic investigations performed by the city's Traffic Engineering Division, the prima facie speed limits are hereby altered to apply in the speed zones on parts of city highways as described in Table 102-108(b). 
(c)  In accordance with state law pursuant to engineering and traffic investigations performed by the city's Traffic Engineering Division, the altered prima facie speed limits for school speed zones on parts of city highways described in Table 102-108(c), shall apply at such times and places as each described school speed zone is active. The city's Traffic Engineering Division shall establish the times in which each described school zone is active, and said speed zones shall be applicable in accordance with signs placed that give notice thereof. 
(d)  Prima facie speed limits established under subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be enforceable when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected in accordance with state laws and regulations. 
Table 102-108(b) 
Speed Zones 
Name of Zone Location of Zone Altered 
Prima Facie 
Speed 
Limit 
(MPH) 9th Street Zone #1 From the intersection of 9th and Van Buren to the intersection of 9th and Seymour Highway 35 Anchor Road Zone #1 From the intersection of Anchor and Barnett to the intersection of Anchor and Turtle Creek 45 Armstrong Drive Zone #1 From the intersection of Armstrong and FM 890 to 2300 feet north of the intersection of Armstrong and FM 890 45 Barnett Road Zone #1 From the intersection of Barnett and Seymour Highway north to the city limits 55 Barnett Road Zone #2 From the intersection of Barnett and Kell East to the intersection of Barnett and Seymour Highway 45 Barnett Road Zone #3 From the intersection of Barnett and Southwest to the intersection of Barnett and Kell East 45 Barnett Road Zone #4 From the intersection of Barnett and Southwest to the intersection of Barnett and Bayberry 40 Brook Avenue Zone #1 From the intersection of Brook and Kell West to the intersection of Brook and Huff 35 Call Field Road Zone #1 From the intersection of Call Field and Kemp to the intersection of Call Field and Fairway 35 City View Drive Zone #1 From the intersection of City View and Old Iowa Park to the intersection of City View and US 287 40 City View Drive Zone #2 From the intersection of City View and US 287 to the intersection of City View and Airport 35 City View Drive Zone #3 From the intersection of City View and Airport to the intersection of City View and Kiel 45 City View Drive Zone #4 From the intersection of City View and Kiel to the intersection of City View and Reilly 50 Duncan Street/ 3rd Zone #1 From the intersection of Duncan and Rosewood to the intersection of Duncan/3rd and Martin Luther King 35 Fairway Boulevard Zone #1 From 150 feet north of the intersection of Fairway and Harbor to the intersection of Fairway and Kell West 40 Fairway Boulevard Zone #2 From the intersection of Fairway and Kell West to the intersection of Fairway and Seymour Highway 45 FM 369 Zone 1 From MP 9.154 to 10.091 60 FM 369 Zone 2 From MP 10.683 to 10.807 60 Galveston Street Zone #1 From the intersection of Galveston and East Scott to the intersection of Galveston and Central Freeway East 35 Galveston Street Zone #2 From the intersection of Galveston and Central Freeway East to the intersection of Galveston and Kell Freeway East 40 Hamilton Boulevard Zone #1 From the intersection of Hamilton and Hampstead to 600 feet northeast of the intersection of Hamilton and Berkeley 40 Harding Street Zone #1 From the intersection of Harding and the Emanuel Davis Overpass to the intersection of Harding and Linda 40 Harding Street Zone #2 From the intersection of Harding and Linda east to the city limits 45 Hatton Road Zone #1 From the intersection of Hatton and Jacksboro Highway to the intersection of Hatton and Bonny 40 Hatton Road Zone #2 From the intersection of Hatton and Bonny east to the city limits 45 Highway 79 Zone #1 From mile post 5.24 to mile post 5.82 45 Huntington Lane Zone #1 From the intersection of Huntington and Reilly south to the intersection of Huntington and US 287 50 Johnson Road Zone #1 From the intersection of Johnson and Barnett to the intersection of Johnson and Fairway 40 Kemp Boulevard Zone #1 From the intersection of Kemp and Southwest to the intersection of Kemp and Seymour Highway 40 Kiel Lane Zone #1 From the intersection of Kiel and Wellington to the intersection of Kiel and City View 50 Kovarik Road Zone #1 From the intersection of Kovarik and Barnett west to the city limits near the intersection of Kovarik and Arena 45 Lake Park Drive Zone #1 From the intersection of Lake Park and southwest to the intersection of Lake Park and Midwestern 35 Lawrence Road Zone #1 From the intersection of Lawrence and Kell Freeway east to the intersection of Lawrence and Call Field 35 Maplewood Avenue Zone #1 From the intersection of Maplewood and southwest to the intersection of Maplewood and Lawrence 35 McNeil Avenue Zone #1 From the intersection of McNeil and Seymour Highway to the intersection of McNeil and Call Field 35 Midwestern Parkway Zone #1 From the intersection of Midwestern and Kemp to the intersection of Midwestern and Eureka 35 Midwestern Parkway Zone #2 From the intersection of Midwestern and Henry S. Grace Service Road to the intersection of Midwestern and Council 40 Missile Road Zone #1 From the intersection of Missile and Central Freeway to the intersection of Missile and Burkburnett 45 North Beverley Drive Zone #1 From the intersection of N Beverley and Iowa Park to the intersection of N Beverley and Loop 11 45 Parkhill Road Zone #1 From the intersection of Parkhill and Kovaric to the intersection of Parkhill and Seymour Highway 40 Rathgeber Road Zone #1 From the intersection of W Rathgeber and Archer City Highway east to the city limits 40 Reilly Road Zone #1 From the intersection of Reilly and Central Freeway west to the city limits 55 River Road Zone #1 From the intersection of Duncan and River Road, northeast to the city limits 35 Seymour Road Zone #1 From the intersection of Seymour and Seymour Highway to the intersection of Seymour and Indian Heights 40 Sheppard Access Road Zone #1 From the intersection of Sheppard Access and Old Iowa Park to the intersection of Sheppard Access and Spur 325 45 Stone Lake Drive Zone #1 From the intersection of Stone Lake and southwest to the intersection of Stone Lake and W Rathgeber 35 Taft Boulevard Zone #1 From the intersection of Taft and Kell East to the intersection of Taft and Hampstead 35 Taft Boulevard Zone #2 From the intersection of Taft and Midwestern to the intersection of Taft and Southwest 40 Turtle Creek Road Zone #1 From the intersection of Turtle Creek and Seymour Highway to the intersection of Turtle Creek and Anchor 45 Wellington Lane Zone #1 From the intersection of Northwest Freeway to the intersection of Wellington and Kiel 50 Wellington Lane Zone #2 From the intersection of Wellington and Kiel to the intersection of Wellington and Reilly 50 Windthorst Road Zone #1 From the intersection of Windthorst and E Scott to the intersection of Windthorst and Hatton 45  
Table 102-108(c) 
School Speed Zones 
Name of Zone Street Location of Zone Altered 
Prima Facie 
Speed 
Limit 
(MPH) Alamo Elementary School Zone #1 11th Street From 69 feet east of the intersection of Harrison and 11th to 33 feet west of the intersection of Denver and 11th 20 Alamo Elementary School Zone #2 Van Buren Street From 224 feet south of the intersection of Van Buren and 11th to the intersection of Van Buren and 11th 20 Christ Academy Zone #1 Stonelake Drive From 20 feet south of the intersection of Stonelake and Bartley to 238 feet south of the intersection of Stonelake and Rockcreek 20 City View Elementary School Zone #1 City View Drive From 288 south of the intersection of City View and Crescent to 394 feet north of the intersection of City View and Iowa Park 25 City View High School Zone #1 City View Drive From the intersection of City View and Longview to 275 feet south of the intersection of City View and Wrangler 25 Crockett Elementary School Zone #1 Hayes Street From 47 feet northeast of the intersection of Hayes and Avenue K to 204 feet southwest of the intersection of Hayes and Avenue H 20 Crockett Elementary School Zone #2 Seymour Road From 120 feet east of the intersection of Seymour and Harriet to 202 feet northeast of the intersection of Seymour and Beverly/Garfield 20 Crockett Elementary School Zone #3 Seymour Road/ Avenue K From 13 feet east of the intersection of Seymour and Arthur to 39 feet west of the intersection of Avenue K and Hayes 20 Cunningham Elementary School Zone #1 McNeil Avenue From 23 feet south of the intersection of McNeil and Rubsam to 101 feet south of the intersection of McNeil and Pool 20 Cunningham Elementary School Zone #2 Pool Street From 222 feet east of the intersection of Pool and Hughes to 172 feet west of the intersection of Pool and McNeil 20 Cunningham Elementary School Zone #3 Phillips Drive From 301 feet west of the intersection of Phillips and Hughes to the intersection of Phillips and McNeil 20 Fain Elementary School Zone #1 Norman Street From 250 feet east of the intersection of Norman and Nursery to 134 feet east of the intersection of Norman and Alamo 20 Farris Developmental Center Zone #1 Burkburnett Road From 204 feet northwest of the intersection of Burkburnett and Jefferson to 180 feet southeast of the intersection of Burkburnett and Lincoln 20 Fowler Elementary School Zone #1 Cypress Avenue From 45 feet south of the intersection of Cypress and Tower to the intersection of Cypress and Langford 20 Fowler Elementary School Zone #2 Langford Lane From 119 feet east of the intersection of Langford and Indigo to 163 feet southeast of the intersection of Langford and Cypress 20 Fowler Elementary School Zone #3 Tower Road From 124 feet east of the intersection of Tower and Lovers to the intersection of Tower and Cypress 20 Fowler Elementary School Zone #4 Ridgecrest Drive From 142 feet west of the intersection of Ridgecrest and Wildflower to the intersection of Ridgecrest and Cypress 20 Fowler Elementary School Zone #5 Sonora Drive Entire street within zone 20 Franklin Elementary School Zone #1 Taft Boulevard From 78 feet south of the intersection of Taft and Speedway to 29 feet south of the intersection of Taft and Clarinda 20 Franklin Elementary School Zone #2 Speedway Avenue From the intersection of Speedway and Taft to the intersection of Speedway and Harrison 20 Franklin Elementary School Zone #3 Martin Boulevard From 250 feet northeast of the intersection of Martin and Avondale to the intersection of Martin and Speedway 20 Hirschi High School Zone #1 Borton Street From 139 feet east of the intersection of Borton and N Beverly to 164 feet east of the intersection of Borton and Ridgeway 20 Houston Elementary School Zone #1 Kemp Boulevard From 120 feet south of the intersection of Kemp and Avenue N to 238 feet south of the intersection of Kemp and Avenue O 25 Houston Elementary School Zone #2 Miami Avenue From 35 feet east of the intersection of Miami and Garfield to the intersection of Miami and Grant 20 Houston Elementary School Zone #3 Grant Street From 11 feet south of the intersection of Grant and Avenue N to 42 feet north of the intersection of Grant and Avenue O 20 Jefferson Elementary School / Rider High School Zone #1 Fairway Boulevard From 15 feet south of the intersection of Fairway and Ernest to 45 feet north of the intersection of Fairway and Lockwood 25 Jefferson Elementary School / Rider High School Zone #2 Mistletoe Drive From 50 feet north of the intersection of Mistletoe and Chuck to the intersection of Mistletoe and Lindale 20 Jefferson Elementary School Zone #3 Johnson Road From 214 feet east of the intersection of Johnson and Pasadena to 544 feet west of the intersection of Johnson and Fairway 25 Jefferson Elementary School Zone #4 Lindale Drive From 131 feet west of the intersection of Lindale and Briarwood to the intersection of Lindale and Fairway 20 John Tower Elementary School Zone #1 Missile Road From 500 feet west of the intersection of Missile and Hooper to 505 feet east of the intersection of Missile and Hooper 25 John Tower Elementary School Zone #2 Hooper Drive From 367 feet south of the intersection of Hooper and John Tower to the intersection of Hooper and Reilly 20 John Tower Elementary School Zone #3 Reilly Road From 103 feet east of the intersection of Reilly and Dewey to the intersection of Reilly and Hooper 20 John Tower Elementary School Zone #4 John Tower Drive From the intersection of John Tower and Hooper to the intersection of John Tower and Reilly 20 Kate Burgess Elementary School Zone #1 Maurine Street From 244 feet east of the intersection of Maurine and N Beverly to 241 feet east of the intersection of Maurine and Ridgeway 20 Kate Haynes Elementary School Zone #1 Jo Ann Drive From 200 feet north of the intersection of Jo Ann and Katherine to 300 foot south of the intersection of Jo Ann and Katherine 20 Kate Haynes Elementary School Zone #2 Katherine Drive From the intersection of Katherine and Hooper to the intersection of Katherine and Billie 20 Kirby Junior High School Zone #1 Loop 11 From the intersection of Loop 11 and N Beverly to 400 feet north of the intersection of Loop 11 and Ledford 35 Lamar Elementary School Zone #1 Hines Boulevard From 224 feet southeast of the intersection of Hines and Lisbon to 107 feet southeast of the intersection of Hines and Lucas 20 Lamar Elementary School Zone #2 Lucas Avenue From 206 feet north of the intersection of Lucas and Sunnyside to 139 feet west of the intersection of Lucas and Kimberly 20 McNeil Junior High School Zone #1 Southwest Parkway From 524 feet west of the intersection of Southwest and Barnett to 111 feet east of the intersection of Southwest and Cape Cod 35 McNeil Junior High School Zone #2 Barnett Road From 477 feet south of the intersection of Barnett and Montreal to 347 feet north of the intersection of Barnett and Langford 20 Milam Elementary School Zone #1 Rhea Road From 150 feet north of the intersection of Rhea and Lavell to 150 feet south of the intersection of Rhea and Featherston 20 Milam Elementary School Zone #2 Stearns Avenue From the intersection of Stearns and Rhea to the intersection of Sterns and Boren 20 Notre Dame Elementary School Zone #1 Lansing Boulevard From 18 feet southeast of the intersection of Lansing and Kingsbury to 107 feet south of the intersection of Lansing and Berwick 20 Notre Dame Elementary School Zone #2 York Street From 43 feet east of the intersection of York and Belgrave to 37 feet east of the intersection of York and Pennsylvania 20 Rider High School Zone #3 Cypress Avenue From 27 feet south of the intersection of Cypress and Spanish to 152 feet south of the intersection of Cypress and Lindale 20 Rider High School Zone #4 Raider Drive From 78 feet south of the intersection of Raider and Johnson to the intersection of Raider and Cypress 20 Rider High School Zone #5 Lindale Drive From 138 feet west of the intersection of Lindale and Cypress to the intersection of Lindale and Brookdale 20 Scotland Park Elementary School Zone #1 N 6th Street From the intersection of N 6th and N Central Freeway Access to 171 feet east of the intersection of N 6th and Louis Esquibel 20 Scotland Park Elementary School Zone #2 N 3rd Street From 143 feet northeast of the intersection of N 3rd and N Central Freeway Access to 267 feet east of the intersection of N 3rd and Stratford 20 Scotland Park Elementary School Zone #3 Stratford Avenue From 140 feet north of the intersection of Stratford and N 6th to 154 feet north of the intersection of Stratford and N 2nd 20 Scotland Park Elementary School Zone #4 N 5th Street From 249 feet east of the intersection of N 5th and Stratford to the intersection of N 5th and Louis Esquibel 20 Scotland Park Elementary School Zone #5 N 4th Street From 313 feet east of the intersection of N 4th and Stratford to the intersection of N 4th and Stratford 20 Scotland Park Elementary School Zone #6 Louis Esquibel Avenue From 102 feet south of the intersection of Louis Esquibel and N 7th to the intersection of Louis Esquibel and N 3rd 20 Southern Hills Elementary School Zone #1 Midwestern Parkway From 118 feet northwest of the intersection of Midwestern and 38th to 75 feet west of the intersection of Midwestern and Beth 25 Southern Hills Elementary School Zone #2 Armory Road From 62 feet south of the intersection of Midwestern and Armory to 52 feet north of the intersection of Armory and Windy Ridge 20 Washington Jackson Elementary School Zone #1 Harding Street From 178 feet east of the intersection of Harding and Williams to 145 feet west of the intersection of Harding and Irene 20 West Foundation Elementary School Zone #1 Lake Wellington Parkway From 39 feet northeast of the intersection of Lake Wellington and Coventry to 266 feet west of the intersection of Lake Wellington and Stirling 20 Wichita Christian Academy Zone #1 Midwestern Parkway From 70 feet east of the intersection of Midwestern and Southmoor to 43 feet west of the intersection of Midwestern and Manor 25 Wichita Christian Academy Zone #2 Neta Lane From 31 feet north of the intersection of Neta and Jarmon to 128 feet south of the intersection of Neta and Greenbriar 20 Wichita Falls Old High School Zone #1 Avenue H From the intersection of Avenue H and Monroe to the intersection of Avenue H and Giddings 20 Wichita Falls Old High School Zone #2 Coyote Boulevard From the intersection of Coyote and Avenue F to the intersection of Coyote and Avenue H 20 Zundy Junior High School Zone #1 Avenue G From 135 feet southeast of the intersection of Avenue G and Fillmore to 173 feet southeast of the intersection of Avenue G and Monroe 20 Zundy Junior High School Zone #2 Avenue H From 30 feet southeast of the intersection of Avenue H and Fillmore to 180 feet northwest of the intersection of Avenue H and Monroe 20 Zundy Junior High School Zone #3 Polk Street From 229 feet northeast of the intersection of Polk and Avenue G to 94 feet southwest of the intersection of Polk and Avenue H 20  
(Code 1966, § 29-90; Code 2001, § 102-109; Ord. No. 41-2012, § 1(102-109), 8-21-2012; Ord. No. 15-2015, 4-7-2015; Ord. No. 26-2015, § 1, 7-7-2015) 
_____
Sec. 102-109. - Authority to establish temporary speed limits. 
    The city's Traffic Engineering Division may determine and declare temporary reasonable and safe speed limits to the maximum extent allowable pursuant to state law. Such change shall be effective at all times when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected. 
(Code 1966, § 29-91; Code 2001, § 102-110; Ord. No. 41-2012, § 1(102-110), 8-21-2012) 
Sec. 102-110. - Speed limit for alleys. 
    It is deemed upon the basis of an engineering survey and traffic investigation that the speed permitted by state law and/or city ordinance upon certain alleys is greater than is necessary for the safe operation of vehicles thereon. It is declared that the speed limit for alleys is 15 miles per hour unless otherwise marked with appropriate signs. 
(Code 1966, § 29-91.3; Code 2001, § 102-111) 
Secs. 102-111-102-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate standing and parking of vehicles, Texas Transportation Code § 542.202(2); duty of drivers with respect to stop signs, Texas Transportation Code §§ 544.003, 545.151; authority of city to designate stop intersections, Texas Transportation Code § 545.202(a)(2). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-141. - Penalty. 
    Every person who shall be convicted of a violation of sections 102-184, 102-186 through 102-188 and 102-191 shall be punished by a fine as provided in the municipal court fine schedule. Each successive period of time, equal to the time limit on the loading zone, that a person allows a vehicle to remain in a loading zone shall constitute a separate offense. Every person who shall be convicted of a violation of any other section of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00. 
(Code 1966, § 29-138; Code 2001, § 102-141) 
Sec. 102-142. - Authority to erect stop signs. 
    Whenever any city ordinance designates and describes a through street, the Traffic Engineering Division may place and maintain a traffic control sign on each and every street intersecting such through street or intersecting that portion thereof described and designated as such by any city ordinance, unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic control signals. However, at the intersection of two such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of such streets as may be determined by the Traffic Engineering Division upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study. 
(Code 1966, § 29-107; Code 2001, § 102-142) 
Sec. 102-143. - Appointment of individuals to enforce disabled persons parking laws. 
(a)  In accordance with Texas Transportation Code § 681.001 et seq., which was adopted by the state legislature, there is established a disabled parking enforcement program for the city which will allow persons to be appointed to enforce the mandates of Texas Transportation Code § 681.001 et seq. The disabled parking enforcement training program shall be developed and administered by the Police Department. All training and certification shall be done at the sole discretion of the chief of police, and all decisions made as to appointment, removal, training and implementation of the training program and/or enforcement of disabled parking laws shall be at the discretion of the chief of police. 
(b)  All persons appointed under this section must be United States citizens of good moral character who have not been convicted of a felony. Upon appointment, a person must take and subscribe to an oath of office to be administered by the city clerk and must complete the approved training program as developed by the Police Department. All persons appointed under this section shall be limited to enforcement of the mandates of Texas Transportation Code § 681.001 et seq., and may not enforce or have any authority to enforce any other laws or ordinances. 
(Code 1966, § 29-126; Code 2001, § 102-143; Ord. No. 35-2003, § 1, 4-15-2003) 
State Law reference- Privileged parking, Texas Transportation Code § 681.001 et seq. 
Sec. 102-144. - Signs or markings indicating angle parking. 
    The Traffic Engineering Division shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets. However, such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal-aid or state highway within the city unless the state Highway Commission has determined by resolution or order entered into its minutes that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic. 
(Code 1966, § 29-105; Code 2001, § 102-144) 
State Law reference- Angle parking authorized, Texas Transportation Code § 545.303. 
Sec. 102-145. - Obedience to angle parking signs or markings. 
    Upon those streets that have been signed or marked by the Traffic Engineering Division for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Code 1966, § 29-106; Code 2001, § 102-145) 
Sec. 102-146. - Intersections where stop required. 
    The Traffic Engineering Division is authorized to determine and designate intersections where a particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such stop intersection and shall erect a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required. 
(Code 1966, § 29-108; Code 2001, § 102-146) 
Sec. 102-147. - Stopping, standing, or parking large vehicles near dwelling or mobile home. 
    No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, on the public right-of-way in front or side of and adjacent to a dwelling or individual mobile home if such vehicle is greater than 20 feet in length or seven feet in width. It shall be a defense to this section that such vehicle is a motor home, travel trailer or recreational vehicle designed for human habitation, excluding mobile and manufactured homes, and it is parked at such location for no more than 72 hours in any month. It shall also be a defense that the vehicle was subject to actual supervised loading or unloading of goods or passengers at the time in question or that the vehicle was being used for street or utility construction or maintenance or that the vehicle was having emergency repairs made on it. 
(Code 1966, § 29-114(a); Code 2001, § 102-147) 
Sec. 102-148. - Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited on specified streets. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall at any time park a vehicle upon any of the described streets or parts of streets which are on file in the office of the Traffic Engineering Division. 
(Code 1966, § 29-114(c); Code 2001, § 102-148) 
Sec. 102-149. - Leaving available ten feet of roadway; blocking driveway entrance. 
(a)  No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle within an alley or street in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Code 1966, § 29-115; Code 2001, § 102-149) 
State Law reference- Parking regulations, Texas Transportation Code § 545.303. 
Sec. 102-150. - Parking in alleys. 
    All vehicles are prohibited from parking in any alley within the city except for the purpose of loading and/or unloading merchandise. 
(Code 1966, § 29-116; Code 2001, § 102-150) 
Sec. 102-151. - Designation of fire lanes. 
    The Traffic Engineering Division is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking on either or both sides of any street when a need has been determined by the fire chief and the Traffic Engineering Division that such street be designated a fire lane. 
(Code 1966, § 29-120; Code 2001, § 102-151) 
Sec. 102-152. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the garage business or the repairing of automobiles or motor vehicles and his agents, servants and employees to park or rank any automobile or motor vehicle left, held or kept for storage, repair, lubrication, washing or any kind of work on any street, alley or public square or in front of any person's residence or place of business or property without the consent of the owner or occupant of such property. 
(Code 1966, §§ 29-117, 29-122; Code 2001, § 102-152) 
Sec. 102-153. - Disabled parking violations. 
(a)  As authorized by Texas Transportation Code § 681.011(f), the entirety of Texas Transportation Code § 681.011 is hereby adopted to apply to a parking space or area for persons with disabilities on private property that is designated in compliance with the identification requirements referred to in Texas Transportation Code § 681.009(b). 
(b)  In a prosecution under this section, it is presumed that any parking space or area marked in compliance with the identification requirements referred to in Texas Transportation Code § 681.009(b) has been designated by the owner or controller of a private parking lot for disabled parking. 
(Code 1966, § 29-124; Code 2001, § 102-153; Ord. No. 52-2005, § 1, 7-5-2005; Ord. No. 18-2010, § 1, 4-6-2010) 
State Law reference- Privileged parking, Texas Transportation Code § 681.001 et seq. 
Sec. 102-154. - Driving or parking on street median. 
    No person shall drive, stop, stand or park a motor vehicle on a street median within the city. 
(Code 1966, § 29-125; Code 2001, § 102-154) 
Sec. 102-155. - Authority to erect timed parking signs 
(a)  The Traffic Engineering Division is authorized to determine and designate curbside street blocks, or portions thereof, as limited time parking spots, based upon the parking needs of the area in question. 
(b)  The Traffic Engineering Division is authorized to place and maintain appropriate restricted parking signs at these locations. 
(c)  When one or more signs are erected in each block giving notice of restrictions on the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle in violation of the restrictions specified on such sign on any day. The presence of a properly erected parking sign is prima facie evidence that the sign was placed and maintained by the Traffic Engineering Division. 
Secs. 102-156-102-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOADING AND UNLOADING 

Sec. 102-181. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley entrance means a building access that abuts on or has an entrance to a public alley, that provides ingress or egress to a street or other thoroughfare for vehicles used in handling and loading and unloading of material or merchandise. 
    Loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers, materials or merchandise. 
    Space means an area equal to one standard parking space, as determined by the Traffic Engineering Division based on the type of parking permitted at the particular curb or location. 
    Time limit means the posted time, assigned by the Traffic Engineering Division, to any loading zone not to exceed 30 minutes. 
(Code 1966, § 29-127; Code 2001, § 102-181) 
Sec. 102-182. - Designation of curb loading zones. 
    The Traffic Engineering Division is authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the loading zones and stating the hours during which this section is applicable. 
(Code 1966, § 29-129; Code 2001, § 102-182) 
Sec. 102-183. - Permit required for loading or unloading at angle to curb. 
(a)  The Traffic Engineering Division is authorized to issue special permits for loading and unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permit may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized in this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Code 1966, § 29-128; Code 2001, § 102-183) 
Sec. 102-184. - Restriction on use of loading zones. 
    No vehicle, other than one used in loading and unloading of merchandise and in the transportation of merchandise, shall be parked in any loading zone. 
(Code 1966, § 29-130; Code 2001, § 102-184) 
Sec. 102-185. - Allocation of loading zones. 
(a)  Loading zones shall be allocated by the Traffic Engineering Division. 
(b)  The Traffic Engineering Division shall arrange for the marking of all loading zones provided for under this division. 
(c)  The Traffic Engineering Division shall assign time limits to all loading zones allocated under this section. In no case shall the time limit assigned exceed 30 minutes. 
(Code 1966, § 29-131; Code 2001, § 102-185) 
Sec. 102-186. - Standing in passenger curb loading zones. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zones are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes. 
(Code 1966, § 29-132; Code 2001, § 102-186) 
Sec. 102-187. - Standing in freight curb loading zone. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of freight from or into a truck engaged in commercial activities in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of freight exceed the posted time limit. 
(Code 1966, § 29-133; Code 2001, § 102-187) 
Sec. 102-188. - Standing in vehicle loading zone. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. The city Traffic Engineering Division is authorized to determine and establish by posting the time limits for stopping, standing or parking a vehicle for the purposes specified in this section in a vehicle loading zone. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed the posted time limit. 
(Code 1966, § 29-134; Code 2001, § 102-188) 
Sec. 102-189. - Designation of public carrier stops and stands. 
    The Traffic Engineering Division is authorized and required to establish bus stops, bus stands, and stands for other passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such number as shall be determined to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. Every bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(Code 1966, § 29-135; Code 2001, § 102-189) 
Sec. 102-190. - Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxicabs. 
(a)  The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than at a bus stand so designated as provided in section 102-189. 
(b)  The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone so designated, except in an emergency. 
(c)  The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not farther than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not unduly to impede the movement of other vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1966, § 29-136; Code 2001, § 102-190) 
Sec. 102-191. - Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed. However, the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading and unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1966, § 29-137; Code 2001, § 102-191) 
Secs. 102-192-102-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PARKING METERS 

Sec. 102-221. - Parking offense. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, firm, or corporation operating a vehicle to park or permit to be parked, or remain standing, any vehicle upon any street, within any parking meter space in the city, as designated in this article, between the hours designated by appropriate signs pursuant to this article, unless the person in charge of said vehicle shall, immediately upon entering said parking space, deposit in the parking meter adjacent to, adjoining or alongside of said parking space appropriate payment of the United States of America, causing such parking meter to display a sign or signal for the period of legal parking within said parking meter zone. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to permit a vehicle to be or remain in any parking space adjacent to, alongside of or adjoining which said parking meter is located while said meter is displaying a signal showing that a vehicle has already been parked in said parking space for a longer period of time than the parking limit provided for by this article for said parking meter zone within which said parking meter is located. 
(Code 2001, § 102-221; Ord. No. 36-2004, § 1, 5-4-2004) 
Sec. 102-222. - Application of proceeds. 
    The coins deposited in parking meters shall be collected by the duly authorized city agents and shall be deposited by them in the city depository. 
(Code 1966, § 29-153; Code 2001, § 102-222) 
Sec. 102-223. - Zones generally. 
(a)  Parking meter zones are established within the district or upon those streets or parts of streets as designated in the schedule on file in the office of the Traffic Engineering Division in which zones the parking of vehicles upon streets shall be regulated by parking meters between the hours specified by appropriate signs, except on Saturdays, Sundays, and public holidays. 
(b)  The Traffic Engineering Division is authorized, subject to the approval of the city council, to establish parking meter zones upon those streets or parts of streets where it is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the installation of parking meters shall be necessary to aid in the regulation, control, and inspection of the parking of vehicles. 
(Code 1966, § 29-147; Code 2001, § 102-223) 
Sec. 102-224. - Zone at Wichita Falls Regional Airport. 
(a)  Parking meter zones are established upon those roadways or parts of roadways in and about the municipal airport terminal area upon which the parking of vehicles shall be regulated by parking meters. Such regulation shall be in force all hours of the day and all days of the year, without exception. Rates are established for one-fourth and one-half hour. 
(b)  The Traffic Engineering Division shall install parking meters in the parking meter zones established as provided in this section upon the curb immediately adjacent to each designated parking space. 
(c)  Each parking meter shall be so designated, constructed, installed and set that, upon the expiration of the time period registered by the deposit of one or more coins, as provided in this section, it will indicate by an appropriate signal that the lawful parking meter period has expired and, during such period of time and prior to the expiration thereof, will indicate the interval of time which remains of such period. 
(d)  Each parking meter shall bear thereon a legend indicating the days and hours when the requirement to deposit coins therein shall apply, the value of the coins to be deposited, and the limited period of time for which parking is lawfully permitted in the parking meter zone in which such meter is located. 
(Code 1966, § 29-148.1; Code 2001, § 102-224) 
Sec. 102-225. - Use of slugs prohibited. 
    No person shall deposit or attempt to deposit in any parking meter any slug, button, or any other device or substance as substitutes for coins of United States currency. 
(Code 1966, § 29-151; Code 2001, § 102-225) 
Sec. 102-226. - Tampering with meter. 
    No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open, or willfully break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter. 
(Code 1966, § 29-152; Code 2001, § 102-226) 
Secs. 102-227-102-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BICYCLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Operation of bicycles, mopeds and play vehicles, Texas Transportation Code § 551.001 et seq. 

Sec. 102-256. - Riding on roadways and bicycle paths. 
    Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. 
(Code 1966, § 6-6(c); Code 2001, § 102-256) 
Chapter 106 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to acquire utilities, § 7; public utilities and franchises, §§ 121-129. 
State Law reference- Utilities, Texas Local Government Code § 402.001 et seq. water, Texas Local Government Code §§ 341.031 et seq., 401.001 et seq.; authority to operate utilities and prescribe rates, Texas Local Government Code § 402.017; city has exclusive jurisdiction over all water and sewer utility rates, operations and services provided by a water and sewer utility, Texas Water Code § 13.042; authority to control and regulate waste discharges and require pretreatment, Texas Water Code §§ 26.176, 26.177; authority to adopt regulations for controlling and governing solid waste collection, handling, transportation, storage, processing and disposal, Texas Health and Safety Code § 363.111; authority to suspend garbage collection service for nonpayment, Texas Health and Safety Code § 363.114. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 106-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Service pipe/line. A service pipe/line is a privately-owned and maintained water or sewer pipe that connects the customer to a city utility main. 
(Ord. No. 03-2019, 3-5-2019) 
Secs. 106-2-106-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SERVICE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Drinking water standards, Texas Health and Safety Code § 341.001 et seq., Texas Water Code § 5.1035. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 106-25. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department means the Department of Public Works. 
    Director means the director of the Department of Public Works. 
(Code 2001, § 106-25; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 106-26. - To whom service furnished. 
    The Department of Public Works shall furnish water service under its rules and regulations to all owners, tenants, firms or corporations within the city limits whose premises are on any street in which there is a city water main, but shall not serve any person, owner, tenant, firm, or corporation who is delinquent in payment of water bills at some other premises in the city or suburbs. The department shall not serve any premises with water where it has reason to believe the owner, tenant or occupant has made application to the department for water service in the name of some other person in order to avoid payment of delinquent water bills at that or other premises in the city or suburbs. 
(Code 2001, § 106-26; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 106-27. - City's right of entry. 
    Every officer, inspector, foreman, meter reader and other authorized employee of the Department of Public Works shall, upon presentation of his badge or other credentials, have free access at all reasonable hours to any premises supplied with city water for the purpose of making repairs or inspections or for the purpose of reading the water meters. 
(Code 2001, § 106-27; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 106-28. - Use of water and equipment generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to take or use water from the Department of Public Works except under the terms and conditions specified in this chapter. All owners and occupants of property are prohibited from furnishing water to any person for any purpose other than specified in this chapter without written consent of the department. No bypass or connection around the meter to the water main shall be made, maintained, or permitted except as may be installed and authorized by the department. 
(Code 2001, § 106-28; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 106-29. - Use of raw city water for drinking purposes. 
    The use of raw water as sold by the city to its water customers is prohibited for drinking purposes, unless and until the customer purchasing such water shall have properly treated the water so as to ensure healthful water complying with all health regulations of the state and the city. 
(Code 2001, § 106-29; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 106-30. - Obstruction of facilities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon or about a fire hydrant, gate, valve, manhole, curb stop, meter or meter box connected with any water pipe of the Department of Public Works any material, debris, or any structure of any kind or to park vehicles of any character or to obstruct in any manner free access to the fire hydrants, meter boxes, etc., of the department. 
(Code 2001, § 106-30; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 106-31. - Notice to department required prior to sidewalk and street construction. 
(a)  Before any person shall construct any sidewalk or concrete, brick or stone driveway on any street or premises, he shall give to the Department of Public Works notice in writing at least 24 hours before such construction work begins, stating where such walk or driveway is to be constructed and when the work will be started, in order that the department may have time to rearrange meters, pipes, etc. 
(b)  All persons who open, grade or regrade, fill, excavate or work any street or alley shall give ten days' written notice to the Department of Public Works asking for the removal, raising or lowering of any water main, pipe fittings, meters, or other waterworks material that may interfere with such work, and any such movement shall be solely at the expense of the person requesting the adjustment of city facilities. Upon failure to furnish such notice, any damage resulting from such failure will be charged against such contractor or person responsible. 
(Code 2001, § 106-31; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009) 
Secs. 106-32-106-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 106-61. - Application; contents. 
(a)  Before water shall be supplied to any person or premises by the Department of Public Works, the owner or occupant of the property shall make written application to the utility collection division for such service upon an application form promulgated by the department. 
(b)  The application form shall contain identifying information required by the department and a contract providing: 
(1)  The applicant shall pay the stipulated water rates at the time and in the manner required by the city's ordinances, rules, and regulations; 
(2)  The department may enforce all rates, collect all charges, change rates, and at times temporarily discontinue the service without notice to the customer; 
(3)  The city shall not be responsible for any damages by water, water pressure, defective plumbing, broken or faulty service pipes or water mains or any condition of the water, or any substance that may be mixed with or be in the water as delivered to the consumer; 
(4)  The city's inspection of the plumbing and appliances shall not be a basis of recovery for damages to premises from defective plumbing or appliances; 
(5)  If the supply of water is interrupted or fails because of accident or any cause whatsoever, then the utility collection division and the city shall not be liable for damages for such interruption or failure, nor shall such failure or interruption for any reasonable period of time be held to constitute a breach of the contract on the part of the department or the city or in any way relieve the consumer from performing the obligations of his contract; and 
(6)  Such other information as determined by the department to be necessary to protect the interest of the city. 
(c)  Safeguard the public health, the purity of the water, the pressure of the water, the protection of the city during fires, and other matters necessary for the safe and proper operation of the department. 
(d)  The part of the service connection extending from the main to the curb, including the corporation stop, service line, curb stop, meter box, meter, and the meter strainer, shall be under the control and maintenance of the city, and shall not be removed, repaired or tampered with, except by order from the department. 
(e)  The service pipe from the meter to the point of use and all fixtures connected thereto is the property of the owner of the premises and must be kept in good repair and protected from frost. 
(Code 2001, § 106-61; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 106-62. - Deposit required. 
(a)  Every person desiring to use city water shall make application with the utility collection division. Applications are subject to approval by the utility collection division. A deposit as set forth in this section shall be made and shall be a reasonable sum to protect the city from loss due to unpaid water, sewer and refuse bills. 
(b)  Deposits for single-unit residential meters shall cover the estimated amount of a two-month bill and shall not be less than an amount set by separate ordinance for each service connection. 
(c)  Deposits for duplexes, apartments, mobile home parks and any other master-metered multiunit residential area shall be an amount set by separate ordinance for each apartment unit or occupiable space or an amount to cover the estimated amount of a two-month bill and shall not be less than an amount set by separate ordinance. 
(d)  Deposits for business, commercial and industrial meters shall cover the estimated amount of a two-month bill and shall not be less than an amount set by separate ordinance. 
(e)  Deposits for special-purpose meters, such as for yard sprinklers and pools, shall cover the estimated amount of a two-month bill and shall not be less than an amount set by separate ordinance for each service connection. 
(f)  A builder licensed in the city who desires to have water at one or more new construction sites may make a blanket deposit of an amount set by separate ordinance. This deposit shall allow the customer to receive water service only at each site until the time of final inspection. After final inspection, the construction status shall be terminated, and the builder shall subsequently pay for water, sewer and refuse services. At such time as the builder terminates the account, the new owner or occupant shall be required to open an account and to make the deposit required within this section in order for utility and refuse services to continue. 
(g)  Water users located outside the city limits shall pay twice the deposit amount. 
(h)  Deposits shall be paid at the time of application or as provided within this section. 
(i)  The utility collection division may provide water service to a single-unit residence for up to seven calendar days prior to receiving a deposit where financial hardship of the applicant precludes immediate payment of the deposit. 
(j)  The deposit may be billed to the customer and paid with the first month's billing to customers in good standing. For the purpose of this subsection, a customer in good standing must not have: 
(1)  Allowed a city utilities account to have become delinquent more than one time within the preceding 12-month period; 
(2)  Attempted payment of a city utilities bill more than one time in the preceding 12-month period with a check that was not honored by the bank; 
(3)  Used city utilities services without authorization prior to application for service; or 
(4)  Allowed his utilities account to be closed for nonpayment. Any failure to pay the required installment by the due date will cause the account to be cut off as provided in section 106-281. The billing provision shall be implemented on the first day of the month following completion of required data processing revisions. 
(k)  The utility collection division may provide temporary service prior to receiving a deposit for those customers who require service at more than one address, when that temporary service is provided for an unoccupied residence or other unoccupied building. When the residence or other building becomes occupied, a deposit must be made for continued service. The customer must have at least one active account and must be a customer in good standing. For the purpose of this subsection, a customer in good standing must not have: 
(1)  Allowed a city utilities account to have become delinquent more than one time within the preceding 12-month period; or 
(2)  Attempted payment of a city utilities bill more than one time in the preceding 12-month period with a check that was not honored by the bank. 
(l)  No person 65 years of age or older who is a customer in good standing shall be required to make a deposit for his primary residence or for a special-purpose meter at his primary residence, if he submits to the utility collection division satisfactory proof of his age. For the purpose of this subsection, a customer in good standing must not have: 
(1)  Allowed his city utilities bill to have become delinquent more than three times in the preceding 12-month period; or 
(2)  Attempted payment of his city utilities bill more than one time in the preceding 12-month period with a check that was not honored by the bank. Any person 65 years of age or older who has a deposit with the utilities collection division will have his deposit refunded to him if he is a customer in good standing and he files an application for such refund, with satisfactory proof of his age, to the utility collection manager. 
(m)  A customer shall lose his exemption from the deposit requirements if he fails to maintain his good standing, and he shall immediately be responsible for depositing the proper amount. The deposit requirements shall continue until the customer has reestablished his good standing. 
(Code 2001, § 106-62; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009; Ord. No. 44-2015, § 1, 9-15-2015) 
Sec. 106-63. - Meter sizes and charges; installation of meters. 
(a)  All consumers not otherwise provided for in this chapter shall be supplied with water only when measured through a meter. Meters of five-eighths inch, three-quarters inch and one inch and an approved meter box will be furnished and installed inside the right-of-way or easement adjacent to a named street by the Department of Public Works after application and payment of the meter installation fee. All consumers requiring meters larger than one inch in size shall be charged with the cost of meter, box, and all necessary valves, fittings, and the labor cost of such installation. All meters larger than one inch must be purchased from and installed by the department or, at the discretion of the director, in accordance with the director's specifications. 
_____
(b)  The Department of Public Works shall determine the size, type, and location of all meters, taps, boxes, service lines, and associated equipment. In general, such items shall be installed in accordance with the following detail, unless otherwise directed by the director of public works: 

_____
(c)  The department shall determine the size, type, and location of the box for the proper protection of the meter. 
(Code 2001, § 106-63; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 106-64. - Installation of water service connections. 
(a)  The Department of Public Works shall install all water service pipes from water mains to the curbline of the street and shall charge for the installation a sum sufficient to cover the cost thereof. 
(b)  Every separate premises, such as a residence, store, factory, apartment complex, hotel, commercial building, etc., must have its own separate service connection and individual meter at the curb and shall not be allowed to supply water to any other premises, under penalty of having the water disconnected. 
(c)  All service pipes from the water mains shall be in accordance with the city's plumbing code and must be brought in from the street and enter the premises at the front so that all meters and cutoffs may be placed at the curb. Service pipes may not cross adjoining property lines. All service lines must be adjacent to the property. 
(d)  Except as provided by subsections (e) and (f) of this section, a manager of a condominium or the owner of an apartment house, manufactured home rental community, or multiple use facility, on which construction begins after January 1, 2003, shall provide for the measurement of the quantity of water, if any, consumed by the occupants of each unit through the installation of: 
(1)  Submeters, owned by the property owner or manager, for each dwelling unit or rental unit; or 
(2)  Individual meters, owned by the city, for each dwelling unit or rental unit. 
(e)  An owner of an apartment house on which construction begins after January 1, 2003, and which provides government-assisted or subsidized rental housing to low- or very low-income residents shall install a plumbing system in the apartment house that is compatible with the installation of submeters for the measurement of the quantity of water, if any, consumed by the occupants of each unit. 
(f)  At the request of the property owner or manager, the city will install individual meters owned by the city for an apartment house, manufactured home rental community, multiple use facility, or condominium, unless the city determines that installation of meters is not feasible. If the city's director of public works determines that installation of individual meters is not feasible, the property owner or manager shall install submeters. The city shall charge the owners the costs to install individual meters. 
(1)  All individual meters installed by the city will be placed at the front of the property within, or adjacent to, the street right-of-way. 
(2)  Any lot requiring more than four meters (five meters if one meter is required for irrigation) will be required to construct a pipe loop, made of ductile iron pipe, to accommodate the tapping of the water main. The city Water Department, as a part of the service tap, will install this loop. The cost of this loop will be included in the tap charge provided by the city. The size and design of this loop will be determined by the city. If the loop is being installed as a part of water line improvements constructed by the developer, the design of the loop will be reviewed, approved and inspected by the Public Works Department. This loop will have a valve at each end and at least one valve in the middle of the loop. This loop will be on the same side of the street as the property to be served. 
(3)  No structures will be constructed by the owner of the property over any part of the pipe loop, the service lines or the individual meters. 
(4)  Multiple pipe loops may be constructed to accommodate the efficient installation of individual meters. 
(Code 2001, § 106-64; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 106-65. - Connections to comply with department standards and plumbing code. 
    The Department of Public Works may decline to accept any application for water service if upon examination the water mains, service pipes, valves, fire hydrants or other equipment are of such quality or are installed in such manner as will not comply with the standards and specifications of the department and the city plumbing code adopted in section 22-481. 
(Code 2001, § 106-65; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 106-66. - Notice required to discontinue service. 
    All rates and charges for water service to any premises shall accrue and be charged against the applicant until such time as notice given by such applicant or by his duly authorized agent to discontinue service is filed with the Department of Public Works. It shall be unlawful for any person to turn on or use water from any service connection until application for such service has been made and accepted by the department as provided in this division and the water turned on by the department. 
(Code 2001, § 106-66; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009; Ord. No. 44-2015, § 2, 9-15-2015) 
Sec. 106-67. - Notice of occupancy of or vacating premises. 
    If any person shall move into any premises, he shall file an application for water service in accordance with section 106-61 before using any water from the service connection for such premises. It shall be the duty of the owner of such property to which water is furnished from the utilities collection division to cooperate with the division by promptly giving notice when such property becomes vacant or occupied by himself or a tenant. No service shall be furnished to any person who is delinquent in the payment of any water or material furnished to the premises for which water is desired or for any other premises owned or occupied by such delinquent water patron in the city or the district outside the city which may be supplied with water by the Department of Public Works. 
(Code 2001, § 106-67; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009) 
Secs. 106-68-106-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - METERS 

Sec. 106-96. - Control of meters and equipment; tampering with prohibited. 
    All meters, curb stops, valves, meter boxes, etc., connected with the water system, including those furnished at the expense of the customer or property owner, shall be and remain under the control of the Department of Public Works. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than those authorized by the department, to: 
(1)  Connect, disconnect, move or tamper with any such meter or fixture; or 
(2)  Move or tamper with any meter box or other appliance of the department. 
(Code 2001, § 106-96; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009; Ord. No. 49-2016, 11-15-2016) 
Sec. 106-97. - Repair and maintenance. 
    All water meters furnished by the Department of Public Works shall remain at all times the property of the department and shall be maintained and repaired by the department when rendered unserviceable or inaccurate through usual wear and tear and shall be renewed when worn out by the department. When replacement, repairs or adjustments of any meter are rendered necessary by the act, neglect, or carelessness of the owner or occupant of any premises, or anyone acting on behalf of the owner or occupant, such expense shall be charged against and collected from the owner or occupant of the premises; if not paid, service shall be discontinued until the charge is paid. 
(Code 2001, § 106-97; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009; Ord. No. 49-2016, 11-15-2016) 
Sec. 106-98. - Multiple installations. 
    If a multiple installation lacks a cutoff valve for each individual premises, then, upon a delinquency by one of the water customers, the department may shut off the original or main service until all delinquent bills are paid. 
(Code 2001, § 106-98; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 106-99. - Unauthorized turning on or off of water. 
    When water has been cut off from any premises upon the application of the owner or applicant or for nonpayment of water charges or for any other cause, it shall be unlawful for any person except employees of the Department of Public Works to again connect such premises with the water system. When water is so turned on without authority, the department may shut off the water at the main or remove a portion of the service pipe and shall not furnish water service again to such premises until all charges are paid and proper guarantees that such violations shall not recur are received and accepted by the department. 
(Code 2001, § 106-99) 
Sec. 106-100. - Installation of cutoff valve between building and meter. 
    Water consumers shall install an approved cutoff valve inside the property line at a location accessible in an emergency and shall not use the curb stop of the Department of Public Works at the meter in lieu thereof. If, in the judgment of the department, an approved check valve on the property side of the water meter is considered necessary for the safety of the water meter and piping, the check valve shall be immediately installed by and at the expense of the consumer at least three days after notice, in writing, shall have been given to the consumer by the department. 
(Code 2001, § 106-100; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009) 
Secs. 106-101-106-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 106-126. - Retail treated water and retail raw water. 
(a)  The rates are established for retail treated water and retail raw water customers by separate ordinance, and shall be collected by the Finance Department. 
(b)  During every billing cycle that an account is active, except the first and last, water rates shall apply to all residential, commercial, and industrial water users, with the exception of contract water users and with the exception that treated water service outside the corporate limits shall be two times the rate charged inside the corporate limits. 
(c)  The meters of raw water retail customers will be read monthly. Billing cycles between meter readings will use estimated consumptions as a basis for the billing, and the number of consumptions will be adjusted quarterly when the meter reading is taken. 
(d)  Residential customers who are citizens of the city and are not adjacent to water mains are eligible to obtain water from the Reilly Road Water Fill Station during such periods as it is operational. The Department of Public Works may place additional rules on access to the Reilly Road Water Fill Station as it determines are appropriate to limit access to those city residents who are not adjacent to water mains. Rules governing access from persons residing outside the city limits may require additional certifications from the county for the purpose of verification and policing of water obtained from the Reilly Road Water Fill Station. 
(1)  For residential customers obtaining water from the Reilly Road Water Fill Station who are city residents, the rate shall be established by separate ordinance. 
(2)  For residential customers obtaining water from the Reilly Road Water Fill Station who are not residents of the city, the rate shall be double the residential rate, plus a service fee established by separate ordinance. Persons who are not residents of the city may not purchase more than 7,500 gallons of water from the Fill Station per month per residence. 
(3)  Persons purchasing water from the Reilly Road Water Fill Station may only use said water in accordance with drought management provisions applicable to water service from the city, including drought surcharges. 
(4)  The city manager is authorized to execute an interlocal agreement, in a form to be approved by the city attorney, with the county to provide for purchases of water from the Reilly Road Water Fill Station by non-city-residents of the county, the provision of an automated dispensing station by the county, and the remittance of part of the administrative fee to the county to provide for the cost of said station. 
(e)  Newly enacted rates shall be effective during the first full billing cycle after modification thereof. 
(Code 2001, § 106-126; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009; Ord. No. 53-2010, § 7, 9-21-2010; Ord. No. 56-2012, § 1, 9-18-2012; Ord. No. 38-2013, § 1, 7-16-2013; Ord. No. 60-2013, §§ 1, 2, 10-15-2013; Ord. No. 34-2014, § 1, 8-5-2014; Ord. No. 44-2015, § 3, 9-15-2015) 
Sec. 106-127. - Wholesale water rates. 
(a)  Rates for wholesale water use shall be established by separate ordinance and adopted by city council. 
(b)  The city manager is authorized to execute such amendments to water purchase contracts with wholesale water customers as may be necessary to implement the wholesale water use rates established by separate ordinance and adopted by city council. 
(Code 2001, § 106-127; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009; Ord. No. 53-2010, § 8, 9-21-2010; Ord. No. 54-2011, § 4, 9-20-2011; Ord. No. 56-2012, § 2, 9-18-2012; Ord. No. 52-2013, § 1, 9-17-2013; Ord. No. 42-2014, § 1, 9-16-2014) 
Sec. 106-128. - Credit card payments; convenience fees. 
(a)  The utility collection division may accept credit cards from Visa, MasterCard, Discover and American Express for payments collected by the utility collection division. 
(b)  A convenience fee established by separate ordinance shall be assessed per transaction to the customer paying by credit card over the telephone, through the city's website, or kiosk, to reimburse the city for reasonable expenses incurred to process the transaction. No convenience fee will be assessed to customers paying by credit card in person at the utility collection counter inside the building. 
(Code 2001, § 106-128; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009; Ord. No. 44-2015, § 4, 9-15-2015) 
Sec. 106-129. - Fees for services provided by the public utilities division. 
    Fees for services performed by the public utilities division will be determined by separate ordinance and adopted by city council. 
(Code 2001, § 106-129; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009; Ord. No. 54-2011, § 5, 9-20-2011) 
Secs. 106-130-106-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESERVOIR AND OTHER PUBLIC WATER FACILITIES 

Sec. 106-156. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Lake means all waters of the stream and its tributaries impounded by the dam across the stream and owned or controlled by the city. 
    Water intake station means the points on the lake where the city collects lake water for the municipal supply. 
(Code 2001, § 106-156; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 106-157. - Prohibited of certain acts in, on, and around public water facilities. 
    In the interest of the public safety and to protect the public water system from damage or contamination, the following described acts are declared unlawful: 
(1)  Any unauthorized access onto, or damage to, any elevated, ground, or underground water storage tank. 
(2)  Any unauthorized entry into, or damage to, a fenced or housed facility belonging to the Department of Public Works or to any public utility area specifically marked to deny uncontrolled entry or use. 
(3)  All recreational activities and trespassing are prohibited within 200 feet of any water intake station. 
(Code 2001, § 106-157; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009) 
Secs. 106-158-106-184. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - WATER CONSERVATION/DROUGHT CONTINGENCY 

Sec. 106-185. - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this division, have the meanings indicated in this section: 
    Automatic sprinkler system means a system of irrigation components made up of permanently installed underground PVC lines and spray irrigation devices that are controlled from an automatic irrigation controller. 
    Auxiliary water means water from a source other than the City of Wichita Falls water supply. 
    Bucket means a deep, cylindrical container holding five gallons or less, designed to be used by one person. 
    Car wash means a place or business equipped for washing cars, trucks, motorbikes, boats, airplanes, other motor vehicles and trailers. 
    Drip irrigation means a method of irrigation that applies water in a dropwise fashion directly to the soil beneath rather than projecting the water in a stream away from its orifice. To be classified in this category, the maximum allowable flow is 6 gallons per hour per emitter. 
    Drought, for this division, "drought" is not intended to be limited to any meteorological definition of the term. "Drought" is intended to have broad meaning and refers to any condition, whether manmade or natural, where the available water supply or resources are not meeting the water demand, or if the water supply or resources are being depleted at a faster rate than they are being replenished. 
    Essential water use means water that is required by federal, state or local regulation and/or is attributed to the health and safety of the citizens of Wichita Falls. 
    Fleet means a group of commercial motor vehicles owned by a single entity that totals more than five vehicles. 
    Foundation watering means the application of water using a hand-held hose, soaker hose or drip irrigation system placed within 24 inches of the foundation, which does not produce a spray above ground or result in water run-off. 
    Graywater means wastewater from showers, bathtubs, hand washing lavatories, sinks that are not used for the preparation/disposal of food or hazardous/toxic ingredients, and clothes-washing machines. It does not include wastewater from washing of material, including diapers, soiled with human excreta or wastewater that has come into contact with toilet waste. 
    Hose-end sprinkler system means a device on the end of a garden hose that can be set in place and can periodically be moved from one location to another. 
    Impervious surface means any structure or any street, driveway, sidewalk, patio or other surface area covered with asphalt, concrete, brick, paving, tile or other material preventing water from penetrating the ground. 
    Indoor pool means pool located entirely within a fully enclosed, climate controlled structure. 
    MGD means million gallons per day 
    Non-essential water use means water use that does not directly impact the health or safety of the citizens of Wichita Falls, or are a requirement of a federal, state or local regulation. 
    Non-potable water means water that is not intended or suitable for drinking and has not been approved for human consumption. 
    Owner/operator of a pool means fee title holder of the property upon which the pool is located, and/or business manager, complex manager, property owners, association manager, rental agent or other individual who is in charge of the day to day operation or maintenance of the property. 
    Positive shut-off means a valve or nozzle that is held in a closed position by system pressure until overridden by an outside force. 
    Potable water means water that is suitable for drinking by the public. 
    Rain water harvesting means the practice of capturing, infiltrating, or utilizing rainfall from roofs, constructed catchment surfaces, driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, and streets. 
    Residential pool means a pool that is located on private property under the control of the property owner or the owner's tenant and that is intended for use by not more than two residential families and their guests. It includes a pool serving only a single-family home or duplex. 
    Single-pass means a cooling system that removes heat by transferring it to a supply of clean water, once, and releasing it down the drain. 
    Soaker hose means an irrigation device made of permeable rubber hose that allows water to be applied slowly and directly to the soil without being sprayed up into the air. Soaker hoses fall into the drip irrigation category. A soaker hose will not spray water regardless of its orientation. 
    Spa and/or hot-tub means a structure that is intended to be filled with water that circulates through an on-site filtration system and is not intended to be drained or refilled after each use. 
    Spray irrigate or spray irrigation means a category of irrigation method that utilizes devices that spray water away from the device orifice(s). These include, but are not limited to, pop-up sprays, rotors, oscillating sprinklers, and impact sprinklers. A hand-held hose is not spray irrigation. 
    Vehicle means a motor vehicle, car, truck, motorcycle, bicycle, boat, trailer, or other conveyance. 
    Water well means water that has been, or is, obtained from the ground by digging, boring, or drilling to access an underground aquifer. 
(Code 2001, § 106-185; Ord. No. 49-2012, § 1, 9-4-2012; Ord. No. 32-2013, § 1, 6-4-2013; Ord. No. 17-2014, § 1, 4-15-2014; Ord. No. 50-2015, Att., 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 106-186. - Water shortage; authority of department. 
(a)  Water conservation measures effective at all times. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity, at any time of the year, to: 
(1)  Irrigation: 
a.  Run outside spray-type irrigation on any day of the week between 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. unless one is using a hand-held hose that is equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle, soaker hose, bucket, watering can, bubbler or drip irrigation system, 
b.  Fail to repair a controllable leak, including but not limited to a broken sprinkler head, a broken pipe or a leaking valve, 
c.  Operate an irrigation system with a broken or missing head, or a head that is out of adjustment and the arc of the spray head is over a street, parking area, or other impervious surface, 
d.  Allow water flow during irrigation that runs, flows, or streams in a way that extends a distance of 50 feet or greater from the area being irrigated, 
e.  Operate a soaker hose, bubbler or drip irrigation system in a manner that causes the delivery of more water than the hose, bubbler, or system was intended by the manufacturer to deliver, or that allows water to run for a distance of five feet or greater from the area being irrigated. 
(2)  Car washing: 
a.  Wash a vehicle at any location other than a commercial car wash, car dealership, detail shop or automotive shop unless the hose is equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle that stops the flow of water through the hose when released by the operator, 
b.  Allow a customer to use a nozzle at a commercial car wash, car dealership, detail shop or automotive shop that discharges more than 3.0 gallons per minute. 
(3)  Restaurants/bars/clubs/school cafeterias: 
a.  Provide drinking water to customers of restaurants, bars, or clubs unless the customer requests such water. 
b.  Use a pre-rinse nozzle that discharges more than 1.6 gallons per minute. 
c.  Use a hand-held pre-rinse, or rinsing nozzle without a positive shut-off. 
(4)  Ice machines: 
a.  Install new ice machines that are single-pass, water cooled. 
(5)  Hotels/motels/short-term lodging. 
a.  Owners or operators of a hotel, motel short term rental or other establishment that offers or provides lodging or rental accommodations for compensation, to fail to offer a towel and linen reuse water conservation option to its lodgers, renters, or customers, and maintain in each applicable guest room, suite, or property, informational signage to communicate information relating to this requirement and to offer the opportunity for guest participation. 
(b)  Discretionary drought restrictions. The director of public works may declare any stage of drought restrictions described in this division to be effective if: 
(1)  The system demand exceeds 90 percent design treatment capacity for three or more consecutive days, 
(2)  The water supply system is unable to deliver water due to mechanical failure or damage of major water system components which are expected to require more than 72 hours to repair, or 
(3)  The water system is contaminated either accidentally or intentionally, or the water system fails from acts of nature or man. 
    The establishment of a discretionary drought restriction will be effective when publicized in the media and the filing of a written declaration with the city manager and city clerk. Upon any declaration of such drought stage, it shall be unlawful for a person to fail to comply with the restrictions applicable to that stage. The director of public works may terminate any of the aforementioned discretionary drought restrictions by filing a written notice of termination with the city manager and city clerk. 
(c)  Stage 1-Drought Watch. 
(1)  The director of public works shall declare a Stage 1 Drought Watch when the levels of Lakes Arrowhead and Kickapoo reach a combined capacity of 65 percent. 
(2)  The following actions shall occur under the direction of the director of public works, with the goal of reducing the amount of water being used by five percent: 
a.  The city council and other city departments will be notified of the impending problem and the proposed immediate and future actions. 
b.  The city shall initiate an education program through all available media to: 
i)  Alert the public to the depletion of the reservoirs; current rate of withdrawals and the effect of such withdrawals; current treatment rates; current meteorological conditions; and the long-range weather forecast from the National Weather Service. 
ii)  Alert the public to the drought management program, the various stages and measures, and the possibility of implementation. 
iii)  Keep a constant flow of information to the public to condition them for more stringent measures. 
c.  The Public Works Department will coordinate with other departments on the structure of a program to implement water restrictions. 
d.  The Public Works Department will conduct training necessary to implement the water restriction program. 
e.  The Public Works Department will prepare all administrative processes (forms, affidavits, maps, offices, etc.) for the restriction program. 
(3)  Irrigation: 
a.  It shall be unlawful to: 
i)  Run outside irrigation systems (including sprinklers, automatic sprinkler systems and unattended hoses) except for two days a week, based on the following physical address schedule where the sprinkler system is located: 
Addresses ending in an even number = Mondays and Thursdays 
Addresses ending in an odd number = Tuesdays and Friday 
ii)  Utilize spray irrigation between the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., unless one is using a hand-held hose that is equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle, soaker hose, bucket, watering can, bubbler or drip irrigation system, 
iii)  Fail to repair a controllable leak, including but not limited to a broken sprinkler head, a broken pipe or a leaking valve, 
iv)  Operate an irrigation system with a broken or missing head, or a head that is out of adjustment and the arc of the spray head is over a street, parking area, or other impervious surface, 
v)  Allow water flow during irrigation that runs, flows, or streams in a way that extends for a distance of 50 feet or greater from the area being irrigated, 
vi)  Operate a soaker hose, bubbler or drip irrigation system in a manner that causes the delivery of more water than the hose, bubbler, or system was intended by the manufacturer to deliver, or that allows water to run for a distance of five feet or greater from the area being irrigated. 
b.  Landscape watering is permitted any day at any time with a hand-held hose that is equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle, soaker hose, bucket (five gallons or less), watering can, bubbler or drip irrigation system. 
c.  On days other than the days of the week established in (c)(3)a.i), testing and troubleshooting of irrigation systems that involve the release of water is permissible any time, including between the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., as long as a licensed plumber or irrigator is present on location during testing (and available to the ticket writer). Testing and troubleshooting of irrigation systems by other than a licensed plumber or irrigator that involves the release of water is otherwise permissible only on the days of the week established in (c)(3)a.i) and time of day established in (c)(3)c.ii). 
d.  New landscape waiver. A waiver of this subsection may be granted for the irrigation of new landscaping plants whereby watering would be permitted to maintain adequate growth until the plants are established but not to exceed a 30-day time period. Any person wishing such a waiver must make application to the City Public Works Department and pay a nonrefundable fee as set by separate ordinance. The water rate during this stage shall be the same as the normal rate for that customer for all consumption over ten CCF as registered by residential meters and all consumption as registered by irrigation meters or commercial meters. 
e.  Public and private golf courses. 
i)  Greens: Golf courses may utilize spray irrigation on greens at any time for the purpose of cooling golf course greens when warranted by weather conditions and only with run cycles of less than five minutes every 60 minutes. Golf course greens are exempt from the spray irrigation days established in (c)(3)a.i), and greens may be Spray Irrigated any day of the week, but will be subject to the prohibition of spray irrigation during the daylight hours between 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
ii)  All other golf course features: It shall be unlawful for golf courses to spray irrigate tee-boxes, fairways, roughs, trees, shrubs, etc., except on the day of the week permitted for the area as established in (c)(3)a.i), and will be subject to the prohibition of spray irrigation during the daylight hours between 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
f.  Nursery plant stock is exempt from the irrigation and landscape watering restrictions of this subsection. 
(4)  Car washing: 
a.  It shall be unlawful: 
i)  To wash a vehicle at your residence or place of business, unless the hose is equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle that stops the flow of water through the hose when released by the operator. 
ii)  For the owner or operator of a commercial business to allow a customer to use a nozzle at a commercial car wash, car dealership, detail shop or automotive shop that discharges more than 3.0 gallons per minute. 
(5)  Restaurants/bars/clubs/school cafeterias: 
a.  It shall be unlawful to: 
i)  Provide drinking water to customers of restaurants, bars, or clubs unless the customer requests such water. 
ii)  Use a pre-rinse nozzle that discharges more than 1.6 gallons per minute. 
iii)  Use a hand-held pre-rinse, or rinsing nozzle without a positive shut-off. 
(6)  Ice machines: 
a.  It shall be unlawful, for any person, firm, corporation or other entity, to install new ice machines that are single-pass, water cooled. 
(7)  Hotels/motels/short-term lodging: 
a.  It shall be unlawful for owners or operators of a hotel, motel, short-term rental or other establishment that offers or provides lodging or rental accommodations for compensation, to fail to offer a towel and linen reuse water conservation option to its lodgers, renters, or customers, and maintain in each applicable guest room, suite, or property, informational signage to communicate information relating to this requirement, and to offer the opportunity for guest participation. 
(d)  Stage 2-Drought Warning. 
(1)  The director of public works shall declare a Stage 2 Drought Warning when levels of Lakes Arrowhead and Kickapoo reach a combined capacity of 50 percent. 
(2)  The following actions shall occur under the direction of the Director of Public Works, with the goal of reducing the amount of water being used by 15 percent: 
a.  Form a drought emergency task force for guidance through the remainder of the drought and to interface with the public. 
b.  Suspend all non-essential operational use of water by City of Wichita Falls, such as flushing water mains, street sweeping, water jet cleaning of sanitary sewer mains, fire fighter training, etc.), except where such use of water is critical to the health and safety of the citizens. 
c.  Notify all wholesale (raw and treated) customers of the situation and inform them of their specific mandatory reduction goals in accordance with Texas Water Code § 11.039. 
(3)  Irrigation: 
a.  It shall be unlawful to: 
i)  Run outside irrigation systems (including sprinklers, automatic sprinkler systems and unattended hoses) except on the day of the week based on the following physical address schedule where the sprinkler system is located: 
Addresses ending in 0 or 1 = Monday 
Addresses ending in 2 or 3 = Tuesday 
Addresses ending in 4 or 5 = Wednesday 
Addresses ending in 6 or 7 = Thursday 
Addresses ending in 8 or 9 = Friday 
Saturday and Sunday irrigation is prohibited. 
ii)  Utilize spray irrigation between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., unless one is using a hand-held hose that is equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle, soaker hose, bucket, watering can, bubbler or drip irrigation system, 
iii)  Fail to repair a controllable leak, including but not limited to a broken sprinkler head, a broken pipe or a leaking valve, 
iv)  Operate an irrigation system with a broken or missing head, or a head that is out of adjustment and the arc of the spray head is over a street, parking area, or other impervious surface, 
v)  Allow water flow during irrigation that runs, flows, or streams in a way that extends for a distance of 50 feet or greater from the area being irrigated, 
vi)  Operate a soaker hose, bubbler or drip irrigation system in a manner that causes the delivery of more water than the hose, bubbler, or system was intended by the manufacturer to deliver; or that allows water to run for a distance of five feet or greater from the area being irrigated. 
b.  Landscape watering is permitted any day at any time with a hand-held hose that is equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle, soaker hose, bucket (five gallons or less), watering can, bubbler or drip irrigation system. 
c.  On days other than the day of the week established in (d)(3)a.i), testing and troubleshooting of irrigation systems that involve the release of water is permissible any time, including between the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., as long as a licensed plumber or irrigator is present on location during testing (and available on site to the ticket writer). Testing and troubleshooting of irrigation systems by other than a licensed plumber or irrigator that involves the release of water is otherwise permissible only on the day of week established in (d)(3)a.i) and time of day established in (d)(3)a.ii). 
d.  New landscape waiver. A waiver of this subsection may be granted for the irrigation of new landscaping plants whereby watering would be permitted to maintain adequate growth until the plants are established but not to exceed a 30-day time period. Any person wishing such a waiver must make application to the City Public Works Department and pay a $50.00 nonrefundable fee as set by separate ordinance. The applicant must agree to pay a water rate that is three times the normal rate for that customer for all consumption over ten CCF as registered by residential meters and all consumption as registered by irrigation meters or commercial meters. 
e.  Public and private golf courses. 
i)  Greens: Golf courses may utilize spray irrigation on greens at any time for the purpose of cooling golf course greens when warranted by weather conditions and only with run cycles of less than five minutes every 60 minutes. Golf course greens are exempt from the spray irrigation days established in (d)(3)a.i), and greens may be spray irrigated any day of the week, but will be subject to the prohibition of spray irrigation during the daylight hours between 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
ii)  Tee-boxes and fairways: It shall be unlawful for golf courses to Spray irrigate tee-boxes and fairways, except on the day of the week permitted for the area as established in (d)(3)a.i) and will be subject to the prohibition of spray irrigation during the daylight hours between 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
iii)  All other golf course features: It shall be unlawful for golf courses to spray irrigate any other landscape features, such as roughs, trees, shrubs, etc. 
f.  Nursery plant stock is exempt from the irrigation and landscape watering restrictions of this subsection. 
(4)  Car washing: 
a.  It shall be unlawful: 
i)  To wash a vehicle at a residence or place of business, unless the hose is equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle that stops the flow of water through the hose when released by the operator. 
ii)  For the owner or operator of a commercial business to allow a customer to use a nozzle at a commercial car wash, car dealership, detail shop or automotive shop that discharges more than 3.0 gallons per minute. 
(5)  Restaurants/bars/clubs/school cafeterias: 
a.  It shall be unlawful to: 
i)  Provide drinking water to customers of restaurants, bars, or clubs unless the customer requests such water. 
ii)  Use a pre-rinse nozzle that discharges more than 1.6 gallons per minute. 
iii)  Use a hand-held pre-rinse, or rinsing nozzle without a positive shut-off. 
(6)  Ice machines: 
a.  It shall be unlawful, for any person, firm, corporation or other entity, to install new ice machines that are single-pass, water cooled. 
(7)  Hotels/motels/short-term lodging: 
a.  It shall be unlawful for owners or operators of a hotel, motel, short-term rental or other establishment that offers or provides lodging or rental accommodations for compensation, to fail to offer a towel and linen reuse water conservation option to its lodgers, renters, or customers, and maintain in each applicable guest room, suite, or property, informational signage to communicate information relating to this requirement, and to offer the opportunity for guest participation. 
(8)  Washing sidewalks, driveways, buildings or concrete slabs: 
a.  It shall be unlawful to wash sidewalks, driveways, buildings or concrete slabs unless an immediate health or safety risk is present. 
(9)  During a Stage 2 Drought Warning, the following surcharges will be applied to all applicable accounts: 
a.  For residential water meters: 
$0.50 per hundred cubic feet (CCF) between ten CCF and 20 CCF, 
$1.00 per CCF between 20 CCF and 40 CCF, and 
$2.00 per CCF over 40 CCF. 
b.  For irrigation water meters: 
$0.50 per CCF between 0 CCF and ten CCF, 
$1.00 per CCF between ten CCF and 20 CCF, 
$2.00 per CCF between 20 CCF and 40 CCF, and 
$4.00 for each CCF over 40 CCF. 
(e)  Stage 3-Drought Emergency. 
(1)  The director of public works shall declare a Stage 3 Drought Emergency when the levels of Lakes Arrowhead and Kickapoo reach a combined capacity of 40 percent. 
(2)  The following actions shall occur under the direction of the director of public works, with the goal of reducing the amount of water being used by 35 percent: 
a.  Monitor all fire hydrant meters that are for contractor use, to determine what conservation can be achieved through this type of water usage, 
b.  Notify all wholesale (raw and treated) water customers of the situation and inform them of their specific mandatory reduction goals in accordance with Texas Water Code § 11.039, and 
c.  Begin establishing a program for a drought disaster, which will allow restriction on the essential uses of water and prepare for implementation. 
(3)  Irrigation: 
a.  It shall be unlawful to: 
i)  Run outside irrigation systems (including sprinklers, automatic sprinkler systems and unattended hoses) except on the day of the week established in (d)(3)a.i). 
ii)  Utilize spray irrigation during the day specified in (d)(3)a.i), except for the following hours: 
2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. for automatic sprinkler systems. 
7:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. for hose-end sprinkler systems. 
iii)  Fail to repair a controllable leak, including but not limited to a broken sprinkler head, a broken pipe or a leaking valve. 
iv)  Operate an irrigation system with a broken or missing head, or a head that is out of adjustment and the arc of the spray head is over a street, parking area, or other impervious surface. 
v)  Allow water flow during irrigation that runs, flows, or streams in a way that extends for a distance of 50 feet or greater from the area being irrigated. 
vi)  Operate a soaker hose, bubbler or drip irrigation system in a manner that causes the delivery of more water than the hose, bubbler, or system was intended by the manufacturer to deliver, or that allows water to run for a distance of five feet or greater from the area being irrigated. 
b.  New landscape waiver: The Public Works Department will not issue any waivers during a Stage 3 Drought Emergency. 
c.  Public and private golf courses. 
i)  Greens: Golf courses may utilize spray irrigation on greens at any time for the purpose of cooling golf course greens when warranted by weather conditions and only with run cycles of less than five minutes every 60 minutes. Golf course greens are exempt from the spray irrigation times, and greens may be spray irrigated any day of the week, but will continue to be subject to the prohibition of spray irrigation during the daylight hours between 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
ii)  Tee-boxes: It shall be unlawful for golf courses to spray irrigate tee-boxes, except on the day of the week established in (d)(3)a.i) and will continue to be subject to the prohibition of spray irrigation during the daylight hours between 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
iii)  All other golf course features: It shall be unlawful for golf courses to spray irrigate any other landscape features, such as fairways, roughs, trees, shrubs, etc. 
d.  Nursery plant stock is exempt from the irrigation and landscape watering restrictions of this subsection. 
(4)  Car washing: 
a.  It shall be unlawful: 
i)  To wash a vehicle at a residence or place of business, unless the hose is equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle that stops the flow of water through the hose when released by the operator. 
ii)  For the owner or operator of a commercial car wash, detail shop or automotive shop to utilize potable water for its operations on the day of the week that coincides with the day of the week established in (d)(3)a.i), that the car wash was allowed to irrigate. 
iii)  For the owner or operator of a commercial business to allow a customer to use a nozzle at a commercial car wash, car dealership, detail shop or automotive shop that discharges more than 3.0 gallons per minute. 
iv)  For a car wash to wash any of its bays with water, except on Sunday. 
(5)  Car dealers/fleets: 
a.  It shall be unlawful: 
i)  For a car dealer or an entity that maintains a fleet of motor vehicles to wash its inventory of cars on any day other than the day the property is authorized to spray irrigate in accordance with the days established in (d)(3)a.i). 
ii)  To wash fleets at any location used for residential purposes. 
b.  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that if a car dealer or car rental is preparing a car for pickup, it washed that vehicle (and only that vehicle) on the day of pick up by the customer. Otherwise, all vehicles are subject to (e)(5)a.i) above. 
c.  The washing of any vehicle in a fleet may take place only at a commercial car wash or at a location owned by the fleet's owner and that is used solely for commercial uses. 
(6)  Restaurants/bars/clubs/school cafeterias: 
a.  It shall be unlawful: 
i)  To provide drinking water to customers of restaurants, bars, or clubs unless the customer requests such water. 
ii)  To use a pre-rinse nozzle that discharges more than 1.6 gallons per minute. 
iii)  To use a hand-held pre-rinse, or rinsing nozzle without a positive shut-off. 
iv)  For a food establishment to thaw food with water. Food must be thawed by another legal method, such refrigeration or cooking process. 
v)  For a food establishment to clean kitchen or food handling areas with spray hoses. 
(7)  Ice machines: 
a.  It shall be unlawful, for any person, firm, corporation or other entity, to install new ice machines that are single-pass, water cooled. 
(8)  Pools: 
a.  It shall be unlawful: 
i)  To operate a water feature on a residential pool, including, but not limited to, fountains, waterfalls, descents, arcs, and slides. 
ii)  If repairing a pool, to drain the water below a level necessary to effect the repair. Owners of pools who follow this restriction will be allowed to re-fill their pool after the repair. 
iii)  For owners and operators of pools to drain their pools once they are closed for the season. 
(9)  Hotels/motels/short-term lodging: 
a.  It shall be unlawful for owners or operators of a hotel, motel, short-term rental or other establishment that offers or provides lodging or rental accommodations for compensation, to fail to offer a towel and linen reuse water conservation option to its lodgers, renters, or customers, and maintain in each applicable guest room, suite, or property, informational signage to communicate information relating to this requirement, and to offer the opportunity for guest participation. 
(10)  Washing sidewalks, driveways, buildings or concrete slabs: 
a.  It shall be unlawful to wash sidewalks, driveways, buildings or concrete slabs unless an immediate health or safety risk is present. 
(11)  During a Stage 3 Drought Emergency, the following surcharges will be applied to all applicable accounts: 
a.  For residential water meters: 
$1.00 per CCF between ten CCF and 20 CCF, 
$2.00 per CCF between 20 CCF and 40 CCF, and 
$4.00 per CCF over 40 CCF. 
b.  For irrigation water meters: 
$1.00 per CCF between zero CCF and ten CCF, 
$2.00 per CCF between ten CCF and 20 CCF, 
$4.00 per CCF between 20 CCF and 40 CCF, and 
$8.00 per CCF over 40 CCF. 
(f)  Stage 4-Drought Disaster. 
(1)  The director of public works shall declare a Stage 4 Drought Disaster when the levels of Lakes Arrowhead and Kickapoo reach a combined capacity of 30 percent. 
(2)  The following actions shall occur under the direction of the director of public works, with the goal of reducing the amount of water being used by 45 percent: 
a.  Impose further mandatory restrictions on non-essential uses of water and essential uses of water. 
b.  Pull hydrant meters and suspend service thereon until conditions return to a drought emergency status. 
c.  Continue the aggressive public relations and education program. 
(3)  Irrigation: 
a.  Irrigation prohibited. It shall be unlawful to utilize any type of irrigation using potable water produced by the City of Wichita Falls that is distributed through the city's distribution system on any day at any time. This restriction includes all forms of irrigation, including, spray, bubbler, drip, hand-watering, etc. 
b.  Public and private golf courses. It shall be unlawful to irrigate any and all vegetated landscape areas on the golf course including greens, tee boxes, fairways, roughs, trees, shrubs, etc. Golf courses will be allowed to utilize the remaining water within their pond system, as they see fit; but, will not be allowed to refill the ponds from the city potable or raw water system, while in a Stage 4 Drought Disaster. 
c.  Nursery plant stock. Nursery plant stock is exempt from the irrigation and landscape watering restrictions of this subsection. 
(4)  Car washing: 
a.  It shall be unlawful: 
i)  To wash a vehicle at any location other than a commercial car wash, car dealership, detail shop or automotive shop. 
ii)  For the owner or operator of a commercial car wash, detail shop or automotive shop to utilize potable water for its operations on the day of the week that coincides with the day of the week established in (d)(3)a.i), that the car wash was allowed to irrigate. 
iii)  For the owner or operator of a commercial business to allow a customer to use a nozzle at a commercial car wash, car dealership, detail shop or automotive shop that discharges more than 3.0 gallons per minute. 
iv)  Fundraising car washes are prohibited. 
v)  The washing of a vehicle for health and safety reasons, sufficient to remove the hazard, is permitted any time. 
vi)  It shall be unlawful for a car wash to wash any of its bays with water, except on Sundays. 
(5)  Car dealers/fleets: 
a.  It shall unlawful: 
i)  For a car dealer or an entity that maintains a fleet of vehicles to wash its inventory of cars on any day other than the day the property was authorized to spray irrigate in accordance with the days established in (d)(3)a)i). 
ii)  To wash fleets at any location used for residential purposes. 
b.  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that if a car dealer or car rental is preparing a car for pickup, it washed that vehicle (and only that vehicle) on the day of pick up by the customer. Otherwise, all vehicles are subject to (f)(5)a.i) above. 
c.  The washing of any vehicle in a fleet may take place only at a commercial car wash or at a location owned by the fleet's owner and that is used solely for commercial uses. 
(6)  Restaurants/bars/clubs/school cafeterias: 
a.  It shall be unlawful: 
i)  To provide drinking water to customers of restaurants, bars, or clubs unless the customer requests such water. 
ii)  Use a pre-rinse nozzle that discharges more than 1.6 gallons per minute. 
iii)  Use a hand-held pre-rinse, or rinsing nozzle without a positive shut-off. 
iv)  Thaw food at a food establishment with water. Food must be thawed by another legal method, such refrigeration or cooking process. 
v)  Clean kitchen or food handling areas at a food establishment with spray hoses. 
(7)  Ice machines: 
a.  It shall be unlawful, for any person, firm, corporation or other entity, to install new ice machines that are single-pass, water cooled. 
(8)  Pools: 
a.  It shall be unlawful: 
i)  To operate a water feature on a residential pool, including, but not limited to, fountains, waterfalls, descents, arcs, and slides. 
ii)  To fill, refill or add potable water to a private or public swimming or wading pool that is not located entirely within a fully-enclosed, climate-controlled structure. 
b.  Indoor pools are exempt from the restrictions of (f)(8)a.i). 
(9)  Hotels/motels/short-term lodging: 
a.  It shall be unlawful, as the owner or operator of a hotel, motel, short-term rental or other establishment that offers or provides lodging or rental accommodations for compensation, to fail to offer a towel and linen reuse water conservation option to its lodgers, renters, or customers, and maintain in each applicable guest room, suite, or property, informational signage to communicate information relating to this requirement, and to offer the opportunity for guest participation. 
(10)  Large industries: 
a.  Large industries will be notified by the city to initiate a water audit of their facilities. 
b.  The water audit will include where water is being used within the facilities and where reductions in water usage can be made. 
c.  Large industries will have 60 days to conduct the water audit and submit a written report to the director of public works detailing the findings of the water audit and the percent reduction in water consumption that can be achieved. 
d.  Each large industry will be required to have all internal modifications to implement the water reduction completed and functioning by the time a combined lake level of 20 percent is reached. 
(11)  Watering structures. 
a.  The watering of home foundations is restricted to once a week, on the day the property was authorized to irrigate established in (d)(3)a.i). 
i)  Foundations may only be watered between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
ii)  Foundations may only be watered with soaker hoses. 
b.  It shall be unlawful to wash sidewalks, driveways, buildings, concrete slabs, any structure or any part of a structure during Stage 4 restrictions. 
(12)  During a Stage 4 Drought Disaster the following surcharges will be applied to all applicable accounts: 
a.  For residential water meters: 
$3.00 per CCF between ten CCF and 20 CCF, 
$6.00 per CCF between 20 CCF and 40 CCF, and 
$12.00 per CCF over 40 CCF. 
b.  For irrigation water meters: 
$3.00 per CCF between ten CCF and 20 CCF, 
$12.00 per CCF between 20 CCF and 40 CCF, and 
$24.00 per CCF over 40 CCF. 
(g)  Stage 5-Drought catastrophe. 
(1)  The director of public works shall declare a Stage 5 Drought Catastrophe when the levels of Lakes Arrowhead and Kickapoo reach a combined capacity of 25 percent. 
(2)  The following actions shall occur under the direction of the director of public works, with the goal of reducing the amount of water being used by 55 percent: 
a.  Impose further mandatory restrictions on non-essential uses of water and essential uses of water. 
b.  Continue the aggressive public relations and education program. 
(3)  Irrigation: 
a.  Irrigation prohibited. It shall be unlawful to utilize any type of irrigation using potable water produced by the City of Wichita Falls that is distributed through the city's distribution system on any day at any time. This restriction includes all forms of irrigation, including, spray, bubbler, drip, hand-watering, etc. 
b.  Public and private golf courses. It shall be unlawful to irrigate any and all vegetated landscape areas on the golf course including greens, tee boxes, fairways, roughs, trees, shrubs, etc. The golf courses will be allowed to utilize the remaining water within their pond system, as they see fit; but, will not be allowed to refill the ponds from the city system, while in a Stage 5 Drought Disaster. 
c.  Nursery plant stock. Nursery plant stock is exempt from the irrigation and landscape watering restrictions of this subsection. 
(4)  Car washing: 
a.  It shall be unlawful: 
i)  For any person to wash a vehicle at any location other than a commercial car wash, car dealership, detail shop, automotive shop, or commercial property that is owned by the owner of a fleet of vehicles. 
ii)  For the owner or operator of a commercial car wash, car dealership, detail shop or automotive shop to utilize potable water for its operations on Sunday or Monday. 
iii)  For the owner or operator of a commercial business to allow a customer to use a nozzle that discharges more than 3.0 gallons per minute. 
iv)  For a car wash to wash any of its bays with water, except on Fridays. 
v)  To conduct a fundraising car wash. 
b.  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection (g)(4) that a person was washing a vehicle for health and safety reasons, only to an extent sufficient to remove the hazard, is permitted any time. 
c.  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection (g)(4) that a car dealer or car rental company was preparing a vehicle for pickup and washed that vehicle on the day of pick up by the customer. 
(5)  Restaurants/bars/clubs/school cafeterias: 
a.  It shall be unlawful: 
i)  To provide drinking water to customers of restaurants, bars, or clubs unless the customer requests such water. 
ii)  To use a pre-rinse nozzle that discharges more than 1.6 gallons per minute. 
iii)  To use a hand-held pre-rinse, or rinsing nozzle without a positive shut-off. 
iv)  For a food establishment to thaw food with water. Food must be thawed by another legal method, such as refrigeration or cooking process. 
v)  For a food establishment to clean kitchen or food handling areas with spray hoses. 
(6)  Ice machines: 
a.  It shall be unlawful, for any person, firm, corporation or other entity, to install new ice machines that are single-pass, water cooled. 
(7)  Pools: 
a.  It shall be unlawful: 
i)  To operate a water feature on any pool, including, but not limited to, fountains, water falls, descents, arcs, and slides. 
ii)  To fill, refill or add potable water to a private or public swimming or wading pool that is not located entirely within a fully-enclosed, climate-controlled structure. 
iii)  Indoor pools are exempt from the restrictions of subsection (g)(7). 
(8)  Hotels/motels/short-term lodging: 
a.  It shall be unlawful for owners or operators of a hotel, motel, short-term rental or other establishment that offers or provides lodging or rental accommodations for compensation, to fail to offer a towel and linen reuse water conservation option to its lodgers, renters, or customers, and maintain in each applicable guest room, suite, or property, informational signage to communicate information relating to this requirement, and to offer the opportunity for guest participation. 
(9)  Watering structures: 
a.  The watering of home foundations is restricted to once a week, on the day the property was authorized to irrigate established in (d)(3)a.i). 
i)  Foundations may only be watered between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
ii)  Foundations may only be watered with soaker hoses. 
b.  It shall be unlawful to wash sidewalks, driveways, buildings, concrete slabs, any structure or any part of a structure. 
(10)  During a Stage 5 Drought Catastrophe the following surcharges will be applied to all applicable accounts: 
a.  For residential water meters: 
$6.00 per CCF between ten CCF and 20 CCF, 
$12.00 per CCF between 20 CCF and 40 CCF, and 
$24.00 per CCF over 40 CCF. 
b.  For irrigation water meters: 
$6.00 per CCF between zero CCF and ten CCF, 
$12.00 per CCF between ten CCF and 20 CCF, 
$24.00 per CCF between 20 CCF and 40 CCF, and 
$48.00 per CCF over 40 CCF. 
(h)  [Surcharges.] Surcharges will remain in effect until the city council announces the end to the restrictions. Water utilized by commercial nurseries for plant stock production shall not be subject to the surcharges established herein. 
(i)  Triggering and terminating drought stages. 
(1)  The director of public works shall declare that each "trigger level" has been reached and that the water use restrictions for each respective stage are in effect. The water restrictions will remain in effect until the lakes rise to a level that, when combined with the long-term forecast, assures the city an adequate supply of water. 
(2)  When an adequate supply of water is available, the city council, by majority vote, and after consultation with the director of public works, shall announce the termination of each respective stage of the restrictions that are triggered by lake levels. 
(j)  Drought restrictions only apply to city-supplied water. Water supplied from sources other than the city's water delivery system, including private water wells, aerobic septic systems, wastewater effluent, and potable water imported from other areas, is intended to be exempt from the restrictions of this section. Accordingly, it shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution for violation of any provision of this section that the water used in the alleged violation was not from the city's water delivery system. 
(k)  Wells and auxiliary water sources. 
(1)  Registration: 
a.  In an effort to protect the city's potable water system from contamination, any person or property receiving water or wastewater services from the City of Wichita Falls must register any and all non-potable, wells and auxiliary water sources, used for any purpose, with the Department of Public Works. 
b.  Non-potable, auxiliary water sources include, but are not limited to: 
i)  Existing, new or planned water wells, 
ii)  Hauled water from surface or groundwater sources, 
iii)  Rainwater harvesting storing more than 3,000 gallons, 
iv)  Graywater systems producing more than 400 gallons per day. 
c.  The City Department of Public Works shall be responsible for developing and maintaining a governing manual, that regulates the permitting, construction and registration of all water wells and auxiliary water sources. 
(2)  Systems must be in compliance with all federal, state and city requirements for the following: 
a.  Cross-connection control/backflow prevention devices. 
b.  Building, plumbing and electrical codes. 
c.  Setback requirements from sewers and septic systems. 
(3)  The City of Wichita Falls public water supply system may not be held liable for any adverse health effects allegedly caused by the consumption of water collected by wells or auxiliary water sources. 
(l)  Defenses to prosecution. 
(1)  It shall be a defense to prosecution that: 
a.  The use of water is necessary to protect the health, safety, or welfare of the public; 
b.  The use of water was necessary for lawful repair of a water distribution facility, flushing of utility lines or residential or commercial plumbing lines; 
c.  The use of water was necessary to meet express requirements of federal, state, or local laws and requirements; 
d.  The use of water was necessary to wash or sanitize to prevent disease transmission risk associated with liquid, solid, or particulate residue in or on emergency vehicles, or vehicles, containers or equipment lawfully used to maintain, process, or transport food, perishables, garbage, liquid or solid waste, organic materials, or recyclables; or 
e.  The use of water was immediately necessary for or related to fire fighting, fire prevention, or fire suppression activities or operations conducted because of actual risk to the public or environmental health, safety, or welfare, life, or property associated with the presence of an uncontrolled fire on or approaching any person or property. 
(m)  Variance. 
(1)  The director of public works shall develop specific criteria to be used for the granting of variances from the provisions of this ordinance, which are appropriate to the provisions for which a variance is being sought. Such criteria shall be applied equally to each request for variance under a particular provision. 
(2)  The director, or his designee, may grant a variance from a requirement of this chapter if the director, or designee, determines that strict compliance with the provisions at issue adversely affects the health, safety, welfare or sanitation of the public, the applicant, or the environment. 
(3)  Persons requesting a variance from the provisions of this drought ordinance shall file a written request for variance with the director of public works. All written requests for variances shall be reviewed by the director, or his/her designee, and shall include the following: 
a.  Name and address of the petitioner(s). 
b.  Purpose of water use. 
c.  Specific provision(s) of the drought ordinance from which the petitioner is requesting relief. 
d.  Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of the Drought Ordinance adversely affects the health, safety, welfare, or sanitation of the public, or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this division. 
e.  Description of the relief requested. 
f.  Period of time for which the variance is sought. 
g.  Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of this ordinance and the compliance date. 
h.  Any other pertinent or requested information. 
(4)  A variance following its approval by the director may be immediately suspended or revoked if the director or director's designee determines any of the following: 
a.  A violation of the terms of the variance occurs at the location during the effective period of the variance; 
b.  The application submitted to the director upon which the variance approval was based included false, misleading, incomplete, or inaccurate information or attachments; or 
c.  The director declares an emergency recall of variances to control use or preserve supply based on protracted drought, unusual operational event, or other public necessity. 
(5)  All variances are only in effect during the drought plan stage for which the variance was issued. 
(6)  No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this Drought Plan, occurring prior to the issuance of the variance. 
(7)  A variance from a requirement of this chapter expires immediately upon the termination, completion, or resolution of the event, occurrence, condition, or activity for which the variance is granted or at a time specified by the director or director's designee. 
(n)  Access to premises. All persons or agents employed by the department of public works shall, at all responsible hours, have access to premises to ascertain if water is being wasted within the corporate city limits of the city or the extraterritorial jurisdiction or the extent of the jurisdictional authority and whether provisions of the drought ordinance have been, and are being, complied with in all respects. 
(o)  Violation; penalty. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity found in violation of any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of $25.00 for the first offense; not more than $500.00 for the second offense; and not more than $2,000.00 for each offense thereafter. Each day of violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. Proof of a culpable mental state shall not be required for the first or second offense. In the event that this section is violated by repeated offenses, the director of public works is authorized to order the locking or removal of the customer's meter until all fees and fines are paid. 
(Code 1966, § 32-34; Code 2001, § 106-186; Ord. No. 52-2001, § 1, 5-15-2001; Ord. No. 50-2003, § 1, 5-20-2003; Ord. No. 122-2003, § 1, 12-16-2003; Ord. No. 8-2004, § 1, 1-6-2004; Ord. No. 29-2004, § 1, 4-6-2004; Ord. No. 15-2009, § 1, 2-17-2009; Ord. No. 49-2012, § 1, 9-4-2012; Ord. No. 32-2013 § 1, 6-4-2013; Ord. No. 17-2014, § 1, 4-15-2014; Ord. No. 47-2014, § 1, 10-21-2014; Ord. No. 58-2014, § 1, 12-2-2014; Ord. No. 50-2015, Att., 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 106-187. - Duty to notify of water waste. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to negligently waste water in any manner whatsoever. Any person having knowledge of any condition whereby water is being wasted shall immediately notify the Department of Public Works. 
(Code 1966, § 32-37; Code 2001, § 106-187) 
Sec. 106-188. - Approved fixtures required to prevent water waste; notice to discontinue service. 
    The refusal or neglect of the owner or occupant to equip and maintain the premises with service pipe connections, utilities, or fixtures of approved character and quality, as provided by this chapter and the city plumbing code adopted in section 22-481, to prevent waste of water shall be sufficient grounds for the refusal of the Department of Public Works to connect the premises with the water supply or to continue such connection after having given five days' written notice of the intention to shut off water because of water waste. 
(Code 1966, § 32-38; Code 2001, § 106-188) 
Secs. 106-189-106-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS 

Sec. 106-216. - Use of fire hydrants. 
(a)  Fire hydrants may be opened only by the Fire Department and the Department of Public Works. It shall be unlawful for any other person to open or tamper with the fire hydrants who does not have authority from the aforementioned departments to do so. 
(b)  To ensure protection of fire hydrants any person authorized to open fire hydrants shall use only an approved spanner wrench and shall shut off the fire hydrant slowly and gently so as not to damage the valve seat and shall replace the caps on the outlets of the fire hydrants when not in use. Failure to do so shall be sufficient cause to prohibit further use of the fire hydrant and the refusal to grant subsequent permits for the use of the fire hydrants, in addition to other penalties provided in this article. 
(Code 1966, § 32-35(a); Code 2001, § 106-216; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 106-217. - Use of and payment for water in fire systems. 
(a)  A fire line normally shall not be installed on the same meter with lines conveying water for other than fire purposes (referred to as "domestic lines"). The fire line should be a sole purpose line tapped off the main. However, if the customer desires to tap the fire line for other than fire purposes, a meter of appropriate size, as determined by the Department of Public Works, shall be installed by the city on public property or easement, at the owner's expense, on the domestic line added to the fire line. The meter shall be placed in, as nearly as possible, the same location as if it were on a line tapped directly off the main and must at all times be accessible to city employees for reading and servicing. The city assumes no responsibility for the effect of a tapped fire line on the customer's insurance coverage or rate. 
(b)  There shall be no unmetered lines tapped off a fire line. Each sprinkler fire line shall have a double check valve and five-eighths-inch detector meter installed to department standards, at the owner's expense, on the customer side of any taps made on the fire line. The double check valve and five-eighths-inch detector meter and the meter installed on a domestic line tapped off the fire line shall, when possible, be installed in the same meter box. Each fire line without a sprinkler system shall have a five-eighths-inch meter installed to department standards, at the owner's expense, on the customer side of any taps made on the fire line. 
(c)  The ownership, maintenance and testing of the entire system forward of the main line tap valve, except the detector meter and domestic meters which are property of the city, reside with the property owner. 
(d)  Fire lines installed as described in this section shall not be subject to charges which compensate for a customer's demand on the water system (e.g., a readiness-to-serve charge) or to consumption charges for the water used through the fire line, if used for fire purposes. 
(e)  Fire lines installed before April 19, 1983, are subject to the following: 
(1)  A fire line with no other lines tapped off it shall have no demand charges applied, whether the fire line is metered or unmetered. 
(2)  When a fire line and a domestic line are connected to a compound meter, a demand charge for the fire line will be applied when the large chamber of the compound meter registers water consumed, if that water was not used for fire purposes. If no water was registered by the large chamber or if the water registered was for fire purposes, the demand charge shall be applied against the small chamber which meters the water flowing through the domestic line. 
(Code 1966, § 32-41; Code 2001, § 106-217; Ord. No. 66-2009, § 1, 9-15-2009) 
Secs. 106-218-106-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - INSTALLATION OF LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION SYSTEMS 

Sec. 106-226. - Landscape irrigation rules adopted. 
    The city adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules or the rules as amended by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality found in the Texas Administrative Code, Title 30 Environmental Quality, Part 1 Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, Chapter 344 Landscape Irrigation regarding the regulation of landscape irrigation in this jurisdiction, and incorporates into this division by reference the applicable definitions found in Texas Administrative Code, Title 30 Environmental Quality, Part 1 Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, Chapter 344 Landscape Irrigation, Subchapter A Definitions. 
(Code 2001, § 106-226; Ord. No. 30-2009, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 106-227. - Valid license required for installer. 
(a)  Installer means an individual who connects an irrigation system to any water supply within the city or the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). 
(b)  Any installer must hold a valid license as defined by Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 and required by Chapter 1903 of the Texas Occupations Code. 
(Code 2001, § 106-227; Ord. No. 30-2009, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 106-228. - Permit required. 
    Any person installing an irrigation system within the territorial or extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the city is required to obtain a permit from the city. Any plan approved for a permit must be in compliance with this division and Texas Administrative Code, Title 30 Environmental Quality, Part 1 Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, Chapter 344 Landscape Irrigation (30 TAC ch. 344, pt. 1). 
(Code 2001, § 106-228; Ord. No. 30-2009, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 106-229. - Double check valves. 
    A double check valve may be used to prevent backflow if: 
(1)  The installation use and testing are performed according to the rules for double check valves adopted by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality in Texas Administrative Code, Title 30 Environmental Quality, Part 1 Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, Chapter 344 Landscape Irrigation (30 TAC ch. 344, pt. 1); and 
(2)  The device is tested upon installation. 
(Code 2001, § 106-229; Ord. No. 30-2009, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 106-230. - Enforcement and fees. 
(a)  There shall be a fee for obtaining and renewing an irrigation permit. This fee shall be established by separate ordinance as a fee schedule for plumbing permits. 
(b)  The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this division as may be required by governing laws. Any violation of this division is declared to be a nuisance. 
(c)  Nothing in this division shall be construed as a waiver of the city's right to bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of this division and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates the ordinance or to require specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with the ordinance; and 
(2)  Other available relief. 
(Code 2001, § 106-230; Ord. No. 30-2009, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 106-231. - Applicability. 
    This division does not apply to: 
(1)  An on-site sewage disposal system, as defined by Texas Health and Safety Code § 366.002; or 
(2)  An irrigation system: 
a.  Used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by Texas Agriculture Code § 251.002; or 
b.  Connected to a groundwater well used by the property owner for domestic use. 
(Code 2001, § 106-231; Ord. No. 30-2009, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
Secs. 106-232-106-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER SERVICE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Sanitary sewer systems, Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq. 

Sec. 106-246. - Control over sewer connections. 
    The director of the Department of Public Works, until otherwise ordered, shall have full control over all sewer and sewer connections and shall have the proper authority to represent the city and perform all the duties and things required under this article, under the direction and control of the City Manager. 
(Code 1966, § 32-56; Code 2001, § 106-246) 
Sec. 106-247. - Privies and cesspools. 
    Privies and cesspools are prohibited within the city. The use of approved septic tanks shall be allowed only when sanitary sewer service is not available as provided in section 106-248 and division 3 of article V of this chapter, and then only upon the special permission of the directors of the city/county public health district. 
(Code 1966, § 32-6; Code 2001, § 106-247) 
State Law reference- On-site disposal systems, Texas Health and Safety Code § 366.001 et seq. 
Sec. 106-248. - Connections required. 
(a)  No utilities shall be connected with any new building or construction until a proper sewer connection has been made if the city sewer is available within 200 feet from such new building or construction. If such city sewer is not available within such distance, no utilities shall be connected until an approved septic tank and disposal field has been constructed for the use of such new building or construction. The septic tank shall be approved by the city/county public health district before such utility clearances shall be issued. 
(b)  All service pipes/lines from the sewer mains shall be in accordance with the city's plumbing code. Service pipes/lines may not cross adjoining property lines. All service pipes/lines must be adjacent to the property. 
(Code 1966, § 32-4; Code 2001, § 106-248; Ord. No. 03-2019, 3-5-2019) 
Sec. 106-249. - House connections to sewer system. 
    The house connection from the city sewer lateral shall be installed at the expense of the connector in accordance with the city's regulations and subject to inspection by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 32-5; Code 2001, § 106-249) 
Sec. 106-250. - Damage to or removal of equipment; disposal of certain waste prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Injure, break or remove any portion of a manhole, lamp hole, flush tank or any part of the sewer system; or 
(2)  Throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited in any sewer opening or receptacle connecting with the sewer system any garbage, offal, dead animals, vegetable parings, ashes, cinders, rags or any other matter or thing whatsoever except feces, urine and the necessary toilet paper and liquid house wastes. 
(Code 1966, § 32-8; Code 2001, § 106-250) 
Sec. 106-251. - Rates. 
(a)  The charge for sanitary sewer service shall be determined by water consumption. For all retail users except residential users, the monthly sewer charge shall be based on the monthly water usage billed in the same month. For each retail residential user, the monthly sewer charge for each billing from April through the following March shall be the same, and, shall be based on the average monthly water usage billed in the preceding months of January, February and March. 
(b)  If a retail water user has a separate meter for water and such meter is classed as a water-only meter, the water metered by such separate meter shall not be included in calculating the monthly sewer charge. 
(c)  All retail users of the sewer system other than residential shall be charged for sewer service on the basis of the total water used; provided, however, that any commercial/industrial user who uses water as an ingredient in the manufacturing process of a product shall not be required to pay a sewer charge based on the water so incorporated into the product. Any such commercial/industrial user shall be required to show proof of the amount of water used as an ingredient in the manufacturing process. The city reserves the right to conduct such tests as it may deem necessary to determine the amount of wastewater placed into the sanitary sewer by such user. 
(d)  Every retail user (residential and commercial/industrial) of sewer service shall pay a monthly minimum sewer charge for each full billing cycle in which an account is active, as established by separate ordinance. In the first and last billing cycle in which the account is active, the minimum monthly bill shall be prorated for the number of days the account is active; the prorated daily charge shall be based on a 30-day month. In addition to the minimum charge, each retail user shall pay a monthly sewer charge established by separate ordinance to be billed for sewer charges. 
(e)  Sewer charges for retail residential customers with no established average for the month of December, January and February of the preceding year (winter-months-average) shall be based on the winter-months-average of all city retail residential customers. 
(f)  Customers who have a high winter-months-average due to water leaks within the averaging period may have their winter-months-average adjusted to their previous year's average or if no previous year's average was established, to the current year's city's average, by presenting proof of repair to the utility collection division by May 31 of the calendar year in which the high average is established. 
(g)  The schedule of rates contained in subsections (a) through (f) of this section for retail sewer charges shall apply to retail users located within the city limits; the rates for sanitary sewer service provided to individual retail users outside the city limits shall be twice the rates prescribed in this section. 
(h)  The rate for Sheppard Air Force Base sewer service shall be the same as prescribed for commercial/industrial customers. The minimum monthly bill is the factor "MB" in the contractually agreed formula for computation of the monthly SAFB sewer bill, and the charge per 100 cubic feet of water consumed is the factor "CW" in the same formula. 
(Code 1966, § 32-57; Code 2001, § 106-251; Ord. No. 13-2001, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 82-2003, § 1, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 76-2004, § 1, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 78-2007, § 1, 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 52-2008, § 2, 9-16-2008; Ord. No. 53-2010, § 9, 9-21-2010; Ord. No. 56-2012, § 3, 9-18-2012; Ord. No. 44-2015, § 5, 9-15-2015) 
Secs. 106-252-106-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BILLING PROCEDURE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Limitation on utility liens, Texas Local Government Code § 402.0025. 

Sec. 106-281. - Manner of billing; late payment fee; disconnecting and reconnecting fees. 
(a)  All services for water, sewer, sanitation, and stormwater accounts shall be billed together on a monthly basis. 
(b)  All water, sewer, sanitation, and stormwater accounts shall be payable monthly and shall carry a due date of approximately 15 days after the billing date. The bill shall include a notice which will state that if payment is not received by the due date, then a five percent late payment fee will be assessed on the amount due. If such bill has not been paid by five days after the due date, then a late payment fee of five percent will be assessed to the balance of the account. If such bill has not been paid by the billing date of the succeeding month's bill, then the succeeding month's bill will include a delinquent notice which will state that the customer's service will be discontinued without further notice unless payment is made on or before the due date and a service fee established by separate ordinance must be paid before service will be restored. The delinquent notice will also include a statement that a five percent late payment fee will be assessed on the amount due if payment is not received by the due date. If the full amount has not been paid on or before five days after the due date of the second month's bill or satisfactory arrangements for paying the bill have not been made, the water, sewer and sanitation services will be discontinued, and a service fee established by separate ordinance and a late payment fee of five percent will be charged to the account. Discontinued service will be restored with full payment of the bill including any late fees and the service fee. Service may be restored with a partial payment of the bill with a payment arrangement made with the Utility billing office. 
(Code 1966, § 32-1; Code 2001, § 106-281; Ord. No. 79-2002, § 1, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 104-2003, § 1, 11-4-2003; Ord. No. 44-2015, § 6, 9-15-2015) 
Sec. 106-282. - Effect of failure to receive billings; timely payment. 
    Failure to receive utility bills through the mail will not be a valid excuse for failure to pay such bills when due. It shall be the duty of every water consumer to keep the Department of Public Works advised in writing of his correct name and mailing address. 
(Code 1966, § 32-2; Code 2001, § 106-282) 
Secs. 106-283-106-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 106-311. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrative authority means the Water Pollution Department which shall have enforcement responsibility for this article. 
    Director means the manager and/or health authority of the city/county public health district. 
    Disposal means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid or semisolid grease trap waste, grit trap waste, and/or septage into or on any land or water. 
    Disposal site means a permitted site or part of a site at which grease trap waste, grit trap waste, or septage is processed, treated and/or intentionally placed into or on any land and at which such waste will remain after closure. 
    Disposer means a person who receives, stores, retains, processes, or disposes of liquid waste. 
    Generator means a person who causes, creates, generates, or otherwise produces liquid waste. 
    Grease trap means a watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of greasy, fatty liquid, semiliquid, and/or solid wastes generated from commercial operations into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected. 
    Grease trap waste means greasy, fatty liquid, semiliquid, and/or solid wastes removed from commercial operations by a grease trap. 
    Grit trap means a watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of petroleum-based oil, grease wastes and solids into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected. 
    Grit trap waste means petroleum-based oil, grease wastes and solids from commercial automotive or heavy machinery repair and/or washing facilities. 
    Hazardous waste means any liquid, semiliquid or solid waste or combination of wastes which, because of its quantity, concentration, physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may: 
(1)  Have any of the following characteristics: toxic, corrosive, an irritant, a strong sensitizer, flammable or combustible, explosive or otherwise capable of causing substantial personal injury or illness; 
(2)  Pose a hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of or otherwise improperly managed and is identified or listed as a hazardous waste as defined by the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act or the administrator, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, and as may be amended. 
    Liquid waste means waterborne solids, liquids and gaseous substances derived from a grease trap, grit trap, chemical/portable toilet and/or septic tank and described as a grease trap waste, grit trap waste or septage. 
    Manager means the person conducting, supervising, managing or representing the activities of a generator, transporter or disposer. 
    Manifest system means a system consisting of a four-part trip ticket used to document the generation, transportation and disposal of liquid waste. 
    May. The term "may" is permissive. 
    Owner means the person who owns a facility or part of a facility. 
    Permit means the formal written document issued to a person by the approving authority authorizing collection of grease trap waste, grit trap waste and septage. 
    Permittee means a person granted a permit under this article. 
    Person means an individual, corporation including a government corporation, organization, government, governmental subdivision or agency, federal agency, state, political subdivision of a state, interstate agency or body, business or business trust, partnership, association, firm, company, joint stock company, commission, or any other legal entity. 
    POTW means publicly owned treatment works. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not normally admitted. 
    Septage means wastes removed from a portable toilet, chemical toilet or septic tank. 
    Special wastes means any solid waste or combination of solid wastes that, because of its quantity, concentration, physical or chemical characteristics or biological properties, requires special handling and disposal to protect the human health or the environment. 
    Spill means the accidental or intentional loss or unauthorized discharge of grease trap waste, grit trap waste, and septage. 
    Tank means a device designed to contain an accumulation of grease trap waste, grit trap waste and septage which is constructed primarily of non-earthen materials (e.g., concrete, steel, plastic) to provide structural support for the containment. 
    TDH means the State Department of Health. 
    Toxic waste means any liquid, semiliquid, or solid waste material which has the ability to chemically produce injury once it reaches a susceptible site in or on the body. 
    Transporter means a person who operates a vehicle for the purpose of transporting liquid waste. 
    Trip ticket means the shipping document originated and signed by the transporter which contains the information required by the approving authority. 
    Vehicle means a mobile device in which or by which liquid waste may be transported upon a public street or highway. 
    WF/WCPHD means the city/county public health district. 
(Code 1966, § 32-86; Code 2001, § 106-311) 
Sec. 106-312. - Authority of approving authority. 
    The approving authority may promulgate rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out this article and protect the public from health and safety hazards. The approving authority may undertake immediate actions as may be necessary to protect the public from health and safety hazards. The approving authority may amend any permit issued under this article to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
(Code 1966, § 32-90(a); Code 2001, § 106-312) 
Sec. 106-313. - Responsibility of corporations or associations. 
(a)  In addition to prohibiting certain conduct by natural persons, it is the intent of this article to hold a corporation or association legally responsible for prohibited conduct performed by an agent acting in behalf of a corporation or association and within the scope of his office or employment. 
(b)  Any person, operator or owner who shall violate any section of this article or who shall fail to comply with any section of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-14. 
(c)  A permittee is liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city for appropriate cleanup and proper disposal of waste materials. Additionally, an administrative fee equal to one-half of assessed cleanup costs shall be levied by the city against the guilty person. 
(Code 1966, § 32-90(c); Code 2001, § 106-313) 
Secs. 106-314-106-340. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LIQUID WASTE 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 106-341. - Accumulation. 
    A person commits an offense if he allows liquid waste that emits noxious or offensive odors or is unsanitary or injurious to public health to accumulate upon property under his control. 
(Code 1966, § 32-89(a); Code 2001, § 106-341) 
Sec. 106-342. - Disposal. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he unloads or offers for sale or exchange liquid waste except at a place permitted by the city, the state, or the federal government. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he deposits or discharges liquid waste onto a street or into a storm or sanitary sewer or an area that drains into the storm sewer system. 
(Code 1966, § 32-89(b); Code 2001, § 106-342) 
Sec. 106-343. - Responsibilities of generator. 
    A generator of liquid waste shall have all liquid waste material picked up from his premises by a liquid waste transporter who holds a valid permit from the city, and the liquid waste shall be transported to an approved site for disposal as approved by the city/county public health district. A generator of liquid wastes shall not have nonhazardous wastes or liquid wastes in combination with hazardous waste removed from his premises by a liquid waste hauler operating under a city permit. A generator shall: 
(1)  Install or provide collection devices of a size and type specified by the approving authority. 
(2)  Maintain collection devices in continuous, proper operation. 
(3)  Supervise proper cleaning of collection devices. 
(4)  Report spills and accidents involving collection devices to the approving authority within 24 hours. 
(5)  Clean up all spills and accidents immediately and have material disposed of by a permitted transporter by proper means. 
(6)  Make available all records required to be kept for inspection by the approving authority during normal business hours. 
(Code 1966, § 32-89(c); Code 2001, § 106-343) 
Sec. 106-344. - Responsibilities of disposers. 
    A liquid waste disposer commits an offense if he allows accumulation of liquid waste on his premises so that rainfall could carry the material to storm sewers or adjacent property or create a noxious odor or health hazard. A liquid waste disposer shall: 
(1)  Obtain and maintain compliance with all licenses and/or permits required by local, state or federal law. 
(2)  Accept waste only from a permitted transporter. 
(3)  Maintain trip ticket copies for a period of two years. 
(4)  Accept only those classes of wastes authorized by license or permit. 
(5)  Make available all records required to be kept for inspection by the approving authority during normal business hours. 
(Code 1966, § 32-89(d); Code 2001, § 106-344) 
Secs. 106-345-106-370. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Transportation 

Sec. 106-371. - Permit required; criteria for issuance of permit. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates, or causes to be operated, a vehicle for the purpose of transporting liquid waste without an applicable permit. A permit shall be issued for transportation of liquid waste and the approving authority shall designate on the permit the liquid waste authorized for transportation in the vehicle. A separate vehicle permit number is issued for each vehicle operated. 
(b)  A person who desires to obtain a permit must make application on a form provided by the approving authority. 
(c)  The approving authority shall be notified of employment changes during the permit period. 
(d)  The approving authority shall not issue a permit, unless the applicant submits for inspection by the approving authority the vehicle the applicant proposes to use to transport liquid waste and the vehicle is found by the approving authority to be constructed and equipped in accordance with this article. 
(e)  A permit is not transferable. 
(f)  A permit issued by the city excludes the hauling of materials that are hazardous in nature. 
(g)  Transporters transporting hazardous wastes must have the applicable state Department of Health or state Department of Water Resources permit and use the appropriate manifest system. 
(Code 1966, § 32-87(a); Code 2001, § 106-371) 
Sec. 106-372. - Permit fee; display of permit. 
(a)  The approving authority shall not issue a permit required under this subdivision to an applicant until the appropriate established fee is paid. An applicant shall pay a fee established by separate ordinance for each vehicle operated by the applicant. Each permit must be renewed by October 1 annually. Any fee paid shall be nonrefundable. 
(b)  The approving authority shall number permits consecutively. Each permit holder shall cause to be displayed on each side of each vehicle, in a color contrasting with the background in three-inch letters or larger, the business name, the city permit number and the state Department of Health registration number. 
(c)  The permit holder shall place the business name, the city permit number and the registration number on each vehicle before the vehicle is operated. The permit holder shall keep the permit receipt or a copy in the vehicle at all times. 
(Code 1966, § 32-87(b); Code 2001, § 106-372) 
Sec. 106-373. - Denial, suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  The approving authority may deny a permit required under this subdivision if it is determined that an applicant is not qualified under this subdivision and may suspended or revoke a permit if it is determined that a permittee: 
(1)  Is not qualified under this subdivision. 
(2)  Has violated a section of this article. 
(3)  Has failed to pay a required fee. 
(4)  Has failed to comply with maintenance or inspection requirements. 
(5)  Has failed to deliver trip tickets to the approving authority. 
(b)  The permittee whose permit has been revoked by the approving authority may appeal to the health authority in writing within ten days of revocation. The health authority may reinstate the permit or continue with the revocation. The decision of the health authority shall be final within five days. 
(c)  After suspension under this section, a permittee may file a request for reinstatement of the permit. When the approving authority determines that the permittee is again qualified, all violations have been corrected, precautions have been taken to prevent future violations, and all required fees have been paid, the approving authority shall reinstate the permit. A permittee whose permit is suspended or revoked shall not collect, transport or dispose of any waste materials within the jurisdiction of the approving authority. 
(Code 1966, § 32-90(b); Code 2001, § 106-373) 
Sec. 106-374. - Maintenance of liquid waste vehicles. 
(a)  A liquid waste transporter shall: 
(1)  Maintain hoses, tanks, valves, pumps, cylinders, diaphragms, pipes, connections, and other appurtenances on a vehicle in good repair and free from leaks. 
(2)  Provide a safety plug or cap for each valve of a tank. 
(3)  Cause a vehicle exterior to be clean and the vehicle to be odor free at the beginning of each workday. 
(b)  Any of the actions in subsection (a) of this section shall be taken only so far as is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. The approving authority may cause to be impounded a vehicle which is being operated in violation of this article, and he may authorize the holding of the vehicle until the violation is corrected. The approving authority may also revoke the permit for the improperly operated vehicle. 
(Code 1966, § 32-87(c); Code 2001, § 106-374) 
Sec. 106-375. - Inspection of liquid waste vehicles. 
    A liquid waste transporter's vehicle shall be inspected by the approving authority prior to the issuance of a vehicle permit with qualifications as follows: 
(1)  The liquid waste transporter shall use a vehicle with a single tank as an integral portion of the vehicle to transport liquid wastes; portable tanks or other containers temporarily installed in vehicles are prohibited. 
(2)  Piping, valves and connectors shall be permanently attached to the tank and/or vehicle. 
(3)  The tank shall be liquid tight. 
(4)  The tank shall be constructed so that every interior and exterior portion can be easily cleaned. 
(5)  Piping, valves and connections shall be accessible and easy to clean. 
(6)  The inlet or opening of the tank shall be constructed so that collected waste will not spill during filling, transfer, or transport. 
(7)  Outlet connections shall be constructed so that no liquid waste will leak, run or spill out from the vehicle. 
(8)  Outlets shall be of a design and type suitable for the liquid waste handled and capable of controlling flow or discharge without spillage or undue spray on or flooding of immediate surroundings while in use. 
(9)  Pumps, valves, cylinders, diaphragms and other appurtenances shall be of a design and type suitable for the type of waste handled; capable of operation without spillage, spray or leakage; and capable of being easily disassembled for cleaning. 
(Code 1966, § 32-87(d); Code 2001, § 106-375) 
Sec. 106-376. - Responsibilities of transporter. 
(a)  Before accepting a load of liquid waste for transportation, a liquid waste transporter shall determine the nature of the material to be transported and that his equipment is sufficient to properly handle the job without spillage, leaks or release of toxic or harmful gases, fumes, liquids or other substances. 
(b)  A transporter with a city liquid waste transporter permit shall not transport materials that are hazardous, as defined in section 106-311, in vehicles permitted by the city for transporting liquid waste. 
(c)  A transporter holding a city permit must use a disposal site permitted and approved by the city, the state, or the federal government. 
(d)  A manifest system consisting of a five-part trip ticket must be used to document the generation, transportation and disposal of all applicable liquid waste generated in the city and shall be used as follows: 
(1)  The trip ticket books shall be purchased by the transporter from the city Department of Health, Air-Water Pollution Division, for the cost of providing the books. 
(2)  A transporter shall complete one trip ticket for each location serviced. Chemical/portable toilet companies servicing their own units shall be required to complete one trip ticket for each vehicle load transported. 
(3)  The white copy of the trip ticket shall be signed by the transporter with the disposal site name and permit number at the time of waste disposal, and the green copy shall be maintained by the landfill/wastewater plant. 
(4)  The yellow copy of the trip ticket shall be maintained by the transporter. 
(5)  All completed trip tickets containing the white copy of the trip ticket will be delivered at least weekly by the disposer to the city Department of Health, Air-Water Pollution Division. 
(6)  A copy of all trip tickets shall be maintained for a period of five years. 
(Code 1966, § 32-88; Code 2001, § 106-376; Ord. No. 42-2002, § 2, 6-4-2002) 
Secs. 106-377-106-405. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- On-site sewage disposal systems, Texas Local Government Code § 366.001 et seq. 

Sec. 106-406. - On-site sewage facility rules adopted. 
    30 Texas Administrative Code (TAC) chapters 30 and 285 (30 TAC chs. 30, 285) and all future amendments and revisions thereto are incorporated by reference. 
(Code 2001, § 106-406; Ord. No. 60-2009, 9-1-2009) 
Sec. 106-407. - Compliance. 
    Any person who owns or has possession or control of a structure discharging sewage into an on-site sewage facility (OSSF) within the jurisdictional area of the city must ensure that the discharge and the on-site sewage facility comply with the rules adopted in section 106-406. 
(Code 2001, § 106-407; Ord. No. 60-2009, 9-1-2009) 
Sec. 106-408. - Additional requirements. 
    In addition to the rules adopted in section 106-406, the city implements the following more stringent regulations. 
(1)  A permit shall be required for all on-site sewage facilities (OSSF) regardless of acreage, and so the exception found in 30 TAC § 285.3(f)(2) shall not apply in the city limits. 
(2)  Permits shall not transfer automatically to a new owner upon sale or other legal transfer of an OSSF, and so 30 TAC § 285.3(a)(3) shall not apply in the city limits. Within 60 days prior to the sale or transfer of any property on which a permitted OSSF exists, the seller or transferor must pay an inspection fee as established by separate ordinance and have an inspection of the OSSF performed by a licensed designated representative of the health district. Only after the payment of such a fee and the conduct of an inspection in which the OSSF is found to be compliant, does the permit become transferable upon any sale or legal transfer which occurs within 60 days of the inspection. Permits for OSSFs which transfer legally without the required fee and inspection shall be deemed to be invalid, and the new owner, buyer or transferor must make application for new permit and follow the procedures required for same before operating the OSSF. 
(3)  Within 60 days prior to the sale or transfer of any property on which any OSSF, including an OSSF exempt from permitting requirements by 30 TAC § 285.3(f), exists, the seller or transferor must pay an inspection fee and have an inspection of the OSSF performed by a licensed designated representative of the health district. Only after the payment of such a fee and the conduction of an inspection in which the OSSF is found to be compliant, does the use of the system become transferable upon any sale or legal transfer which occurs within 60 days of the inspection. OSSFs for properties which transfer without the required fee and inspection shall be deemed to be invalid, and the new owner, buyer or transferor must pay the required fee and obtain the inspection before operating the OSSF. 
_____ 
(4)  The Aerobic Treatment Unit Sizing Chart in Table II of 30 TAC § 285.91(2) is replaced with the following: 
Aerobic Treatment Unit Sizing 
For Residences Within the City Limits of Wichita Falls 
Size of Home Minimum Aerobic 
Tank Treatment Capacity 
in gallons per day 3 or fewer bedrooms and less than 2,501 sq. ft. 450 4 bedrooms and less than 3,501 sq. ft. or less than 4 bedrooms, larger than 2,500, but smaller than 3,501 600 5 bedrooms and less than 4,501 sq. ft. or less than 5 bedrooms, larger than 3,500, but smaller than 4,501 750 6 bedrooms and less than 5,501 sq. ft. or less than 6 bedrooms, larger than 4,500, but smaller than 5,501 900 7 bedrooms and less than 7,001 sq. ft. or less than 7 bedrooms, larger than 5,500, but smaller than 7,001 1050 8 bedrooms and less than 8,501 sq. ft. or less than 8 bedrooms, larger than 7,000, but smaller than 8,501 1200 9 bedrooms and less than 10,001 sq. ft. or less than 9 bedrooms, larger than 8,500, but smaller than 10,001 1350 10 bedrooms and less than 11,501 sq. ft. or less than 10 bedrooms, larger than 10,000, but smaller than 11,501 1500 For each additional bedroom above ten or every additional 1,500 sq. ft. of living area above 11,500 add 150  
(5)  The following requirement is added to 30 TAC § 285.32(a): Structures which have more than one sewer stub out shall have a common connection of all sewer lines before the treatment system unless the treatment system is designed with more than one entrance. 
(6)  The following requirement is added to 30 TAC § 285.3(d): Installers and their apprentices shall during installation, maintain on the job site copies of all approved plans, contracts, manifests, well data, and the specifications of the components relating to the installation of the OSSF, and shall make same available to the inspector until all required inspections are completed. 
(7)  On-site sewage facilities maintenance and management practices. Maintenance contract requirements for all OSSFs are identified in 30 TAC § 285.91(12). Further, maintenance and management practices shall comply with 30 TAC §§ 285.7 and 285.39. 
a.  No homeowner/property owner shall be allowed to perform any maintenance on an on-site disposal system using aerobic treatment unless the homeowner/property owner: 
1.  Provides documentation of completing and passing a basic OSSF maintenance course approved by the regulatory authority for aerobic treatment units and the property to be maintained is owned by the trained homeowner, or 
2.  Holds a valid wastewater Class D license or higher wastewater treatment license, or 
3.  An owner of an OSSF lawfully installed as of October 1, 2009, who has maintained said OSSF prior to that date may continue to do so. 
4.  All of the above mentioned must be able to demonstrate to a licensed designated representative of the health district that he can perform the following procedures for maintaining the OSSF: replacing air filters, cleaning aerobic diffusers, spinners and agitators, cleaning pumps, testing for chlorine and/or fecal coliform, monitoring turbidity, scum and sludge build-up, controlling odor, and ensuring the application area is distributing properly and according to the original system design. The owner must inspect the OSSF and submit an inspection report to the health district every four months. An owner who fails to submit inspections as required shall not be permitted to self-maintain, and will be required to obtain a testing and reporting contract from a licensed OSSF maintenance provider. 
b.  Each maintenance provider having contracts in Wichita Falls shall register with Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public Health District (health district) Environmental Health Division. Maintenance provider registration shall be effective from the date of registration to December 31 of the same year. Renewal maintenance provider registration for the next year shall not be accepted before December 1 of the current year. New and renewal maintenance contracts will only be accepted from maintenance providers whose registration is current and in good standing. Maintenance provider registration shall be free of charge. 
1.  Maintenance providers who fail to perform maintenance testing at the required intervals, mark an inspection tag, or submit a report on time two or more times during any 12 month period may have their registration suspended for no longer than one year in addition to any other penalties that may apply. No new or renewal maintenance contracts will be accepted from a maintenance provider during the time their registration is suspended. 
2.  A licensed OSSF maintenance provider will submit an inspection report for each OSSF to the health district every four months. Renewal contracts shall be for a term of no less than one year and include at least three inspections. Contract renewals with the same maintenance provider will not be accepted by the health district unless all of the maintenance reports from the previous contract period have been received. 
(8)  All components that need to be replaced on an OSSF shall be replaced by an individual licensed by the TCEQ to maintain OSSFs. Said replacement must utilize components certified by the manufacturer for use on the specific model being maintained. 
(Code 2001, § 106-408; Ord. No. 60-2009, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 45-2018, § 1, 9-18-2018) 
Sec. 106-409. - Duties and powers of public health district. 
    The Wichita Falls/Wichita County Public Health District is declared the designated representative for the enforcement of the rules under this division within the city. Individuals employed by the health district will represent the district as the designated representative; however these individuals must be approved and certified by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality before assuming the duties and responsibilities of the designated representative. 
(Code 2001, § 106-409; Ord. No. 60-2009, 9-1-2009) 
Sec. 106-410. - Fees. 
(a)  All fees collected for permits and/or inspections pursuant to this division shall be made payable to the Wichita Falls/Wichita County Public Health District. 
(b)  The district shall establish a fee schedule for the on-site sewage facility program within the city and maintain a copy of such fee schedule for inspection by the public. Such fee schedule shall set reasonable fees for services performed by or at the direction of the licensing authority and may be amended by the licensing authority from time to time. 
(Code 2001, § 106-410; Ord. No. 60-2009, 9-1-2009) 
Sec. 106-411. - Appeals. 
    Persons aggrieved by an action or decision of the designated representative may appeal such action or decision to the city council. 
(Code 2001, § 106-411; Ord. No. 60-2009, 9-1-2009) 
Sec. 106-412. - Penalties. 
    This division adopts and incorporates the applicable penalty provisions related to on-site sewage facilities contained in Texas Health and Safety Code chs. 341 and 366; Texas Water Code chs. 7, 26 and 37; and 30 TAC chs. 30 and 285. 
(Code 2001, § 106-412; Ord. No. 60-2009, 9-1-2009) 
Secs. 106-413-106-530. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WATER AND SEWER MAIN EXTENSIONS 

Sec. 106-531. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish a policy for water and sewer main extensions for the city. 
(Code 1966, § 32-68; Code 2001, § 106-531) 
Sec. 106-532. - Extension policy. 
(a)  Upon request of an applicant or group of applicants who are authorized to receive water and/or sewer service, for the purpose of this article known as "applicant," the city may extend water and gravity sanitary sewer mains in the streets and alleys or easements within the city limits in order to permit connections by persons desiring and seeking water service and sanitary sewer service. All costs for engineering, right-of-way acquisition, construction, and other actual costs for installation of the mains will be borne by the applicant as the user of the service. All materials and construction methods for the extension must be in compliance with city standards and specifications. The applicant must provide engineering plans sealed by a state-registered professional engineer for city approval. Any required state regulatory authority approval needed for the extension must be obtained by the applicant or his agent. Construction will be inspected by the city. The water and/or sewer lines must be extended to the point on the property to be served where the applicant is to make connection for service. Public water and sewer lines (main) must be placed in the city-owned right-of-way or a city-owned easement. 
(b)  When the requested extension is 100 feet or less, the applicant may request that the city perform the engineering design and construction by paying a fee established by separate ordinance. 
(c)  When the requested extension is more than 100 feet or the applicant does not want the city to construct extensions of 100 feet or less or the city chooses not to construct a line upon request by an applicant, the applicant may engage a private contractor to accomplish the installation work. The applicant is responsible for the full cost of the extension of the water and/or sewer line up to and including the size line required by the service requirement of the property or eight inches in diameter, whichever is larger. If the requested extension requires use of a sanitary sewer lift station and pressure line, the lift station and pressure line must be sized to meet the service requirement of the property or the minimum size requirements imposed by state regulatory authorities, whichever is larger. 
(d)  The minimum size line required for sewer and water line extensions shall be eight inches unless approved by the city engineer. Water line extensions shall conform to the size shown in the city master water plan. Water line extensions shall be looped to eliminate dead ends unless approved otherwise. 
(e)  Sewer lines shall be installed at minimum grade with no more than two inches drop at manholes unless approved by the city engineer. Sewer line extensions and lift stations shall be designed to maximize system gravity capability and reduce the requirement for additional lift stations. Lift station pumps and equipment shall be installed that are interchangeable with pumps stocked and maintained by the city wastewater collection division. 
(f)  Upon construction, the utility mains, lift stations, and all appurtenances shall become the property of the city with no future interest retained by the applicant. 
(Code 1966, § 32-69; Code 2001, § 106-532; Ord. No. 03-2019, 3-5-2019) 
Sec. 106-533. - Deferred charges. 
    For a water or sewer line extension of 100 feet or less where the applicant desires to pay the charges for the city to perform engineering services and construction, the applicant or his agent must pay to the city the entire sum as set forth in this article or execute a promissory note and mechanic's lien in a form approved by the city attorney, agreeing to pay monthly installments, together with such interest rate as may from time to time be set by the city council on the remaining sum due, which installments may be included on the applicant's water bill. The applicant shall further agree that if any installments become delinquent, the city may enforce its liens as provided by law and/or may discontinue water and sewer services to such property until the amount in default has been paid, together with a penalty of ten percent of such amount in default. 
(Code 1966, § 32-70; Code 2001, § 106-533) 
Sec. 106-534. - Procedure on leased property. 
    If the property to be served pursuant to this article is rental or leased property, the city is authorized to refuse service on the premises until the property owner makes satisfactory arrangements with the city under the terms of this article for the extension of water and/or sewer lines. 
(Code 1966, § 32-71; Code 2001, § 106-534) 
Sec. 106-535. - Obligation of city. 
    The city shall not be obligated to proceed under this article if funds are not available or if, in the discretion of the city, the extension may not be practical. 
(Code 1966, § 32-72; Code 2001, § 106-535) 
Sec. 106-536. - Checkvalves or backflow valves; indemnity agreement. 
    Where, in the opinion of the director of public works, the property is subject to flooding or the sanitary sewer is subject to being surcharged due to infiltration of stormwaters or the premises is subject to being flooded by an overcharged sewer due to its elevation in relation to the proposed sewer line, the owner or developer of the premises shall be denied a sanitary sewer main for service, unless the owner or developer agrees to install checkvalves or backflow valves in each house sewer and agrees to indemnify fully the city and save it whole and harmless from and against any and all damages, costs, or expenses of every kind, character and nature, whether real or asserted, accruing upon or about the buildings due to the surcharge of the sanitary sewer or inadequate storm drainage. Such agreement shall be executed by the owner or developer of the property and filed in the county deed records and shall be a covenant running with the land and shall be binding on the owner, his successors or assigns. 
(Code 1966, § 32-73; Code 2001, § 106-536) 
Sec. 106-537. - Subdivided or platted property. 
    Where extensions of water and sewer systems are required to serve property which has been subdivided or platted for development and resale, water and sewer facilities may be extended to such properties on the following basis and in accordance with subdivision regulations in appendix A in this volume and the minimum standards and procedures in section 106-538: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to serve or connect any lot, tract or plot of land or any part thereof or for the use of the owner or purchaser of such land or any part thereof with water and sewer connections unless and until such plan, plot, or replot of such lot or tract of land shall conform to the platting requirements of the city and has been approved by the city Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(2)  In no case will developers be allowed water and sewer connections to the city systems unless the developers and owners agree to annex the property to the city as soon as the utility systems are accepted for operation by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 32-74; Code 2001, § 106-537) 
Sec. 106-538. - Methods of construction for subdivided or platted property. 
    Water and sewer main extensions to serve a real estate subdivision to the city, a plat of which has been finally approved by the city Planning and Zoning Commission and filed for record, may be accomplished in the following manner: 
(1)  Upon approval by the city, a developer of an addition or plat shall design and prepare construction plans of water and sanitary sewer facilities or either of them to serve the subdivision, including any access or off-site facilities that may be required. These plans shall conform in all details to the city's standards as to the design, grade, location, size and quality of materials and construction. 
(2)  Plans and profiles submitted by the developer's engineer shall be inked on standard 22-inch by 36-inch sheets of tracing linen. Plans and profiles shall be shown at scales of not less than one inch to 100 feet horizontal and one inch to six feet vertical. The engineer submitting the plans and profiles must be a registered professional civil engineer in the state, and he must affix his seal and signature to the tracings of all plans and profiles. The completed tracings for water and sewer facilities shall be approved by the city in accordance with the street profiles and storm sewer profiles as approved by the Department of Public Works. After plans are approved, two copies of water facility plans and specifications and two copies of sewer facility plans and specifications shall be submitted to the city. Plans shall include a copy of the plat of the addition as approved by the city Planning and Zoning Commission and recorded in the county deed records. 
(3)  Upon approval of the plans by the city, the developer may enter into a contract with any qualified contractor or may himself construct the system as so planned; provided, however, that the construction and installation of the water lines and sewer lines or either of them shall be supervised by city inspectors to see that the installation is made in accordance with the plans and the city's standard specifications which, in every instance, shall be a part of such installation contract. 
(4)  No installation of water or sewer lines will be made at any other location except in a dedicated street, an alley, or an easement running in favor of the city, which shall be filed of record by the owner of such addition. 
(5)  Any such installation, when accepted by the city, shall become the property of the city, free and clear of all encumbrances, and any contract entered into between the developer and a contractor shall provide for a performance bond such as the city uses in its standard specifications which, in every instance, shall be a part of the installation contract. The city shall be named as one of the beneficiaries in such bond. 
(6)  If the developer makes the installation himself, he shall execute a performance bond in favor of the city in the same form and conditioned in the same manner as provided for in the standard contract documents used by the city in making contracts for water and sanitary sewer installations. 
(7)  The city specifically reserves the option to advertise for bids but will approve such action by the developer's engineer under satisfactory conditions. If the developer desires the city to let the contract, he must deposit with the city the total cost of all water and sewer facilities, including off-site mains, and prepare plans and specifications. The city will then construct the facilities, refund any excess money or require such additional money necessary to defray the total cost of the utilities. 
(Code 1966, § 32-75; Code 2001, § 106-538) 
Secs. 106-539-106-565. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - REGULATIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 106-566. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq., as amended. 
    Administrator means the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency and/or the agency for the state that has authority to administer the program. 
    Approval authority means the executive director of the state agency that has authority to administer the program. 
    Authorized representative of the user means: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility, a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees Celsius, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
    Bypass means an intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
    Categorical pretreatment standards means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR 405-471. 
    Chemical oxygen demand or COD means the measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l) as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
    City means the City of Wichita Falls, Texas, or any authorized person acting in its behalf. 
    Closed-cup flashpoint means a measure of the characteristic of the ignitability of a material using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
    Composite sample means the sample resulting from the combination of individual samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time, as per the procedure described in 40 CFR 403, appendix E(I). 
    Control authority means the laboratory/water pollution coordinator of the Wichita Falls-Wichita County public health district or another official designated by the city manager or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Control manhole means a point of access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
    Control point means a point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer, also known as an inspection port and/or control manhole. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration or to which the only pollutant added to the water is heat. 
    Director means the chief administrative officer of a state or interstate water pollution control agency with a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program approved pursuant to section 402(b) of the Act and an approved state pretreatment program. 
    Domestic sewage means waterborne wastes normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, including apartments, houses and hotels; office buildings; factories; and institutions, free from stormwater, surface water and industrial wastes. 
    EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for other duly authorized officials, including authorized contractors acting as representatives, of said agency. 
    Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by the Environmental Protection Agency of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act. 
    Fats means primarily fatty acid esters of the alcohol glycerol, also called acylglycerols, neutral fats, natural fats, or glycerides. They are the major components of depot, or storage, fats in plant and animal cells, especially in the adipose or fat cells of vertebrates. The term "fats" may include any synthesized substance of a like nature. 
    Garbage means animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
    Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes, as per the procedure described in 40 CFR 403, appendix E(II). 
    Grease means fats, waxes, free fatty acids, calcium and magnesium soaps, mineral oils and certain other nonfatty material commonly found in wastewater. 
    Grease trap/interceptor means a water-tight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of grease, greasy and/or fatty liquids, semi-solids, and/or solid wastes generated from commercial operations into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected. 
    Hazardous substance means any substance designated pursuant to 40 CFR 302. 
    Hazardous waste means as provided in 40 CFR 261.3. 
    Indirect discharge and discharge mean the introduction of pollutants into a publicly owned treatment works from any non-domestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act. 
    Industrial user and user mean a source of indirect discharge or discharge. 
    Industrial waste means waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business; from development of any natural resource; from any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater; and wastewater containing pollutants in higher concentrations than normal domestic sewage as defined in this section. 
    Interceptor means a device designed and installed to separate and retain deleterious, hazardous, or undesirable matter from normal waste and permit normal sewage or liquid wastes to discharge into the disposal system by gravity. 
    Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the publicly owned treatment works, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal and, therefore, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder or any more stringent state or local regulations: section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Lower explosive limit (LEL) of a compound means the minimum concentration of that compound, as a gas or vapor in air, which will explode or burn in the presence of an ignition source. 
    Maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    May. The term "may" is permissive or discretionary. 
    Medical wastes means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
    Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means the same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio. The milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permits program as administered by a state or interstate water pollution control agency as approved pursuant to section 402(b) of the Act. 
    National pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to part 403.5 of the Act. 
    New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act, which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b or (1)c of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to the existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program, any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment or significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
    No measurable trace means a measurement of a parameter that is less than the detection limit of the appropriate analytic technique approved by the Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Non-contact cooling water means water used for cooling which does not come into contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product. 
    Oils means those fats that are liquid at ordinary temperatures. 
    Other waste means decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, refuse, ashes, garbage, offal, oil, tar, chemicals, and all other substances except sewage and industrial wastes. 
    Owner and occupant mean the person using the lot, parcel of land, building or premises connected to discharging sewage, industrial wastewater of the city, and who pays or is legally responsible for the payment of water rates or charges made against the lot, parcel of land, building or premises, if connected to the city's water distribution system, or who would pay or be legally responsible for such payment if so connected. 
    Pass through means a discharge which exits the publicly owned treatment works into the waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the publicly owned treatment works' Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person means any individual, consortium, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, joint venture, commercial entity, governmental entity, or any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities including the United States government or any state, municipality, commission, political subdivision of a state or interstate body. 
    Petroleum oil means high-molecular-weight fractions, produced by thermal cracking or pyrolysis of paraffin hydrocarbons, that are viscous and oily, typically used as lubricants in machinery. The term "petroleum oil" may include any synthesized substance of a like nature. 
    pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a material, liquid or solid, expressed in standard units, specifically the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration represented on a scale of 0 to 14 with 7 being a neutral state, 0 most acidic and 14 most alkaline. 
    Point source means any discernable, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, or vessel or other floating craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged. The term "point source" does not include agricultural stormwater discharges and return flows from irrigated agriculture. 
    Pollutant means dredged spoil; solid waste; incinerator residue; filter backwash; sewage; garbage; sewage sludge; munitions; medical wastes; chemical wastes; biological materials; radioactive materials except as regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 USC 2011 et seq.); heat; wrecked or discarded equipment; rock; sand; cellar dirt; municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes; and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
    Pollution prevention (P2) means the use of materials, processes, or practices that reduce or eliminate the creation of pollutants or wastes at the source. It includes, but is not limited to, practices that reduce the use of hazardous and nonhazardous materials, energy, water, or other resources as well as those that protect natural resources through conservation or more efficient use. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d); by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user. 
    Pretreatment standards and standards mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits, whether federal, state or local, and where more than one standard for a particular pollutant exists, the most stringent. 
    Prohibited discharge standards and prohibited discharges mean absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in sections 106-816 and 106-817. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) and wastewater system mean a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, which is owned by a state or municipality, as defined by section 504(4) of the Act. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a publicly owned treatment works. The term also includes the municipality as defined in section 504(4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. 
    Removal means a reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of a pollutant during pretreatment or treatment. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical or biological means and may be the result of specifically designed capabilities or may be incidental to the operation of the pretreatment or treatment system. Removal does not mean dilution of a pollutant. 
    Reportable slug load means either of the following: 
(1)  Any release into the publicly owned treatment works over a 24-hour period which meets any of the following criteria: 
a.  A reportable quantity of a hazardous material, as defined under section 311 of the CWA, section 102(b) of the CERCLA, and 40 CFR 302.4. 
b.  Ten pounds or more of heavy metals, including arsenic, cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, mercury, nickel, silver, and zinc; or cyanide in solution. 
c.  One gallon or more of any toxic substance listed in this article. 
d.  All flammable liquids in quantities of more than one gallon. 
e.  Any other liquid material determined to have adverse effects on the publicly owned treatment works, including but not limited to alkalies or alkaline substances, oils, foam generating wastes, highly colored wastes, pesticides, organics, vegetable matter, and solvents not listed previously. 
(2)  Any discharge of water or wastewater with a concentration of any given constituent or a quantity of flow for any period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flow of normal operations of the user shall also be considered a slug load. 
    Sanitary sewer means a public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastewater or a combination of both and into which stormwater, surface water, groundwater, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
    Sewage means domestic or industrial waste carried in the drains and pipes of the sanitary sewer. 
    Significant industrial user means: 
(1)  Any user subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the publicly owned treatment works, excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater; 
b.  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the publicly owned treatment works treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the publicly owned treatment works' operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6). 
(3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the publicly owned treatment works operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
    Significant noncompliance means that an industrial user is in violation of one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which 66 percent or more of all measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those violations in which 33 percent or more of all measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils, and grease, and 1.2 or all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the control authority determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as the baseline monitoring report, 90-day compliance report, periodic report, and reports on compliance and compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the control authority determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
    Significant violator means any user committing a violation meeting one or more of the criteria of 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii). 
    Slug, slug discharge and slug load mean any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or noncustomary batch discharge. Certain slug loads are reportable slug loads. 
    Standard Industrial Classification Code (SIC) means the uniform method for collecting and presenting business data devised by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget. Each business is given an SIC code based upon its primary activity, which is determined by its predominant business or service. For the purposes of this article, the SIC code of a business is the first four digits of the SIC number of that business as found in the most current edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. The term "stormwater" also includes other types of surface runoff and drainage, such as but not limited to lawn watering; vehicle washing; pavement and sidewalk wash-off; and drainage from swimming pools, water beds, and hot water heaters and structure cleaning. 
    Suspended solids and total suspended solids mean the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater, or other liquids, which is removable by laboratory filtering using the method for determining nonfilterable residue in 40 CFR 136.3. 
    Total toxic organics (TTO) means the summation of all quantifiable values greater than 0.01 milligrams per liter for all toxic organics listed under 40 CFR 413.02(i) and 40 CFR 433.11(e). 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant designated as toxic pursuant to section 307(a)(1) of the Act and listed in 40 CFR 401.15. 
    TPDES means Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permits program as administered by a state water pollution control agency as approved pursuant to section 402(b) of the Act. 
    Upset means an exceptional incident in which a discharge unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with the standards set forth in this article and other applicable, federal, state, and local laws due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the discharger, and excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation thereof. 
    Wastewater means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the publicly owned treatment works. Stormwater, surface water, and groundwater infiltration may be included in the wastewater that enters a publicly owned treatment works. 
    Wastewater discharge permit means a mechanism used to control the discharge of wastewater to the POTW from an industrial user in order to: 
(1)  Ensure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(2)  Regulate continuing use of the sanitary sewer system; and 
(3)  Place conditions on the discharge. 
    Wastewater treatment plant and treatment plant means that portion of the publicly owned treatment works which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
(Code 1966, § 32-123; Code 2001, § 106-566; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 106-567. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand CERCLA Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act CFR Code of Federal Regulations COD Chemical oxygen demand CWA Clean Water Act EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency FOG Fats, oils, and grease gpd Gallons per day mg/l Milligrams per liter NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System O&M Operation and maintenance P2 Pollution Prevention pH Potential Hydrogen Ion Concentration POTW Publicly owned treatment works RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act SIC Standard industrial classification SNC Significant Noncompliance SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act TPDES Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System TRC Technical review criteria TSS Total suspended solids USC United States Code  
(Code 1966, § 32-122; Code 2001, § 106-567; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 106-568. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR 403). The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system; 
(4)  Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the operation, maintenance and improvement of the municipal wastewater system; 
(5)  Protect the health and safety of wastewater treatment and wastewater collection personnel as well as the general public; 
(6)  Enable the municipal wastewater system to comply with Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws; and 
(7)  To reduce the operational and maintenance costs of maintaining the sewer system by preventing the accumulation of grease, oil, and residue within the sewage system lines. 
(b)  This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users, requires user reporting, assumes that an existing customer's capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established in this article. 
(c)  This article shall apply to the city and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's publicly owned treatment works (POTW). 
(Code 1966, § 32-121(a); Code 2001, § 106-568; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 106-569. - Confidential information. 
    Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permits and monitoring programs and from the control authority's inspection and sampling activities and any other information submitted to the control authority pursuant to this article shall be available to the public without restriction, at least to the extent provided by 40 CFR 2.302, unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the control authority that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable federal, state, or local law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission in the manner prescribed on the application form or instructions or, for other submissions, by stamping the words "confidential business information" on each page containing such information. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public and shall be treated in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 2 (Public Information), but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person providing the report, unless so prohibited by 40 CFR 2 (Public Information). Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Code 1966, § 32-130; Code 2001, § 106-569) 
Secs. 106-570-106-595. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 106-596. - Administration. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, the laboratory/water pollution coordinator of the city/county public health district under the authority and supervision of the city manager shall administer, implement, and enforce this division. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the laboratory/water pollution coordinator of the city/county public health district may be delegated by the laboratory/water pollution coordinator of the city/county public health district to other city personnel. 
(Code 1966, § 32-121(b); Code 2001, § 106-596; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 106-597. - Public participation in enforcement. 
    The control authority shall comply with the public participation requirements of 40 CFR 25 in the enforcement of national pretreatment standards. As a provision of such, the control authority shall make at least annual public notification, in the largest daily newspaper published in the city in which the publicly owned treatment works is located, of users which, at any time in the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. For the purpose of this section, a user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which 66 percent or more of all the measurements taken from a particular control point during a six-month period exceed, by any magnitude, the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which 33 percent or more of all the measurements taken from a particular control point during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, FOG, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the control authority determines or believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of publicly owned treatment works, control authority, or other city personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the either the publicly owned treatment work's or the control authority's exercise of its emergency authority under but not limited to 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the control authority determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Code 1966, § 32-131; Code 2001, § 106-597) 
Secs. 106-598-106-613. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Supplemental Enforcement Action 

Sec. 106-614. - Water supply severance. 
    Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any section of this article or a provision of a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Code 1966, § 32-134(a); Code 2001, § 106-598) 
Sec. 106-615. - Public nuisances. 
    A violation of any section of this article or a provision of a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the control authority. Any person creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the sections of this Code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying the nuisance. 
(Code 1966, § 32-134(b); Code 2001, § 106-599) 
Secs. 106-616-106-625. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Administrative Enforcement 

Sec. 106-626. - Authority of control authority. 
    The control authority may issue orders without notice or opportunity for prior hearing, requiring compliance with standards developed under the authority of the act under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii). 
(Code 1966, § 32-132; Code 2001, § 106-626) 
Sec. 106-627. - Notification of violation. 
    When the control authority finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any section of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within 14 days of the receipt date of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the control authority. Submission of this in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this subdivision shall limit the authority of the control authority to take any action, including emergency action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Code 1966, § 32-132(1); Code 2001, § 106-627) 
Sec. 106-628. - Consent orders. 
    The control authority is empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance with this article. Such documents will include the specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the document. Such document shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 106-630 and 106-631 and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Code 1966, § 32-132(2); Code 2001, § 106-628) 
Sec. 106-629. - Show cause hearing. 
    The control authority may order a user which has violated or continues to violate any section of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement to appear before the control authority and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against or prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. Whether or not a duly notified user appears as noticed, immediate enforcement action may be pursued. Since the user will have already been in SNC to necessitate the show cause hearing, any action taken as a result of the hearing shall be in addition to any penalties levied for the SNC. 
(Code 1966, § 32-132(3); Code 2001, § 106-629; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 106-630. - Compliance orders. 
    When the control authority finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any section of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer and/or water service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(Code 1966, § 32-132(4); Code 2001, § 106-630) 
Sec. 106-631. - Cease and desist orders. 
(a)  When the control authority finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any section of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the control authority may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventative action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
(b)  Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(Code 1966, § 32-132(5); Code 2001, § 106-631) 
Sec. 106-632. - Administrative fines. 
(a)  When the control authority finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any section of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may fine such a user in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00. Such fine shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. For monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. Such assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service charge, and the control authority shall have such other collection remedies as he has to collect other service charges. 
(b)  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 14 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one percent per month for every month unpaid up to a maximum of ten percent per month. 
(c)  A user desiring to dispute such fine must file a written request for the control authority to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within ten days of being notified of the fine. When the control authority believes a request has merit, the control authority may convene a hearing on the matter within 15 days of receiving a request from the user. If the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The control authority may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(d)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(Code 1966, § 32-132(6); Code 2001, § 106-632) 
Sec. 106-633. - Emergency suspensions. 
(a)  The control authority may immediately suspend a user's discharge and/or water service, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The control authority may also immediately suspend a user's discharge and/or water service, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with operation of the publicly owned treatment works or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(b)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. If a user fails to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the control authority may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the publicly owned treatment works, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The control authority may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the control authority that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 106-634 are initiated against the user. 
(c)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the control authority prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under section 106-629 or 106-634. 
(d)  Nothing in this subdivision shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Code 1966, § 32-132(7); Code 2001, § 106-633) 
Sec. 106-634. - Termination of discharge. 
(a)  In addition to section 106-763, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, sampling or industry categorization verification; 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in subdivision II of division 4 of this article; 
(6)  Violation of any applicable state or federal law; or 
(7)  Tampering with sampling equipment, sampling lines, or otherwise interfering with sampling or samples collected for the purpose of influencing or manipulating sample test results. 
(b)  Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 106-629 why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the control authority shall not be a bar to or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(Code 1966, § 32-132(8); Code 2001, § 106-634; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 106-635. - Liquidated damages. 
(a)  Each wastewater discharge use permit issued to an industrial user, and as a condition of issuing such permit, shall contain the following: 
"In the event that the Control Authority determines that any user is in violation of any provisions of Chapter 106, Article VII of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Wichita Falls, Texas, its wastewater discharge permit, or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Control Authority shall notify the user of such violation and require the user to cure the violation within the time specified in the notice. The user shall respond in writing to the notice of violation within ten business days from receipt of such notice, setting forth the steps taken to correct the violation. The Control Authority may extend the time for such response upon a showing of just cause by the user. If the Control Authority determines that the user is continuing the violation, the Control Authority may assess liquidated damages at a minimum of $1,000.00 per violation, per day." 
(b)  The user retains the right to seek review by the city council of any damages assessed under this section and the wastewater discharge permit. 
(c)  Assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service charge, and the control authority shall have such other collection remedies as may be available for other service charges and fees. 
(d)  Issuance of an assessment under this section shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(Code 1966, § 32-132(9); Code 2001, § 106-635; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Secs. 106-636-106-660. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Judicial Enforcement 

Sec. 106-661. - Authority. 
    If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes into the wastewater disposal system contrary to this article or any order or permit issued under this article, the control authority, through the city attorney, may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the municipal court for the city. 
(Code 1966, § 32-133; Code 2001, § 106-661) 
Sec. 106-662. - Injunctive relief. 
    When the control authority finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any section of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may petition the courts through the city attorney for the issuance of a temporary, preliminary, and/or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The control authority may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite of taking any other action against a user. The control authority shall have such remedies to collect these fees as it has to collect other sewer service charges. 
(Code 1966, § 32-133(1); Code 2001, § 106-662) 
Sec. 106-663. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  A user who has violated or continues to violate any section of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued under this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of $2,000.00 per violation per day plus actual damages incurred by the publicly owned treatment works. For a monthly or other long term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(b)  The control authority may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(c)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against a user. 
(Code 1966, § 32-133(2); Code 2001, § 106-663; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 106-664. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, the city shall enact all criminal authorities authorized under state law. 
(b)  Any user that willfully or negligently violates any section of this article, any orders or wastewater discharge permits issued under this article or any other pretreatment requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000.00 per violation, per day as provided in section 106-632. 
(c)  Any user that knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, the wastewater discharge permit or an order or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine per violation, per day as provided in section 1-14. 
(d)  The purpose of criminal prosecution is to punish noncompliance through court proceedings and to deter future noncompliance. The city will enforce compliance with all ordinances in municipal court and will seek the assistance of the district attorney and/or the U.S. Attorney's office to enforce state statutes and federal laws. 
(Code 1966, § 32-133(3); Code 2001, § 106-664; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 106-665. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
    The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The control authority may take any, all, or any combination of the actions in this subdivision against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the control authority may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the control authority is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Code 1966, § 32-133(4); Code 2001, § 106-665) 
Secs. 106-666-106-690. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations 

Sec. 106-691. - Upset. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(b)  An upset that would otherwise be a violation that is caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe is not a violation according to the state water code, section 7.251. 
(c)  In an action brought in municipal or state court, if a person can establish that an event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance or a permit issued under the ordinance was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe, the event is not a violation of the ordinance or permit. 
(d)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(e)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(f)  A user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(Code 1966, § 32-134.1(a); Code 2001, § 106-691; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 106-692. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
    A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against him for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 106-816 or the specific prohibitions in section 106-817 if the user can prove that he did not know or have reason to know that the discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to and during the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit and, in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(Code 1966, § 32-134.1(b); Code 2001, § 106-692) 
Sec. 106-693. - Bypass. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
    Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. The term "severe property damage" does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  Notice of bypass shall be given in accordance with the following: 
(1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the control authority, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the control authority of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times; if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and the steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The control authority may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(d)  Enforcement action curtailments shall be as follows: 
(1)  Bypass is prohibited, and the control authority may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  The control authority may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the control authority determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (d)(1) of this section. 
(Code 1966, § 32-134.1(c); Code 2001, § 106-693) 
Secs. 106-694-106-720. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VI. - Compliance Monitoring 

Sec. 106-721. - Inspection and sampling. 
    In accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(v), the control authority shall randomly inspect and sample each significant industrial user once a year in order to verify self-monitoring reports and other user-provided information. This section shall not preclude the control authority from sampling and/or inspecting significant industrial users more frequently or from sampling or inspecting any nonsignificant industrial user or any other user. 
(Code 1966, § 32-129; Code 2001, § 106-721) 
Sec. 106-722. - Right of entry. 
(a)  The control authority and/or the approval authority shall have the right to enter the premises of any user, whether or not the user possesses a wastewater discharge permit, to determine whether the user is complying with all the requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this article. A user shall allow the control authority and/or the approval authority ready access to all parts of the premises for the purpose of sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties, including determination and verification of proper classification of the user as a categorical, noncategorical, significant, or nonsignificant industrial user. 
(b)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the control authority and/or the approval authority will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(c)  The control authority shall have the right to set up on the user's property or require installation of such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(d)  The control authority may require the user to install sampling equipment, monitoring equipment, metering equipment, and/or control manholes as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at his own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at appropriate intervals to ensure their accuracy. 
(e)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction, whether object, condition, or otherwise, to safe and easy access to the facility or the facility's control point shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the control authority and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(f)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the control authority and/or the approval authority access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(g)  The right of access of the control authority and/or the approval authority shall extend to but not be limited to any premises where there is a discharge source or pretreatment system located or where records are required to be kept by this article or under 40 CFR 403. To make a comprehensive determination of user's compliance status, the control authority and/or the approval authority shall have access to all areas of the facility, including but not limited to areas where chemicals and raw materials are stored. This right shall be considered at least as extensive as the authority provided under section 308 of the Act. 
(h)  During the course of any visit, the control authority and/or the approval authority may document any part or process of the facility by written document, still photography, video, audio, or any other recording method deemed appropriate by the control authority and/or the approval authority. The user may use the procedures in section 106-569 to request that portions of the documentation be considered confidential information. 
(i)  The user shall not deny access by the control authority and/or the approval authority to any area of the facility for any reason, including but not limited to proprietary processes, security clearance, safety concern, or personal privacy. Any necessary arrangements for access to all areas shall have been made by the user beforehand so that upon presentation of suitable identification, the control authority and/or the approval authority shall be permitted to enter any area of the facility without reasonable delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. The failure of the user to make any such necessary arrangements shall not constitute a valid reason for the user to deny entrance by the control authority and/or the approval authority to any area of the facility. 
(Code 1966, § 32-129(1); Code 2001, § 106-722; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 106-723. - Search warrants. 
    If the control authority and/or the approval authority has been refused access to a building, structure, or property or any part thereof and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued under this article or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, the control authority may seek issuance of a search warrant. 
(Code 1966, § 32-129(2); Code 2001, § 106-723) 
Secs. 106-724-106-750. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT 

Sec. 106-751. - Denial or conditions of new or increased contributions. 
    The control authority may deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants or changes in the nature of pollutants to the publicly owned treatment works by industrial users where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such contributions would cause the publicly owned treatment works to violate its Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit. 
(Code 1966, § 32-126(a); Code 2001, § 106-751; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 106-752. - Wastewater analysis. 
    When requested by the control authority, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within a reasonable time specified by the control authority. The control authority is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(Code 1966, § 32-126(b); Code 2001, § 106-752) 
Sec. 106-753. - Requirements. 
(a)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the control authority, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to section 106-754 or 106-755 may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(b)  The control authority may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(c)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 106-751-106-759 and sections 106-614 and 106-615 and subdivisions IV and V of division 2 of this article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(Code 1966, § 32-126(c); Code 2001, § 106-753; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 106-754. - Existing connections. 
    Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future shall, within 30 days after such date, apply to the control authority for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section 106-757 and shall not cause or allow discharges to the publicly owned treatment works to continue after 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the control authority. All users currently under a permit may continue to discharge wastewater for the duration of the permit with the provision that all prohibitions in this article shall be considered to be in force at the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(Code 1966, § 32-126(d); Code 2001, § 106-754) 
Sec. 106-755. - New connections. 
    Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the publicly owned treatment works must obtain such a permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section 106-757, must be filed at least 60 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(Code 1966, § 32-126(e); Code 2001, § 106-755) 
Sec. 106-756. - Extrajurisdictional industrial users. 
    This article shall apply to all persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's publicly owned treatment works, and thus such users may be required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with all applicable sections of this division. 
(Code 1966, § 32-126(f); Code 2001, § 106-756) 
Sec. 106-757. - Application contents. 
(a)  All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The control authority may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
(1)  All information required by section 106-881(b); 
(2)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to the publicly owned treatment works; 
(3)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(4)  Each product produced by type, amount, process and rate of production; 
(5)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(7)  Time and duration of discharges; and 
(8)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the control authority to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
(b)  Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(Code 1966, § 32-126(g); Code 2001, § 106-757) 
Sec. 106-758. - Application signatories and certification. 
    All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and shall contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine or imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Code 1966, § 32-126(h); Code 2001, § 106-758) 
Sec. 106-759. - Decisions. 
    The control authority will evaluate the data furnished in the application for a wastewater discharge permit by the user and may require additional information. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the control authority will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The control authority may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Code 1966, § 32-126(i); Code 2001, § 106-759) 
Sec. 106-760. - Duration. 
    A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(Code 1966, § 32-127(a); Code 2001, § 106-760; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 106-761. - Contents. 
(a)  A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the control authority to: 
(1)  Prevent pass through or interference; 
(2)  Protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent; 
(3)  Protect worker health and safety; 
(4)  Facilitate sludge management and disposal; and 
(5)  Protect against damage to the publicly owned treatment works. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following: 
(1)  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
(2)  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the prior notification and approval of the control authority in accordance with section 106-764 and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit, all with the provision that the control authority may require a new wastewater discharge permit application be made in lieu of a permit being reassigned or transferred or sold; 
(3)  Effluent limits based on applicable general pretreatment standards in 40 CFR 403, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law; 
(4)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements, including an identification of the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based on the applicable general pretreatment standards in 40 CFR 403, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law; and 
(5)  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedules may not extend the compliance date beyond applicable federal deadlines. 
(c)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain but not be limited to the following conditions: 
(1)  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization. 
(2)  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works. 
(3)  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges. 
(4)  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans or pollution prevention (P2) programs to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the publicly owned treatment works. 
(5)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the publicly owned treatment works. 
(6)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment. 
(7)  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit. 
(8)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the control authority to ensure compliance with this article and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Code 1966, § 32-127(b); Code 2001, § 106-761; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 106-762. - Appeals. 
(a)  The control authority shall provide public notice of issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the control authority to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 90 days of notice of its issuance. 
(b)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(c)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(d)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(e)  If the control authority fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
(Code 1966, § 32-127(c); Code 2001, § 106-762) 
Sec. 106-763. - Modification. 
    The control authority may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including but not limited to the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the publicly owned treatment works that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's publicly owned treatment works, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; or 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(Code 1966, § 32-127(d); Code 2001, § 106-763) 
Sec. 106-764. - Transferability. 
    Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the control authority. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. The control authority may require a new wastewater discharge permit application be made in lieu of a permit transfer. 
(Code 1966, § 32-127(e); Code 2001, § 106-764) 
Sec. 106-765. - Revocation. 
(a)  The control authority may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including but not limited to the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the control authority of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the control authority of changed conditions pursuant to section 106-885; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the control authority and/or approval authority timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges or surcharges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(Code 1966, § 32-127(f); Code 2001, § 106-765) 
Sec. 106-766. - Reissuance. 
    A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 106-757, a minimum of 15 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(Code 1966, § 32-127(g); Code 2001, § 106-766) 
Sec. 106-767. - Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
(a)  If another municipality or user located within another municipality contributes wastewater to the publicly owned treatment works, the control authority shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality. 
(b)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (a) of this section, the contributing municipality must provide the following information to the control authority: 
(1)  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the publicly owned treatment works by the contributing municipality; 
(2)  An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the publicly owned treatment works; and 
(3)  Such other information as the control authority may deem necessary. 
(c)  An intermunicipal agreement, as required by subsection (a) of this section, shall contain the following conditions: 
(1)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this article and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in section 106-820. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city's ordinance or local limits; 
(2)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
(3)  A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the control authority; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the control authority; 
(4)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the control authority with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
(5)  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the publicly owned treatment works; 
(6)  Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge; 
(7)  A provision ensuring the control authority and/or the approval authority access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the control authority; and 
(8)  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intermunicipal agreement. 
(Code 1966, § 32-127(h); Code 2001, § 106-767) 
Secs. 106-768-106-790. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SEWER USE REGULATIONS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 106-791-106-815. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Prohibited Discharges 

Sec. 106-816. - General prohibitions. 
    No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the publicly owned treatment works any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions and the specific prohibitions in section 106-817 apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works, whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(Code 1966, § 32-124(a)(1); Code 2001, § 106-816) 
Sec. 106-817. - Specific prohibitions. 
(a)  No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the publicly owned treatment works the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the publicly owned treatment works, including but not limited to wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Wastewater having a pH less than five or more than 12, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the publicly owned treatment works or equipment. 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in an amount which will cause obstruction of the flow in the publicly owned treatment works resulting in interference, but in no case solids greater than two inches or five centimeters in any dimension. 
(4)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the publicly owned treatment works. 
(5)  Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius). 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the publicly owned treatment works in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the city in accordance with section 106-854. 
(9)  Fats, oils and grease in concentrations greater than 500 mg/l, or which violate any other section of this subdivision. 
(b)  Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the publicly owned treatment works. 
(Code 1966, § 32-124(a)(2); Code 2001, § 106-817) 
Sec. 106-818. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
(a)  The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471 are incorporated. All existing or new users shall also comply with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, including those set forth in 40 CFR 403.6. 
(b)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the control authority may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(c)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the control authority shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(d)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by the Environmental Protection Agency when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(e)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Code 1966, § 32-124(b); Code 2001, § 106-818) 
Sec. 106-819. - State pretreatment standards. 
    State requirements and limitations on discharges to the publicly owned treatment works shall be met by all dischargers which are subject to such standards in any instance in which they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this article or any other applicable ordinance. 
(Code 1966, § 32-124(c); Code 2001, § 106-819) 
Sec. 106-820. - Local limits. 
(a)  The city has two publicly owned treatment works: POTW #1, known as the Northside Treatment Plant, located at 5645 Burkburnett Road, Wichita Falls, Texas, and POTW #2, known as the River Road Treatment Plant, located at 1005 River Road, Wichita Falls, Texas. As these two treatment works have different capacities, flow characteristics, and receiving waters, the city has developed maximum allowable discharge limits for industrial users for each treatment works. 
(b)  Each industrial discharger will be required to adhere to those limits established at the treatment works receiving its wastewater discharge. The following local limits are established to protect against pass through and interference and to protect sludge quality. Except as provided, no person shall discharge wastewater in excess of the following maximum allowable discharge limits: 
Pollutant River Road 
Treatment 
Plant 
mg/l Northside 
Treatment 
Plant 
mg/l Antimony 1.42 0.34 Arsenic 0.89 0.21 Beryllium 0.07 0.47 Cadmium 0.39 0.08 Chromium 6.82 3.48 Copper 6.75 2.30 Cyanide 0.38 0.06 Lead 2.26 0.58 Mercury 0.0083 0.0073 Nickel 4.64 0.34 Phenols 3.94 0.87 Selenium 0.17 0.02 Silver 0.66 0.66 Zinc 42.54 1.72  
(c)  Discharge of wastewater containing BOD and/or TSS in concentrations greater than 300 mg/l and fats, oils and grease in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l will be subject to a sewer surcharge at a rate set by the city council to defray the additional costs of treatment for excessive BOD, TSS and fats, oils and grease at the publicly owned treatment works. 
(d)  The surcharge will be an additional charge to the current monthly industrial sewer charge. The surcharge will not be retroactive, but will continue until such time subsequent tests determine that the surcharge requires adjustment. 
(e)  The limits in this section apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the publicly owned treatment works. All concentrations for metals, cyanide, and phenols are for "total." The control authority may impose mass limitations in addition to or in place of the concentration-based limitations in this section. 
(f)  The control authority may impose additional and/or alternative limits by permit on specific individual industrial users. These limits shall be technically based on the allowable loading of the specified pollutant at the appropriate treatment plant. In no case shall these additional and/or alternative limits be less stringent than the above limits, or any applicable federal or state statute. 
(Code 1966, § 32-124(d); Code 2001, § 106-820; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 106-821. - City's right of revision. 
    The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the publicly owned treatment works. 
(Code 1966, § 32-124(e); Code 2001, § 106-821) 
Sec. 106-822. - Dilution. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The control authority may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Code 1966, § 32-124(f); Code 2001, § 106-822) 
Secs. 106-823-106-850. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Pretreatment Requirements 

Sec. 106-851. - Pretreatment facilities. 
    Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions established by this article in subdivision II of this division within the time limitations specified by the Environmental Protection Agency, the state, or the control authority, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the control authority for review and shall be acceptable to the control authority before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under this article. 
(Code 1966, § 32-125(a); Code 2001, § 106-851) 
Sec. 106-852. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the control authority may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and meet such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the publicly owned treatment works and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The control authority may require any person discharging into the publicly owned treatment works to install and maintain, on his property and at his expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. All records, charts, recorded charts or strips, and logs of such controls shall be maintained and provided upon request of the control authority. 
(c)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors or traps shall be provided when, in the opinion of the control authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil or sand; however, such interceptors or traps shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the control authority and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors or traps shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at his expense. A record of maintenance, repairs, and a log of pumping and waste hauling of contents shall be maintained and provided to the control authority upon request. 
(d)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(e)  The control authority may require any user to install or have installed at the user's expense a control manhole, of a size and construction approvable by the control authority. Additionally, the control authority may require the user to construct or have constructed at the user's expense any structures, appurtenances, fences, embankments, rail guards, posts, security system, or any other device with eye bolts, locks, lights, signs, or any other device to ensure the security and safety of control authority personnel and sampling equipment. 
(Code 1966, § 32-125(b); Code 2001, § 106-852; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 106-853. - Accidental discharge and slug control plans. 
    At least once every two years, the control authority shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug discharges. The control authority may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the control authority may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the control authority, other regulatory agencies such as the EPA and the approval authority, and the appropriate wastewater treatment plant of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 106-886; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include but are not limited to inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. The location of floor drains, if present, and any other possible sources of introduction into the waste stream or sanitary sewage system will also be identified. 
(Code 1966, § 32-125(c); Code 2001, § 106-853; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 106-854. - Hauled wastewater. 
    The following requirements are in addition to section 106-311 and subdivision III of division 2 of this article: 
(1)  Septic tank waste shall only be introduced into the publicly owned treatment works at locations designated by the publicly owned treatment works and at such times as are established by the publicly owned treatment works. Such waste shall not violate subdivision II of this division or any other requirements established by the city. The control authority may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. 
(2)  The control authority may require haulers of industrial wastewater to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The control authority may require generators of hauled industrial wastewater to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The control authority may also prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial wastewater. The discharge of hauled industrial wastewater is subject to all other requirements of this article. 
(3)  Industrial wastewater haulers shall discharge loads only at locations designated by the publicly owned treatment works. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the publicly owned treatment works. The publicly owned treatment works or the control authority may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The publicly owned treatment works or the control authority may require the industrial wastewater hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(4)  Industrial wastewater hauler must provide a trip ticket for every load. The trip ticket, including the procedures for its use, is the same as described and provided for in section 106-376(d). 
(5)  The superintendent of the POTW, or his designated representative, may at any time and without prior notice, refuse to allow the discharge of any specific load of hauled wastewater from any particular liquid waste hauler. This refusal may be based upon such criteria as questionable physical characteristics of the hauled wastewater (odor, color, etc.), past history of the manifested liquid waste generator, or any other such information or judgment that the discharge may adversely affect the POTW in any way. In the event of such refusal of discharge, the wastehauler shall provide to the control authority within 30 days, a manifest indicating the proper disposal of that load of hauled wastewater. 
(Code 1966, § 32-125(d); Code 2001, § 106-854; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 106-855. - Disposal of contaminated water from leaking petroleum storage tank sites. 
(a)  After treatment to specified standards, the contaminated water will be placed in a sanitary sewer line where possible. Disposal into the sanitary sewer system will be based on the quality of the water, the peak flow to be placed into the sewer, sewer capacity available, and the availability of sanitary sewer systems. 
(b)  If necessary, the treated water can be placed into the storm drainage system. This disposal method will require an approval authority permit to discharge the treated water into the surface waters of the state. Disposal via the storm drain system must not create a nuisance to the properties between the affected site and the public stream where discharge is permitted by the approval authority. 
(c)  Where it is not possible or feasible to dispose of the treated waters in the sanitary sewer or the disposal by storm drain will create a nuisance effect, and no other disposal methods are available, the city will determine the improvements required in the sanitary or storm drain systems to accept the flow. All improvements will be at the sole expense of the owner of the contaminated site. All improvements must be installed per city standards and procedures, and must be dedicated to the city. 
(d)  All waters from a contaminated site, before disposal into a sanitary sewer, must meet the quality standards of this subdivision with the addition of the following standards for BTEX, lead, and total hydro-carbons: 
Chemical ug/liter mg/liter Benzene 1,000 1.0 Toluene 1,000 1.0 Ethyl benzene 1,000 1.0 Xylenes 1,000 1.0 Total BTEX 2,000 2.0 Total petroleum Hydrocarbons (TPH) 2.0 Lead (River Road POTW) 2.26 Lead (Northside POTW) 0.58  
(e)  Prior to disposal of the treated water from the contaminated site, the site owner must present to the control authority a copy of the approval authority approved plan for corrective action and, as required, an approval authority permit to discharge to surface waters. The control authority will be provided a copy of all laboratory tests conducted to meet the approval authority requirements in the plan for corrective action. The control authority may require additional tests beyond those of the approval authority approved plan of corrective action. 
(f)  These procedures apply to either pump-and-treat flows or batch releases of treated waters from contaminated sites. Under no circumstances will a site owner dispose of treated waters from a LPST contaminated site in the city until authorized to do so by the control authority. 
(g)  The owner will be required to obtain a permit from the control authority. This permit must be renewed annually. The owner must pay an initial permit fee and an annual fee to renew the permit. In addition, each month the owner may pay a fee to defray the cost of reviewing lab results and the results of city-initiated sampling and testing to ensure compliance with both the remedial action plan and the industrial pretreatment ordinance. These costs must be paid until the site is closed by the approval authority and disposal of treated waters has ceased. A statement of the amount of these fees can be obtained from the control authority. 
(h)  If the treated water is disposed of in the sanitary sewer, there will be a minimum monthly charge plus the current commodity charge per 1,000 gallons disposed. The amount disposed generally shall be determined by the rated capacity of the pumps in a pump-and-treat system or by the size of the container in a batch disposal system (added). 
(Code 2001, § 106-855; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 106-856. - Fraud and false statements. 
    The reports and other documents required to be submitted or maintained under this article shall be subject to: 
(1)  The provisions of 18 USC 1001 relating to fraud and false statements; 
(2)  The provisions of section 309(c)(4) of the act, as amended, governing false statements, representations, or certifications; and 
(3)  The provisions of section 309(c)(6) of the act regarding responsible corporate officers. 
(Code 1966, § 32-125(e); Code 2001, § 106-856; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Secs. 106-857-106-880. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 106-881. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Generally. Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or 180 days after the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the publicly owned treatment works shall submit to the control authority a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) of this section. Where reports containing this information already have been submitted to the control authority in compliance with the requirements of 40 CFR 128.140(b) (1977), the industrial user will not be required to submit this information again. At least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources and sources that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall be required to submit to the control authority a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) of this section. New sources shall also be required to include in this report information on the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall give estimates of the information requested in subsections (b)(4) and (5) of this section. 
(b)  Required information to submit. Users described in subsection (a) of this section shall submit the following information: 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owners. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification of the operation carried out by the user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the publicly owned treatment works from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the publicly owned treatment works from each of the following: 
a.  Regulated process streams; and 
b.  Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e). (See subsection (b)(5)e of this section.) 
The control authority may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by cost or feasibility consideration. 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration and/or mass, where required by the standard or the control authority, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration and/or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operation and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 106-891. 
c.  The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection. 
d.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 106-891. 
e.  The control authority may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures. 
f.  The baseline report shall indicate the time, date, and place of sampling and methods of analysis and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the publicly owned treatment works. 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional treatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 106-882. 
a.  Where the industrial user's categorical pretreatment standard has been modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR 403.7), the combined wastestream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (40 CFR 403.13) at the time the user submits the report required by subsection (b) of this section, the information required by subsections (b)(6) and (7) of this section shall pertain to the modified limits. 
b.  If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR 403.7), the combined wastestream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (40 CFR 403.13) after the user submits the report required by subsection (b) of this section, any necessary amendments to the information required by subsections (b)(6) and (7) of this section shall be submitted by the user to the control authority within 60 days after the modified limit is approved. 
c.  The control authority shall have the authority to set compliance schedules where and when it so deems necessary or if the user's compliance schedule is deemed inadequate by the control authority. 
(8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 106-758. 
(Code 1966, § 32-128(a); Code 2001, § 106-881) 
Sec. 106-882. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
    The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 106-881(b)(7): 
(1)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards. Such events include but are not limited to hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing a contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, pretreatment system start-up, first discharge, and beginning and conducting routine operation. 
(2)  No increment referred to in subsection (1) of this section shall exceed nine months. 
(3)  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the control authority, including, at a minimum, whether or not the user complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which the user expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the schedule established. 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the control authority. 
(Code 1966, § 32-128(b); Code 2001, § 106-882) 
Sec. 106-883. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
    Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, for a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works, any industrial user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the control authority a report containing the information described in section 106-881(b)(4)-(6). For industrial users subject to mass or concentration limits established by the control authority in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production or other measure of operation, this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 106-758. 
(Code 1966, § 32-128(c); Code 2001, § 106-883) 
Sec. 106-884. - Periodic compliance reports for categorical industrial users. 
(a)  Any industrial user subject to a categorical standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard or, for a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the publicly owned treatment works, shall submit to the control authority during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the control authority, the Environmental Protection Agency, or the approval authority, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such categorical pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the discharge reported in section 106-881(b)(4) except that the control authority may require more detailed reporting of flows. At the discretion of the control authority and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the control authority may agree to alter the months during which such reports are to be submitted. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 106-758. The samplings may be done in months preceding the submittal months; however, they must be done within the same permit year. 
(b)  Where the control authority has imposed mass limitations on industrial users as provided for by section 106-822, the report required by subsection (a) of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the discharge from the industrial user. 
(c)  For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the control authority in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), the report required by subsection (a) of this section shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed only in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production or other measure of operation, the report required by subsection (a) of this section shall include the user's actual average production rate for the reporting period. 
(d)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(e)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this division monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the control authority, using the procedures prescribed in section 106-891, the results of this monitoring shall be included in this report. 
(f)  The reports required in this section shall be based upon data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, which data is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. The control authority shall require that frequency of monitoring necessary to assess and ensure compliance by industrial users with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(g)  All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 106-758. 
(Code 1966, § 32-128(d); Code 2001, § 106-884; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 106-885. - Periodic compliance reports for significant noncategorical industrial users. 
    Significant noncategorical industrial users shall submit to the control authority at least once every six months, on dates specified by the control authority, a description of the nature, concentration, and flow of the pollutants required to be reported to the control authority. These reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report, and performed in accordance with the techniques described in section 106-891. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 106-758. 
(Code 1966, § 32-128(e); Code 2001, § 106-885) 
Sec. 106-886. - Reports of changed conditions. 
(a)  Each user must promptly notify the control authority in advance of any planned significant or substantial changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, character, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change. 
(b)  The control authority may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 106-759. 
(c)  The control authority may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 106-759 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 106-763 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, significant changes include but are not limited to flow increases of 20 percent or greater, the discharge of previously unreported pollution, or the addition of any process subject to categorical pretreatment standards. 
(Code 1966, § 32-128(f); Code 2001, § 106-886) 
Sec. 106-887. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  If any discharge, including but not limited to accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or any slug load, that may cause potential problems for the publicly owned treatment works or for a reportable slug load, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the control authority and the appropriate publicly owned treatment works of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the control authority, submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the publicly owned treatment works, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this division. 
(c)  Every significant industrial user shall permanently post a notice on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees and contractors whom to call if a discharge described in subsection (a) of this section occurs. Employers shall ensure that all employees and contractors, who may cause such discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification. 
(Code 1966, § 32-128(g); Code 2001, § 106-887) 
Sec. 106-888. - Reports from other users. 
(a)  All other users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide such information and reports to the control authority as required by the wastewater discharge permit. 
(b)  All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the control authority as the control authority may require. 
(Code 1966, § 32-128(h); Code 2001, § 106-888) 
Sec. 106-889. - Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting. 
    If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the control authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the control authority within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except the industrial user is not required to resample if the control authority performs sampling at the industrial user: 
(1)  At a frequency of at least once a month; or 
(2)  Between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Code 1966, § 32-128(i); Code 2001, § 106-889) 
Sec. 106-890. - Discharge of hazardous waste. 
    Under this division, all users are prohibited from discharging hazardous waste. 
(Code 1966, § 32-128(j); Code 2001, § 106-890) 
Sec. 106-891. - Sampling and analytical requirements. 
(a)  All pollutant sampling and analyses to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question or where the administrator determines that the 40 CFR 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the publicly owned treatment works or other parties, approved by the administrator. 
(b)  A minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. The control authority may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any industrial user that demonstrates that flow-proportional sampling is infeasible. In such cases, samples may be obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. 
(c)  Submissions of all pollutant analyses shall contain the following: 
(1)  A copy of the laboratory report should be attached. The report should include the following information: 
a.  The name, address, and telephone number of the laboratory performing the analysis. 
b.  The units in which each parameter is reported. 
c.  The method of analysis used (e.g., Environmental Protection Agency 335.1, 3500-Zn-A, etc.). The method must be a technique for wastewater analysis as prescribed in 40 CFR 136. 
d.  The detection limit for each parameter measurement. 
e.  The name, initials, or other such unambiguous identification of the analyzing technician. 
f.  The date each analysis was performed. 
g.  The signature of the laboratory director, or equivalent position. 
h.  Quality control data (e.g., spikes, etc.). 
i.  The results of the analyses. 
(2)  A copy of the chain of custody records should be attached. Each record shall have the following: 
a.  The name and address of the user being sampled. 
b.  The sample container identification number or other such unique, unambiguous identification. 
c.  For a grab sample, the date and time the sample was taken. 
d.  For a composite sampling, the date and time the composite sampler was set up and the date and time the composite sampler was retrieved. 
e.  The exact sampling point of the sample. 
f.  The method of taking the sample (i.e., grab sample, automatic or manual flow-proportioned composite sample, automatic or manual time-proportioned composite sample, etc.). 
g.  The name, title, and signature of the person taking the sample. 
h.  The method of preservation of the sample and the date and time it was preserved, or if no preservation was necessary. 
i.  The date and time dispatched for analysis, the name of the dispatcher, and the method of shipment, if the sample was so dispatched. 
j.  The name of the individual, company, and/or address to which the sample is dispatched. 
k.  The signature of the receiver of the sample, the date and time of its receipt, who it was received from, and its disposition. 
(Code 1966, § 32-128(k); Code 2001, § 106-891) 
Sec. 106-892. - Timing. 
    Written reports submitted under this division will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt shall govern. 
(Code 1966, § 32-128(l); Code 2001, § 106-892) 
Sec. 106-893. - Recordkeeping. 
(a)  Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain and maintain records of all information resulting from monitoring activities required by this article and 40 CFR 403.12. Such records shall include the following activities: 
(1)  The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the name of the person taking the samples; 
(2)  The dates analyses were performed; 
(3)  Who performed the analyses; 
(4)  The analytical techniques/methods used; and 
(5)  The results of such analyses. 
(b)  Users subject to the reporting requirements established by this article or 40 CFR 403.12 shall be required to retain for a minimum of three years any records of monitoring activities and results, whether or not such monitoring activities are required by this article or 40 CFR 403, and shall make such records available for inspection and copying by the director, the regional administrator, the approval authority, and/or the control authority. This period of retention shall be automatically extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user, the control authority, and/or the publicly owned treatment works or when requested by the director, the regional administrator, the approval authority, and/or the control authority. 
(c)  Subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall also apply to the control authority. 
(Code 1966, § 32-128(m); Code 2001, § 106-893) 
Secs. 106-894-106-920. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - FEES, RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 106-921. - Pretreatment charges and fees. 
    The control authority and the city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program which may include the following: 
(1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications, including the cost of processing such applications. 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures, including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users. 
(3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction. 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals. 
(5)  Surcharges for BOD and TSS above the value of 300 mg/l, and fats, oils and grease above 100 mg/l. 
(6)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this article. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(Code 1966, § 32-134.2(a); Code 2001, § 106-921; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 106-922. - Wastewater discharge permit fees. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permit fees shall be fixed according to the schedule established by separate ordinance. 
(b)  The rates referenced in subsection (a) of this section are for a permit issued for a period of one year. The control authority may prorate the amounts for permits with shorter durations or may multiply the amounts by the appropriate factor for multiyear permits. Unless otherwise designated on the permit, all permits expire at 12:00 midnight on December 31 of the designated year. 
(Code 1966, § 32-134.2(b); Code 2001, § 106-922; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002; Ord. No. 83-2009, § 1, 11-3-2009) 
Sec. 106-923. - Abnormal sewage surcharge. 
(a)  Abnormal sewage shall be defined as sewage containing BOD and/or TSS in concentrations greater than 300 mg/l and/or fats, oils and grease in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l. 
(b)  Any industrial user whose discharge contains abnormal sewage shall be subject to a monthly sewage surcharge payable to the city utility collection division. The surcharge shall be in addition to monthly sewer service charges. Monthly surcharges shall stay in effect until such time as the industrial user demonstrates that it has reduced the abnormality. The reduction must be attained in accordance with section 106-822 and subdivision III of division 4 of this article. The surcharge shall be based on data determined by approved methods of the Environmental Protection Agency (see 40 CFR 136). This data shall be derived from all sampling done at least in the previous six-month period, but this period may be longer if deemed appropriate by the control authority. The control authority reserves the right to either increase or decrease the surcharge at any time to reflect additional data from sampling. 
(c)  The surcharge for abnormal BOD shall be established by separate ordinance. Any discharge of water or wastewater with a concentration of BOD more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of normal operations of the industrial user shall be prohibited without the prior notification and specific permission of the control authority. 
(d)  The surcharge for abnormal TSS shall be established by separate ordinance. Any discharge of water or wastewater with a concentration of TSS more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of normal operations of the industrial user shall be prohibited without the prior notification and specific permission of the control authority. 
(e)  The surcharge for abnormal fats, oils and grease shall be established by separate ordinance. Discharge of fats, oils and grease over 500 mg/l is prohibited. 
(f)  Each surcharge shall be assessed separately. For sewage containing more than one abnormal constituent, the surcharges shall be added together. 
(g)  This charge shall be reviewed annually by the control authority who may recommend to the city council adjustments as necessary to reflect true costs to the city. 
(Code 1966, § 32-134.3(a); Code 2001, § 106-923; Ord. No. 25-2002, § 1, 4-2-2002) 
Secs. 106-924-106-950. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Water quality control, Texas Water Code § 26.001 et seq. 

Sec. 106-951. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    2-year design storm means a rainfall event as documented by actual measurement or by recognized design methods that has a 50 percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    10-year design storm means a rainfall event as documented by actual measurement or by recognized design methods that has a ten percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    100-year design storm means a rainfall event as documented by actual measurement or by recognized design methods that has a one percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Channel means any natural or artificial stream that conveys water. 
    Channel improvement means the improvement of the flow characteristics of a channel by clearing, excavating, realigning, lining or other means in order to increase its capacity and effectiveness. The term "channel improvement" may also be used to refer to channel stabilization. 
    Common plan of development means a construction activity that is completed or is planned to be completed in separate stages, separate phases, or in combination with other construction activities. 
    Construction activity means activities subject to TPDES construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
    Controlled release structure means a facility constructed to regulate the volume or peak discharge that can be conveyed through the structure given certain depths of flow, velocity of approach, and structure geometry. 
    Detention facilities agreement means a legal document in recordable form and substance satisfactory to the city to be executed by a developer and the city, which describes the duties and responsibilities of a developer to comply with this article and describes and establishes an easement area and access to the facilities involved. 
    Detention pond means a basin or pond that is designed to be normally dry and which stores or detains stormwater runoff temporarily after a rainfall event and discharges all of that water over time at a reduced rate from that which would normally have occurred. 
    Developer means a person or business entity that owns or intends to develop a tract of land and intends to improve the tract or tracts. Improvements may include, but are not necessarily limited to: clearing, grubbing, filling, mining, excavating, re-grading, constructing buildings, other structures, parking, drives, streets, and utilities and/or otherwise preparing the tract or tracts for division or development. 
    Final drainage study refers to those final project plans, analyses, studies, and supporting documents as required to obtain city review and approval and to facilitate construction of improvements and facilities necessary to comply with the requirements of this article. 
    Final stabilization. A construction site status where any of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and a uniform (i.e., evenly distributed, without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with a density of at least 70 percent of the native background vegetative cover for the area has been established on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed. 
(2)  For individual lots in a residential construction site by either: 
a.  The homebuilder completing final stabilization as specified in subsection (1) of this definition; or 
b.  The homebuilder establishing temporary stabilization for an individual lot prior to the time of transfer of the ownership of the home to the buyer and after informing the homeowner of the need for, and benefits of, final stabilization. If temporary stabilization is not feasible, then the homebuilder may fulfill this requirement by retaining perimeter controls or other best management practices, and informing the homeowner of the need for removal of temporary controls and the establishment of final stabilization. 
(3)  For construction activities on land used for agricultural purposes (e.g., pipelines across crop or range land), final stabilization may be accomplished by returning the disturbed land to its pre-construction agricultural use. Areas disturbed that were not previously used for agricultural activities, such as buffer strips immediately adjacent to surface water and areas that are not being returned to their pre-construction agricultural use must meet the final stabilization conditions of subsection (1) of this definition. 
(4)  In arid, semi-arid, and drought-stricken areas only, all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and both of the following criteria have been met: 
a.  Temporary erosion control measures (e.g., degradable rolled erosion control product) are selected, designed, and installed along with an appropriate seed base to provide erosion control for at least three years without active maintenance by the operator; and 
b.  The temporary erosion control measures are selected, designed, and installed to achieve 70 percent vegetative coverage within three years. 
    Finish floor elevation ("FFE") means the elevation of the lowest enclosed floor area of a structure as further defined by the National Flood Insurance Program regulations promulgated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency ("FEMA"). 
    Fully developed watershed conditions means hat level of development anticipated when all of the land within a watershed is developed to the maximum extent allowable, typically determined by comparing existing development with projected uses of vacant land and nonconforming properties based upon the latest city's zoning or land use plan, whichever is more intense. 
    Gross aggregate area means the area of the development under consideration plus the area of any contiguous land, owned or controlled by the developing entity. 
    Hydrograph means a graphical representation of the flow rate (or discharge) of water over time, consequently, the area under the hydrograph curve describes a volume of water. Several methods are available to construct hydrographs. 
    Maximum extent practicable or MEP means what is available and capable of being done after taking into consideration cost, existing technology and logistics in light of overall project purposes (40 CFR 230.10(a)(2)). 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system or MS4 means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) that are: 
(1)  Owned or operated by the federal government, state, municipality, township, county, district, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state or federal law) including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or a designated and approved management agency under section 208 of the act that discharges into surface waters of the state; 
(2)  Designed or used for collecting or conveying solely stormwater; 
(3)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(4)  Not a part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    Notice of change or NOC means a written notification to the executive director from a discharger authorized under this permit, providing changes to information that was previously provided to the agency in a notice of intent form. 
    Notice of intent or NOI means the notice of intent that is required by the NPDES stormwater multi-sector general permit, the EPA Region 6 NPDES stormwater construction general permit, or any similar general permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity that is issued by the EPA or the TCEQ. 
    Notice of termination or NOT means a written submission to the executive director from a discharger authorized under a general permit requesting termination of coverage. 
    On-site storage facility means a stormwater storage facility that is designed for the storage of runoff on and for a particular site or development. An on-site storage facility may be a detention pond that is designed to be normally dry and which stores or detains stormwater runoff temporarily and discharges all of that water over time at a reduced rate from that which would normally have occurred, or a retention pond (a wet bottom pond) that is designed to retain a certain amount or level of water, a conservation pool, and a flood storage pool for storing stormwater runoff on a temporary basis for the purpose of reducing the peak discharge from the basin. 
    Positive and adequate outfall means the drainage of an area in a manner that will adequately convey and ensure complete removal of all surface water after a rainfall event by means of natural gravity. 
    Preliminary drainage study means a preliminary plan with supporting documentation which is prepared to demonstrate that a proposed development can, from a conceptual standpoint, properly address the requirements of this article. The preliminary study is presented to the city's Department of Public Works engineering division for conditional approval prior to final design and preparation of construction plans. 
    Retention pond means a normally wet bottom basin or pond that is designed to retain a certain amount or level of water in a conservation pool above which capacity for an additional flood storage pool is available for storing stormwater runoff and discharges the additional flood storage pool over time at a reduced rate from that which would normally have occurred. 
    Runoff means that portion of the precipitation that makes its way toward channels or lakes as surface or subsurface flow. When the term "runoff" is used alone, surface runoff is usually implied. 
    Sheet flow means water, usually stormwater runoff, flowing in a thin layer over the ground surface. The term "sheet flow" is synonymous with overland flow. 
    Stormwater refers to water (or runoff) which results from precipitation that is not absorbed by soil or plant material over a defined area. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan or SWP3 means a document which describes the best management practices (BMP) and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
    Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or TPDES means the program delegated to the State of Texas by the EPA pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b). 
    Topographically identifiable watercourse refers to a watercourse or drainage way that is easily identified by a thin, light blue divided line on a USGS topographic map or that is designated as a conveyance of water on the most recent city topographic map. 
    TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or its successor agency. 
    Water surface elevation ("WSEL") means the elevation of the water surface (or the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum of 1988) resulting from certain rainfall events and frequencies in a drainage facility. 
(Code 2001, § 106-951; Ord. No. 39-2011, § 1, 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 106-952. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this article to establish policies to govern the planning, design, construction, operation and maintenance of stormwater and erosion control facilities and stormwater practices; to regulate the quantity and quality of stormwater discharges; and to protect public health, welfare and safety by seeking to minimize loss and damage related to stormwater runoff and flooding within the jurisdiction of the city. This article sets forth the minimum requirements necessary to provide and promote a safe, efficient and effective drainage system in keeping with appropriate engineering practices and regulatory requirements and to establish the various public and private responsibilities necessary to achieve that end. 
(Code 2001, § 106-952; Ord. No. 39-2011, § 1, 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 106-953. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all public drainage facilities; to any public or private commercial or multifamily residential development or redevelopment activity comprising a gross aggregate area of one acre or more; and to any single-family residential development comprising a gross aggregate area of two acres or more. The gross aggregate area shall include parcels of common ownership that would be connected were it not for separations by intervening public rights-of-way, alleys or easements. However, with respect to the federally mandated requirements for stormwater discharges from construction activities and post-construction runoff as described in section 106-962, this article shall be applicable to any site of one acre or more in size regardless of use. 
(Code 2001, § 106-953; Ord. No. 39-2011, § 1, 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 106-954. - Disclaimer of liability. 
    This article seeks to establish degrees of stormwater conveyance, discharge, erosion control, stormwater quality and flooding protection that are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and that are based on scientific and engineering considerations. Unanticipated circumstances and unforeseen combinations of rainfall events and conditions can and will occur. Consequently, this article shall not be construed to imply that designs, construction, and controls approved and installed pursuant to this article will be free from or will prevent flood damage or loss. Use of or reliance upon this article and the stormwater design manual shall not create liability on the part of the city or the city's officials, representatives or employees. 
(Code 2001, § 106-954; Ord. No. 39-2011, § 1, 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 106-955. - Administration. 
    The Department of Public Works, under the direction of the director of public works, shall be responsible for the administration of this article, including but not limited to enacting any procedures, programs, standards, guidelines and criteria necessary to achieve the intent of this article. 
(Code 2001, § 106-955; Ord. No. 39-2011, § 1, 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 106-956. - Stormwater design manual. 
    In designing developments, the developer shall comply with the stormwater design manual"(known in this article as the "manual"), promulgated by the city's Department of Public Works, which shall contain written policies, standards, technical design criteria, procedures, methodology, details and regulations related to determination, design, review, and approval of stormwater facilities as necessary to implement and comply with the provisions of this article. The manual shall be the governing document for all design activities related to compliance with this article. Although the intent of this manual is to establish uniform design practices, it neither replaces the need for sound engineering judgment nor precludes the use of information not presented. Other accepted engineering procedures may be used to conduct hydrologic and hydraulic studies with prior approval of the director of public works. 
(Code 2001, § 106-956; Ord. No. 39-2011, § 1, 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 106-957. - Regulatory permits. 
    It shall be the developer's responsibility to secure all regulatory permits associated with stormwater runoff and the development of drainage improvements. Such permits shall include, but are not limited to: U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 404 permits, Texas Commission on Environmental Quality ("TCEQ") section 401 permits; Federal Emergency Management Agency Floodplain Revision permits; U.S. Environmental Protection Agency National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permits; TCEQ Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permits, and any required city permits. The developer shall also be responsible to provide any necessary project documentation to the city as required to facilitate the city's meeting its requirements under an existing maintenance agreement with the Corps of Engineers for all drainage work along or entering Holliday Creek. When the city is responsible for the design of a drainage project, the city shall be responsible for all required permits. 
(Code 2001, § 106-957; Ord. No. 39-2011, § 1, 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 106-958. - Maintenance of facilities. 
    Improvements and facilities constructed as required by and in accordance with this article shall be maintained as required to ensure that the improvements and facilities continue to properly function and perform as designed. All drainage facilities and improvements dedicated and constructed for public use and located within public ownership or easements shall, after acceptance, be maintained by the city. All improvements and facilities constructed on and/or constructed solely for the purpose of providing for compliance with this article for any non-residential, multifamily or single lot residential development activity shall be maintained by the property owner and this requirement for maintenance shall pass with the chain of title of the property. Such private construction and maintenance responsibilities shall be: defined in a written detention facilities agreement in a form satisfactory to the city; executed by the property owner/developer and the city; and recorded in the Wichita County real property records. 
(Code 2001, § 106-958; Ord. No. 39-2011, § 1, 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 106-959. - Drainage systems. 
(a)  Drainage system criteria. It is the purpose of this section to establish design criteria for various stormwater facilities for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the population by minimizing dangers of flooding to life and property. Storm drainage analysis and design for the city shall take into account fully developed watershed conditions unless another standard is specifically authorized elsewhere in this article. Areas within a designated floodplain shall meet the more stringent FFE requirements of city floodplain development regulations. The developer shall comply with the following drainage system criteria unless otherwise authorized by the director in writing: 
Table 1 - Drainage System Criteria 
Facility 10-Year 
Event 100-Year 
Event Streets and alleys Maximum water depth within the street or alley shall not exceed six inches above the lowest point of the pavement section Maximum water depth shall not exceed the lesser of 18 inches above the lowest point of the pavement section or eight inches above the crown of the roadway. Flows must remain within city right-of-way OR the developer must provide site or lot grading plans demonstrating that a six-inch minimum freeboard is provided between the maximum WSEL and the FFE of adjacent buildings Enclosed pipe systems Sized to convey calculated flows from contributing drainage area(s) and/or to convey all flows resulting in excess depths of flow within streets and alleys Sized to convey calculated flows from contributing drainage area(s) and/or convey all flows resulting in excess depths of flow within streets and alleys. A six-inch minimum freeboard shall be provided between the maximum WSEL and FFE of adjacent buildings Channels and creek improvements Convey calculated flows from contributing drainage area(s) and maintain velocity requirements per the stormwater design manual Convey calculated flows from contributing drainage area(s) with maximum WSEL remaining within easement and maintain velocity requirements per the stormwater design manual. A six-inch minimum freeboard shall be provided between the maximum WSEL and FFE of adjacent buildings Culverts Upstream headwater not to exceed top of pavement or curb at the low point of the crossing WSEL within easement; not to exceed 12 inches above the lowest point of the pavement section at the low point of the crossing; and complying with FEMA regulations. A six-inch minimum freeboard shall be provided between the maximum WSEL and FFE of adjacent buildings Bridges Refer to 100-year requirement Bridges shall pass a 100-year event with a minimum 12-inch freeboard between the calculated 100-year WSEL and the lowest horizontal structural member Detention or retention ponds Refer to limitation of development runoff, section 106-960 Refer to limitation of development runoff, section 106-960 Dams and impoundments Regardless of size and dam height, all dams must meet TCEQ requirements per 30 TAC 299 Regardless of size and dam height, all dams must meet TCEQ requirements per 30 TAC 299  
(b)  Lot-to-lot drainage. Existing drainage between developed lots shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property owners. New residential subdivision developments shall drain surface runoff from no more than three residential lots across an adjoining residential lot before conveying runoff into a public right-of-way, easement or drainage system. New commercial developments shall not drain surface runoff onto another adjoining lot unless a means of conveyance is provided within a dedicated drainage easement to reach a public right-of-way, easement, natural topographically identifiable watercourse, or manmade drainage system. 
(c)  Positive and adequate outfall. For all developments, whether constructed in whole or in phases, drainage from all improvements shall be conveyed by means of a positive and adequate outfall to the nearest natural topographically identifiable watercourse or manmade drainage system. Drainage improvements required to achieve positive and adequate outfall shall be designed and included in the site development plans submitted for city engineering approval. On-site drainage easements shall be provided as required for these improvements. The developer and design engineer must consider the impact of drainage flows and discharges onto adjoining landowners. A downstream evaluation may be required to determine if downstream drainage improvements and drainage easements are required. 
(d)  Drainage easements. The developer shall dedicate drainage easements for all stormwater conveyance systems and improvements constructed pursuant to this article including but not necessarily limited to all inlets, piping, ditches, swales, channels, and detention or retention ponds that are to be dedicated to and accepted by the city and that are not already located within existing city easements or rights-of-way. These easements may be dedicated on a plat of record or provided by separately recorded instrument. 
(1)  Drainage easements shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width and sufficient to include the entire stormwater facility width as designed pursuant to the stormwater design manual plus an additional ten feet on one side for access and maintenance activities. The additional ten feet may be omitted for lined or unlined channels that are easily and directly accessible by city crews with maintenance equipment or with side slopes of less than or equal to 4:1. The additional easement width may also be avoided by providing reinforced concrete access ramps to the channel bottom at 4:1 slopes with a six-foot minimum bottom width and sloped (flared) sidewalls from city rights-of-way at 500 feet maximum spacings along the length of the drainage facility. 
(2)  All drainage easements shall remain open and unobstructed. Prohibited obstructions include but are not limited to fences, buildings, shrubbery, or any other improvement that may be considered to impede the flow of stormwater or that would prevent city access for maintenance. However, drainage easements extending along the long axis between residential lots for small (;lt;=24 inches) drainage pipe systems may be fenced. 
(3)  Without prior written approval of the director of public works, a utility franchisee shall not install utilities in a drainage easement except for essentially perpendicular crossings of underground or overhead utilities. 
(e)  Drainage studies. Those studies as described in this subsection (e) are considered to be in addition to any specialized studies or applications that are required by FEMA or other governmental agency for a particular project. 
(1)  Generally. The developer shall submit a drainage study for industrial, commercial, or multifamily residential developments comprising a gross aggregate area of one acre or more. Drainage studies shall be submitted for single-family residential developments comprising a gross aggregate area of two acres or more. If a drainage study was not completed on an area that was previously platted, a final drainage study will be provided before project plans are approved, unless that requirement is waived by the director of public works. 
(2)  Preliminary drainage study. 
a.  Timing. The developer shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that proper drainage pursuant to this article can be conceptually addressed for a development at the preliminary plat stage. A developer shall schedule a conference with the city engineering division prior to the submission of a preliminary plat and shall then submit a preliminary drainage study which includes a conceptual layout of the proposed storm drainage system, or master drainage plan for the proposed development concurrently with the submission of the preliminary plat. Department of Public Works approval of the preliminary plat shall be contingent upon its review and written acceptance of the preliminary drainage study. 
b.  Qualifications to perform the study. The preliminary drainage study shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the state with demonstrated knowledge of the study of drainage issues and proficiency with drainage analysis and modeling tools. The preliminary drainage study shall be signed, sealed and dated by the engineer responsible for the preparation of the study. 
c.  Requirements. The requirements for a preliminary drainage study shall be as established in the stormwater design manual. 
(3)  Final drainage study. 
a.  Timing. The developer shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that drainage analysis and design pursuant to this article are properly addressed for a development at the final plat stage. The developer shall submit a final drainage study for the proposed development concurrently with the submission of the final plat. The final drainage study shall include all appropriate computation and analysis documentation as required by the stormwater design manual. Final drainage studies of all proposed improvements or land developments shall clearly identify the on-site and off-site drainage system improvements required to satisfy this article and demonstrate the upstream and downstream limits to which the improvements or development comply with the design criteria of this article and the stormwater design manual. The final drainage study shall identify intended phases of development and shall provide that drainage improvements for each phase are sufficient to meet the requirements of this article should any successive phase not be undertaken. Additionally, the final drainage study shall identify and define the stages within a phased development that mandate certain drainage improvements to be completed in order to continue the development sequence. If the developer did not submit a final drainage study for a proposed development or if development conditions have been modified, a final drainage study shall be provided prior to issuance of a construction permit for the development. The city's Department of Public Works may condition its approval of the final plat or issuance of the construction permit on its review and acceptance of the final drainage study. 
b.  Qualifications to perform the study. The final drainage study shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas with demonstrated knowledge of the study of drainage issues and proficiency with drainage analysis and modeling tools. The preliminary study shall be signed, sealed and dated by the engineer responsible for preparation of the study. 
c.  Requirements. The requirements for a final drainage study shall be as established in the stormwater design manual. 
(f)  Drainage improvements required for development. 
(1)  Drainage improvements. All developments shall provide for any new drainage facilities, the improvement of any existing drainage facilities, channel improvements or grading, driveway adjustments, culvert improvements or any other drainage improvement, drainage facility, or work that is necessary to provide for the stormwater drainage requirements specified in the stormwater design manual. 
(2)  Easements. The developer shall dedicate drainage easements across the site that will accommodate fully developed watershed conditions. 
(3)  Construction required. The developer shall construct drainage improvements that convey stormwater runoff through the proposed development to positive and adequate outfall locations in accordance with the design criteria in the ordinance from which this article derives and the stormwater design manual. The developer is only required to construct that portion of the drainage system across the site that will convey existing off-site flows and the flows from the proposed site development. Upsizing or phasing of the construction of the drainage systems to accommodate fully developed watershed conditions shall be coordinated with the city. Funding for increased sizing of these facilities may be funded by the city at its discretion subject to funding availability. 
(Code 2001, § 106-959; Ord. No. 39-2011, § 1, 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 106-960. - Limitation of development runoff. 
(a)  Generally. This article shall establish policies necessary to limit and restrict the increase in runoff from development activities and/or to provide adequate downstream drainage facilities and conveyances to minimize the effects of runoff and downstream flooding from development. The intent of this section is to focus design attention on the stormwater impact of development on the entire watershed rather than on a single, discrete site. Further standards, technical design criteria, procedures, methodology, details and regulations to limit runoff from development are included in the stormwater design manual. 
(b)  Runoff release rate. The controlled release rate of stormwater runoff from development or redevelopment activities shall not exceed predevelopment conditions unless downstream facilities can be demonstrated to be sufficient to convey fully developed 100-year design storm flows from the watershed as provided hereinafter. For the purposes of this article, predevelopment conditions are considered to be those site conditions and characteristics which existed prior to the 1988 adoption of the city's initial detention ordinance and which can be clearly identified on the 1986 aerial photography archived by the city engineering division. In certain circumstances where downstream drainage facilities are insufficient to carry the concentrated point flows from a development's on-site storage facilities, downstream channel improvements shall be required or special outflow structures to provide sheet flow release shall also be constructed to mitigate downstream impact. 
(c)  Options. The following options are available to analyze, account for, and reduce the impact of runoff from development on the drainage systems of the city. Engineering analyses for the option chosen for a development shall be performed as required by this article and in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(1)  On-site storage with controlled release. A developer may limit or reduce stormwater discharge rates from the proposed development to predevelopment conditions as defined herein by providing on-site storage facilities with an appropriately designed, controlled release structure. Design of such on-site facilities shall be designed and submitted in accordance with the stormwater design manual and shall provide for 100-year design storm storage plus a minimum freeboard of six inches above the maximum calculated water surface elevation and a controlled release structure that provides for proper storage and release rates at the two-year, ten-year and 100-year design storm predevelopment rates. An on-site storage and discharge reduction plan shall be prepared by a competent professional engineer licensed by the state and shall be submitted to the city engineering division for its review and approval. Construction and maintenance responsibilities for these facilities on single lot residential, multifamily residential or nonresidential developments shall be defined in a written detention facilities agreement form satisfactory to the city, executed by the property owner/developer and the city, and recorded in the county real property records. This agreement shall grant the city a non-exclusive easement on and access to the area containing the discharge reduction improvements. For multiple lot single-family residential developments, a deed to the city in a form satisfactory to the city shall be granted conveying the property on which the on-site storage facilities are located, and an acceptable easement shall be granted to the city as required to provide access to the area on which these facilities are constructed. 
(2)  Downstream impact assessment. A downstream impact assessment as described in the stormwater design manual may be performed to document that existing downstream drainage facilities to which the proposed development is to be connected are already sufficient to transport the fully developed 100-year design storm flows, to protect downstream properties from increased flooding, to protect downstream channels from increased erosion potential due to upstream development, and to protect public health and safety. The downstream assessment shall extend from each outfall of the proposed development to a stormwater facility identified by existing plans, FEMA modeling, or other computer models previously prepared and acceptable to the city as having fully-developed flow capacity and shall follow the guidelines of the stormwater design manual as approved on a site-by-site basis by the director of public works. Runoff computations shall be based upon fully developed watershed conditions in accordance with the city's latest land use projections and may include areas outside of the city limits and ETJ. The assessment shall be performed and submitted in accordance with the stormwater design manual. The results of the downstream assessment may indicate that the developer has several options as follows to address compliance with this article. If none of these options are available or acceptable to the developer, then on-site storage with controlled release shall be required. 
a.  No impact. In those instances where the downstream impact assessment demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director of public works that the proposed development causes no downstream increases in discharge or base flood elevations due to the timing of the hydrographs or that the existing downstream drainage system can convey the fully developed flows from the project without exceeding the requirements of this article or the stormwater design manual, then no drainage improvements or on-site storage facilities will be required. 
b.  Downstream improvements. When a downstream impact assessment indicates that downstream facilities do not meet the requirements of this article and the stormwater design manual, the developer may provide for the proper design and construction of downstream drainage improvements rather than construct on-site storage facilities to properly mitigate the effects of additional runoff. Alternatively, where a downstream drainage improvement project has already been identified and analyzed by the city, with the permission of the director of public works, a developer may participate in the project cost of such downstream improvements to satisfy the requirements of this section. Financial participation may include a portion or all of the city drainage project cost and/or the cost of drainage easement acquisition for the city's benefit. The amount of financial participation by the developer shall be determined using an acceptable engineer's opinion of the probable construction cost necessary to meet the ordinance requirements for on-site storage and release, plus engineering design fees, and cost of payment, performance and maintenance bonds. 
c.  Participation in regional detention. The developer may identify or participate in a regional storage facility designed for the fully developed watershed conditions for an area of common development. Such a facility shall be designed pursuant to the stormwater design manual and shall be subject to a predetermined facilities agreement in form and substance satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 2001, § 106-960; Ord. No. 39-2011, § 1, 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 106-961. - Variance; de minimis waiver and appeal. 
(a)  Variance. A person or entity (an "applicant") may request a deviation or variance from the provisions of this article; however, there is no guarantee that such requests will be granted. Requests shall be made in writing to the director of public works, shall include all accompanying data, calculations and documentation necessary for city engineering staff to properly analyze the request, and will not be permitted unless the following criteria are addressed to the satisfaction of the director of public works: 
(1)  The requested variance will not adversely affect conditions either upstream or downstream of the subject property; 
(2)  The requested variance will not conflict with any other projects or plans adopted by the city, state, or federal agencies or cause increased flood heights, threats to public safety, additional expenditures of public funds, impairment of the public interest, or conflict with existing local, state or federal laws or regulations; 
(3)  The requested variance would not confer upon the applicant any special privilege not available to others subject to the ordinance; and 
(4)  Not granting the variance would result in exceptional hardship because of circumstances unique to the particular property, the cost of ordinance compliance not being considered a hardship. 
(b)  Waiver for de minimis stormwater discharge impact. Certain development projects may be subject to this article as a result of their gross aggregate area; however, the proposed site improvements will result in negligible or very minimal stormwater discharge. In these circumstances, the developer shall have two options to request a waiver of the requirements of this article: 
(1)  The developer may request that a stormwater discharge reduction waiver request be prepared and submitted in writing to the city engineering division by a professional engineer licensed in the state. Such a waiver request shall include specific project and site information along with actual engineering calculations to document the request; or 
(2)  The developer may schedule, in advance, an appointment with an individual designated by the director of public works within the city engineering division to apply for a waiver of this article in person. The applicant shall provide a site plan to scale which indicates the location and size of existing and proposed improvements and major property features along with a copy of the final plat or survey delineating the property boundaries for the proposed development. 
For either of the options set forth in subsection (b)(1) and (2) of this section, the city engineering division will take the request presented under advisement and will notify the developer or his consultant in writing as to the city's decision concerning the waiver request. If the waiver request is denied, the developer must address the requirements of this article by use of another option as provided herein. 
(Code 2001, § 106-961; Ord. No. 39-2011, § 1, 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 106-962. - Stormwater pollution prevention requirements for construction activity and post-construction runoff. 
    This section applies to all construction sites located within the city limits or otherwise subject to the regulatory authority of the City of Wichita Falls that have discharges from construction site activities disturbing one acre or more, or which are part of a plan of common development that will disturb one acre or more. 
(1)  Submittal of NOI, small construction site notice, and SWP3. A copy of the notice of intent (NOI) and/or the small construction site notice, and stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWP3) shall be submitted to the Department of Public Works for review in accordance with NPDES or TPDES permit requirements and this article at least ten business days prior to the anticipated start of construction activities. Should the SWP3 review process exceed ten business days, construction activities may commence under the submitted SWP3. Once the plan review is complete, any necessary changes will be made to the SWP3 at the project site. If relevant information provided in the NOI or SWP3 changes, the operator must submit a notice of change (NOC) in accordance with the requirements of the TPDES construction general permit and update the SWP3. A copy of the NOC shall be provided to the Department of Public Works within 14 days of change. 
(2)  Review and modification of the SWP3. 
a.  The Department of Public Works retains the authority to request for review any document or plans, including but not limited to a SWP3, spill prevention control plans, hazardous material plans, and waste management documentation from a regulated construction site that the director of public works or designee reasonably believes may affect stormwater discharges to the MS4. 
b.  The director of public works or designee may require an operator of a regulated facility or construction site to modify its SWP3 if the SWP3 does not comply with the requirements of NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with the construction activity. 
c.  The deficiencies in a SWP3 will be communicated in writing and will provide to the operator a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed 30 days, to make necessary changes in the SWP3. 
(3)  Review and modifications of best management practices (BMP). 
a.  Any person engaged in activities or operation, or owning facilities or property, which will or may result in pollutants entering the MS4 shall implement BMP's to the maximum extent practicable to prevent and reduce such pollutants. The owner or operator of a regulated facility or construction site shall provide reasonable protections from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4. Practices implemented to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes shall be provided and maintained at the owner or operator's expense. 
b.  The city will maintain a list of approved BMP's as part of the city engineering standards which are accessible on the city's website. The Department of Public Works may request a demonstration of the effectiveness of implemented BMP's. 
c.  The Department of Public Works may require an operator of a regulated facility or construction site to modify its BMP's if the BMP's do not provide effective protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes from entering into the MS4. 
d.  The deficiencies in facilities or construction site's BMP's will be communicated in writing and the operator will be provided a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed 60 days, to make the necessary changes in the BMP's. 
(4)  Access to construction sites. 
a.  The intent of the facility or construction site inspections shall be to determine compliance with the conditions of the city's MS4 TPDES permit, any applicable NPDES or TPDES general permits and this article. The facility and construction site owners and operators shall allow the Department of Public Works ready access to applicable sections of public and private premises for the sole purpose of inspections, surveillance, and monitoring for the presence of illegal discharges to the municipal stormwater drainage system, illicit connections to the municipal stormwater drainage system, and assessment of any portions of a regulated construction site influenced by stormwater runoff that may adversely affect the municipal stormwater drainage system. 
b.  An owner or operator of a facility or construction site shall authorize the director of public works and/or his designee to enter such site at reasonable times during normal business hours to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. If the director of public works determines that an imminent and substantial danger exists to public health or infrastructure, then the director or his designees may enter the site without notice to the operator. If the owner or operator refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(5)  Compliance with permit. 
a.  A construction site shall comply with the requirements of the NPDES and TPDES permits to discharge stormwater associated with the construction site activity. 
b.  A person commits an offense if the person operates a construction site in violation of the requirements of the NPDES and/or TPDES permit discharge stormwater associated with the construction site activity. 
c.  Prior to the submittal of a notice of termination (NOT), the operator of the construction site shall first notify the Department of Public Works to request an inspection of the construction site for approval of final stabilization. After final inspection approval, the operator of the construction site shall submit to TCEQ and the Department of Public Works a NOT that includes the information required by the TPDES construction general permit. 
d.  The operator shall retain copies of any SWP3 and all reports required by this article or by the TPDES permit for the site and records of all data used to complete the NOI for a period of at least three years from the date that the site meets the definition of final stabilization. 
(6)  Post-construction stormwater control. 
a.  The purpose of post-construction controls is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-construction stormwater runoff and non-point source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. 
1.  Establishing design and review criteria for the construction, function, and use of structural stormwater Best Management Practices (BMP's) that may be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
2.  Encouraging the use of better management and low impact site development practices, such as the use of vegetated conveyances for stormwater and preservation of green space, buffers and other conservation areas to the maximum extent practicable; and 
3.  Establishing provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural and nonstructural stormwater BMP's to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained appropriately, and pose minimum risk to public safety. 
b.  Regulated post-construction storm-water control. The requirements of this section shall apply to all developments of the city and redevelopments within the corporate limits or in the extraterritorial jurisdiction that are equal to or greater than one acre, unless one of the exceptions applies to the development or redevelopment as of the effective date of this article. 
c.  Exceptions. 
1.  Redevelopment or expansion that results in no net increase in impervious area. 
2.  Development and redevelopment that decreases predevelopment runoff volumes as defined in section 106-960. 
3.  Any new development or redevelopment project that has or will have permit coverage under the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Industrial Stormwater Permit issued by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). 
d.  Standards for post-construction stormwater control. All stormwater control measures and stormwater treatment practices (BMP's) required under this article shall be evaluated by the director according to the policies, criteria, and information, including technical specifications, standards and the specific design criteria for required development or redevelopment. All plans shall be submitted in conjunction with the drainage criteria review process. The director shall determine whether these measures will be adequate to meet the requirements of this article. 
(7)  Administrative enforcement. 
a.  Violations. It shall be an offense for an owner or operator of a construction site or a third party performing work on a construction site to violate any of the requirements of this article, including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Conducting any land disturbing or construction activity equal to or greater than one acre without an approved NOI or small construction site notice and an SWP3 for the location where the violation occurred. 
2.  Failing to implement the SWP3 to include, but not limited to, installing erosion control devices or maintaining erosion control devices throughout the duration of land disturbing activities, in compliance with the approved SWP3 and BMP's for the location where the violation occurred. 
3.  Failing to remove off-site sedimentation that is a direct result of land disturbing activities where such off-site sedimentation results from the failure to implement or maintain erosion control devices as specified in an approved SWP3 for the location where the violation occurred. 
4.  Allowing sediment-laden water to flow from a site without being treated through an erosion control device. 
5.  Failing to repair damage to existing erosion control devices, including replacement of existing grass or sod or established final stabilization. 
b.  Notice of violation . Written notice of violation (NOV) shall be given to the responsible party or site operator/owner as identified in the SWP3 for a site. The NOV shall identify the nature of the alleged violation, the action required to obtain compliance with the approved SWP3, and the time to comply. 
c.  Stop work order . If the director of public works, or designee, determines that compliance subsequent to the NOV is not being attained, that a construction site is operating in a dangerous or unsafe manner, or that conditions exist at a construction site that may lead to an illicit discharge, upon written notice of an issuance of a stop work order, such work or conditions shall be immediately terminated or remedied. Written notice shall be provided to the owner, operator, and responsible party of the construction site and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. However, where an emergency exists which may result in discharge of hazardous materials or other discharges which pose an immediate injury and harm to property, natural resources, wildlife, or habitat written notice shall be delivered as soon as practical. 
d.  If the violation has not been corrected within seven days after the notice of violation or, in the event of a valid appeal, within seven days of the decision of the director upholding the decision of the Department of Public Works, then representatives of the Department of Public Works may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(8)  Nuisance, abatement, and lien. 
a.  Failure of a property owner or facility operator to comply with a notice of violation issued pursuant to this article is deemed to be furtherance of: 
1.  An unwholesome situation; 
2.  A condition that may produce disease; 
3.  The presence of impure or unwholesome matter; 
4.  Objectionable, unsightly, and unsanitary matter; and 
5.  A public nuisance. 
b.  If the owner of property in the municipality does not comply with a municipal ordinance or requirement under this article within seven days of notice of a violation, the Department of Public Works may: 
1.  Do the work or make the improvements required; and 
2.  Pay for the work done or improvements made and charge the expenses to the owner of the property. 
c.  In performing or contracting for the aforementioned work or improvements, the department must comply with the procedures established in Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.006, as amended. After following such procedures, the department may assess the expenses of such work against the real estate on which the work is done or improvements are made in accordance with Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.007, as amended. 
(9)  Penalty and injunction. 
a.  Violation of a provision of this article is declared to be a violation of an ordinance involving health and safety. Accordingly, it shall be punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00 per violation and as provided by section 1-14. 
b.  If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the city attorney may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations of this article or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Code 2001, § 106-962; Ord. No. 39-2011, § 1, 8-2-2011) 
Secs. 106-963-106-985. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - STORMWATER DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM 

Sec. 106-986. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Benefited property means a lot or tract to which drainage service is made available or which receives water or wastewater or sanitation service from the city. 
    Cost of service, as defined by law, includes: 
(1)  The prorated cost of land, easements, and rights-of-way related to drainage improvements; 
(2)  The cost of acquisition, construction, repair and maintenance of structures, equipment, and facilities used in draining the benefited properties; 
(3)  The cost of architectural, engineering, legal, and related services, plans and specifications, studies, surveys, estimates of cost and of revenue, and all other expenses necessary or incident to planning, providing, or determining the feasibility and practicality of structures, equipment, and facilities used in draining the benefited properties; 
(4)  The cost of all machinery, equipment, furniture, and facilities necessary or incident to the provision and operation of draining the benefited properties; 
(5)  The cost of funding, debt service, financing charges, and interest arising from construction projects and the start-up of a drainage facility used in draining the benefited properties; and 
(6)  The administrative costs of a drainage utility system. 
    Drainage charge means: 
(1)  The levy imposed to recover the cost of service of the city in furnishing drainage for any benefited property; and 
(2)  An amount made in contribution to the funding of future drainage system construction by the city. 
    Drainage system means the drainage owned or controlled in whole or in part by the city and dedicated to the service of benefited property, including provisions for additions to the system. 
    Service area means the municipal boundaries of the city. 
(Code 2001, § 106-986; Ord. No. 58-2010, § 1, 11-2-2010) 
Sec. 106-987. - System established and charges adopted. 
(a)  The city declares under the state constitution and Texas Local Government Code §§ 552.041-552.054 that the Municipal Drainage Utility Systems Act is adopted, and it is declared that the drainage system of the city shall be a public utility. Pursuant to the provisions of Texas Local Government Code § 552.046, the city incorporates its existing drainage facilities, materials, and supplies into the system. 
(b)  This article adopts a schedule of charges against all eligible real property in the proposed service area. Pursuant to this article the city will provide drainage for all eligible real property in the service area on payment of drainage charges, except real property exempted from coverage under Texas Local Government Code ch. 552, subch. C, and offer drainage service on nondiscriminatory, reasonable, and equitable terms. 
(Code 2001, § 106-987; Ord. No. 58-2010, § 1, 11-2-2010) 
Sec. 106-988. - Schedule of charges. 
(a)  The schedule of charges under this article is based on studies, staff review, and the projects and work program approved by the city council. Future revisions will be made only after a separate hearing has been held with notices properly published. 
(b)  The schedule of charges in this article is based on a methodology that is nondiscriminatory, reasonable, and equitable. The properties are established as a class unless individual calculation is believed to be necessary. The source of the impervious area data is the city and the stormwater runoff factors are based on engineering quantifications. The fee for all properties is computed by charging residential customers on the basis of the impervious area of an average residential lot and applying that charge to commercial properties on the basis of their impervious area, as follows: 
(1)  A single-family living unit equivalent (SFLUE) is the impervious area of an average residential lot, which is found to be 3,500 square feet. 
(2)  The monthly stormwater drainage utility system fee is as established by separate ordinance. 
Example: Applied to a commercial piece of property with an impervious area of 35,000 square feet, the stormwater drainage utility system fee would be as established by separate ordinance, computed as follows: 
    35,000 sq. ft. of impervious area/3,500 sq. ft. per SFLUE = 10 SFLUEs 
    10 SFLUES x $3.55 per SFLUE = $35.55 per month 
(3)  The fee schedule is applied with the following results: 
a.  For residential properties with individual meters: Established by separate ordiance. 
b.  For nonresidential properties and master-metered residential properties: The fee will be based on the impervious land area of the property as determined by the city if the water service is provided through master meters. In the case of multiple master meters, the sum of the drainage charges for the entire property may be placed on the same utility bill. The maximum monthly fee shall not exceed the amount established by separate ordinance per month. 
(Code 2001, § 106-988; Ord. No. 58-2010, § 1, 11-2-2010) 
Sec. 106-989. - Exemptions. 
    The city exempts the following categories of utility customers from receiving a drainage charge: 
(1)  Property owned by the city; 
(2)  Property with proper construction and maintenance of a wholly sufficient and privately owned drainage system; 
(3)  Property held and maintained in its natural state, until such time that the property is developed and all of the public infrastructure constructed has been accepted by the city; and 
(4)  A subdivided lot, until a structure has been built on the lot and a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city. 
(Code 2001, § 106-989; Ord. No. 58-2010, § 1, 11-2-2010) 
Sec. 106-990. - Billing, deposits, and expenditures. 
(a)  The city will bill for drainage services on the monthly utility bill along with water, sewer, and solid waste services. 
(b)  There will be no separate deposit required. 
(c)  In the case of a delinquent payment of the monthly utility bill, which includes the drainage charge, the city is authorized by Texas Local Government Code § 552.041 et seq., and by this article to discontinue service of all city utilities for nonpayment, even if the amount in dispute is the drainage charge component of the monthly utility bill. 
(d)  The city shall identify and separate all drainage utility income. 
(e)  The monies received from utility drainage charges shall be used only for purposes that are directly or indirectly related to the utility drainage system, as provided by law, including those costs of service defined in section 106-986. 
(Code 2001, § 106-990; Ord. No. 58-2010, § 1, 11-2-2010; Ord. No. 07-2011, § 1, 1-18-2011) 
Sec. 106-991. - Appeals. 
(a)  Ordinary billing and payment disputes under this article shall be subject to informal hearing and dispute resolution procedures used for other utility billing disputes by the city. Certain other matters may be appealed to the city engineer or his designee as follows: 
(1)  Residential property billing can be appealed when the owner can offer proof that the property is unimproved and therefore not subject to the stormwater drainage utility system fee. 
(2)  Any owner of nonresidential property who can offer proof that an error was made with regard to the category of land development, the area of imperviousness of the land development, or the size of the developed property may appeal such matters. 
(b)  The city engineer or his designee shall render a written decision on such appeals within 30 days after receiving a written notice of appeal from the land owner. 
(Code 2001, § 106-991; Ord. No. 58-2010, § 1, 11-2-2010) 
Secs. 106-992-106-999. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - GREASE INTERCEPTORS, INSTALLATION AND DISPOSAL OF WASTE 

Sec. 106-1000. - Purpose, policy, and administration. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is the regulation of the generation and disposal of grease for the protection of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) and the environment. 
(b)  The objective of this article is to reduce the operational and maintenance costs of maintaining the POTW by preventing the accumulation of grease within the collection system lines. 
(c)  This article shall apply to persons in the city and to persons outside the city who, by contract or agreement with the city, are users of the city's POTW. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1000; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1001. - Administration. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, the laboratory/water pollution administrator of the Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public Health District under the authority and supervision of the city manager shall administer, implement, and enforce this article and is authorized to promulgate such rules as shall be reasonable and necessary to carry out its provisions. 
(b)  The city manager, the director of community development, the director of public works, and the director of health, and persons designated and under the instruction and supervision of any of them, may investigate compliance of this chapter. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1001; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1002. - Incorporation of abbreviations by reference. 
    Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, abbreviations as defined in article VII of this chapter, shall apply to the extent that they are not in conflict with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1002; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1003. - Incorporation of definitions by reference. 
    Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, terms and phrases as defined in article VII of this chapter, shall apply to the extent that they are not in conflict with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1003; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1004. - Specialized definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Approval authority means the executive director of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) and any duly authorized individuals, including contractors, acting as representatives of said director, or the executive director of any state agency replacing TCEQ as the enforcement authority. 
    Biological pretreatment service means the application of any additive or enzyme or the use of any other biological means to digest waste in an interceptor that discharges into a public sewer system within the city. 
    Building official means the building and code administrator for the City of Wichita Falls. The term "building official" includes any employees, agents or representatives of the building and code administrator. 
    Chronic problem means a generator that has contributed grease into the POTW requiring the cleaning of lines more than once in a three-year period to prevent stoppages. 
    Control authority means the Laboratory/Water Pollution Coordinator of the Wichita Falls/Wichita County Public Health District (or another official designated by the city manager) or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative. The term "control authority" includes any employee of the city assigned to investigate compliance with and detect violations of this chapter. 
    Discharge means the introduction of waste into a POTW. 
    Disposal means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid or semi-solid grease interceptor waste, grit interceptor waste, and/or sewage into or on any land or water so that such waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwaters. 
    Disposal facility means a facility at which liquid waste, including but not limited to, grease interceptor waste, grit interceptor waste, and sewage, is received, processed, or treated. 
    Disposal facility operator means an individual who is authorized to accept or reject liquid waste at a disposal facility, and who is authorized to sign a trip ticket, regardless of actual title. 
    Disposal site means a site or part of a site at which grease interceptor waste, grit interceptor waste, or septage is processed, treated or intentionally placed into or on any land and at which site said waste will remain after closure. 
    Emulsifier means any substance which, when added or placed into wastewater grease interceptor, will form an oily substance to a milky fluid in which the fat globules are in a very finely divided state and are held in suspension, giving it the semblance of a solution; as the homogenization of milk emulsifies the fat with the whey forming a smooth milk product. 
    Existing facility means any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of grease, the construction of which started before August 17, 2004. 
    Food courts means areas predominantly found in shopping centers or amusement parks and festivals where several food service facilities having different owners or serving different fare may be sharing seating space or plumbing facilities. 
    Food service facility means any establishment that cuts, cooks, bakes, prepares or serves food, or which disposes of food-related wastes, or which has a local, state, or federal food preparation or service permit. 
    Food waste grinder means a device which shreds or grinds up solid or semisolid waste materials into smaller portions for discharge into the POTW. 
    Generator means a facility that causes, creates, generates, stores, or otherwise produces wastewater which contains grease from on-site process operations, whether domestically or commercially generated, or as a byproduct of some domestic or non-domestic activity. 
    Grease means fats, waxes, free fatty acids, calcium and magnesium soaps, mineral oils and certain other non-fatty material from animal or vegetable sources, or from hydrocarbons of petroleum origins, commonly found in wastewater from food preparation and food service. 
    Grease interceptor or interceptor means a water-tight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of grease into the POTW to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected, and to separate and retain grease and other waste from the wastewater discharged by a facility. In order to be considered a grease interceptor under this article, the interceptor should not allow a discharge of grease in excess of 500 milligrams per liter (mg/l) concentrations. 
    Grease interceptor waste means any grease, food particles, or organic or inorganic solid or semisolid waste collected and intercepted by a grease interceptor, usually in layers of floatable, suspended, and settleable substances, which are ultimately removed from a grease interceptor for proper disposal. 
    Grease recovery device means a type of grease interceptor that mechanically removes grease from wastewater for later disposal. 
    Inspection port means an opening with easily opened covers designed to allow inspectors quick access to the inlet flow control device, a compartment of the grease interceptor, or the effluent from the interceptor. 
    Living quarters means a facility, or an area of a facility, where a person or family has a distinct living area which includes individual kitchen and bath facilities and is utilized solely by that single person or family. 
    Manager means the person, regardless of actual title, immediately on-site at a location conducting, supervising, managing, or representing the activities of a generator, a transporter or a disposer. 
    Monitoring port means an inspection port large enough to allow temporary installation of monitoring devices such as samplers, strip recorders, flow meters, or other such measuring and/or monitoring devices. 
    NPDES means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System as administered by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Permitted transporter means a transporter who holds a formal written control document required and issued by the control authority, which authorizes and entitles the transporter to collect, transport or dispose of grease interceptor waste, grit interceptor waste and other liquid wastes at a permitted or registered treatment, storage or disposal site or facility. 
    Permittee means a person issued any permit under this article and includes any agent, servant, or employee of the permittee. 
    Publicly owned treatment works and POTW mean a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, which is owned by a state or municipality, as defined by section 504(4) of the Act. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a publicly owned treatment works. The terms "publicly owned treatment works" and "POTW" also include the municipality as defined in section 504(4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. 
    Reporting period means January 1 through December 31 of a year. When documentation must be submitted, it must be the documentation for the reporting period immediately preceding the date of submission. 
    Shopping center means a group of geographically unified commercial establishments built on a site that is planned, developed, owned, and managed as an operation unit for sale or lease with a common parking lot. 
    TPDES means Texas Pollution Discharge Elimination System, as administered by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, under which the city's POTW is permitted. 
    Transporter means a user who transfers waste from the site of a generator to an approved site for disposal or treatment. 
    Trip ticket means the written documentation of the generation, receipt, transportation, and disposal of grit interceptor waste, grease interceptor waste, septage, and other liquid wastes, which enables the legal and proper disposal of such waste at a permitted or registered disposal site, and which specifies the identity of the generator, transporter, and disposal facility and the volume wastes disposed. 
    Under sink grease interceptor or USGI means a grease interceptor placed under or in close proximity to sinks or other fixtures. 
    Wastewater means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the publicly owned treatment works. Stormwater, surface water, and groundwater infiltration may be included in the wastewater that enters a publicly owned treatment works. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1004; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1005. - Applicability. 
(a)  Wastewater which contains grease shall be discharged into the POTW system only as permitted by this article. 
(b)  The following types of facilities shall discharge all wastewater from sinks, dishwashers, drains, and any other fixtures through which grease may be discharged, into an adequately sized, properly maintained and functioning grease interceptor before the discharge enters the POTW, and shall provide a grease interceptor inlet flow control device inspection port, a grease interceptor effluent monitoring port, and inspection ports for all parts of the grease interceptor: 
(1)  Commercial food preparation and food service facilities, including but not limited to bakeries, boardinghouses, butcher shops, cafes, commercial kitchens, delicatessens, ice cream parlors, hospitals, meat packing plants, restaurants, schools, and similar facilities, especially where meat, poultry, seafood, dairy products or fried foods are prepared or served; 
(2)  Commercial plants where biological matter is processed or rendered, including but not limited to fat rendering plants, soap factories, slaughter houses, taxidermy shops, and similar facilities; 
(3)  Clubhouses and other communal gathering facilities, such as those belonging to apartment complexes, golf courses and housing developments, which include kitchens or can be otherwise expected to discharge grease into the POTW; 
(4)  Facilities of intensified dwelling, including, but not limited to; adult day care facilities, assisted living facilities, convalescent homes, day nursing and childcare facilities in which food preparation occurs, homes for the mentally challenged, hotels, maternity homes, nursing homes, retirement and life care communities and homes; and 
(5)  All other facilities, including existing facilities, deemed by the control authority to be discharging grease in amounts or in a manner that alone or in concert with other substances from the discharges of other facilities reasonably threatens to impede or stop the flow in the POTW. The determination shall be made based upon an investigation of the facility, and a comparison of the content and amount of discharge from the facility with the discharges of other facilities similar in size and use. Upon a determination that a facility's discharge will create problems in the POTW, the control authority may require the installation of an adequately sized, properly maintained and functioning grease interceptor before the discharge enters the POTW, and the installation of a grease interceptor inlet flow control device inspection port and a grease interceptor effluent monitoring port. 
(c)  A food service facility is exempt from the requirements of subsection (b) of this section if it: 
(1)  Sells or serves pre-packaged or pre-cooked food that requires only warming; 
(2)  Serves only snow cones or drinks that do not include meat or dairy products; 
(3)  Is a produce market without a food grinder; or 
(4)  Is a grocery or convenience store that does not offer food preparation, meat cutting or packaging, a delicatessen, or a bakery. 
(d)  Grease interceptors shall not be required for single-family residences, duplexes, triplexes, quadplexes, or apartment complexes, unless subsection (b)(5) of this section applies. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1005; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1006. - Grease interceptors construction. 
(a)  All facilities required to have a grease interceptor shall locate the interceptor in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning, service and inspection. 
(b)  Grease interceptors will be sized, designed, and installed according to the requirements of the technical codes adopted by the city in chapter 22, except that in any event where this article and chapter 22 conflict, this article shall control. 
(c)  Under no circumstances are multiple grease interceptors to be positioned in series. 
(d)  As of March 6, 2012, no communal grease interceptors shall be installed. New facilities shall be required to install individual grease interceptors. Facilities that utilized a communal grease interceptor before March 6, 2012, shall be permitted to continue to do so, but may elect to install an individual grease interceptor instead. 
(e)  New shopping centers must have two separate sewer line connections at each unit within the shopping center. One sewer line shall be for sanitary wastewater and one sewer line shall be for the kitchen area, or potential kitchen area, of each unit. The kitchen area, or potential kitchen area, sewer line shall be connected to floor drains in the specified kitchen area, and shall connect, or be able to connect, to other kitchen fixtures. 
(f)  Owners of a new multi-unit facility or new shopping center facility shall contact the control authority prior to conducting private plumbing work at the multi-unit facility site. Multi-unit facility owners or their designated contractor shall have plans for separate private wastewater lines for kitchen and sanitary wastewater for each individual unit. In addition, the plans shall identify locations to accommodate grease interceptors for each unit of the multi-unit facility. 
(g)  If a new food court is proposed in a mall, or an existing food court is proposed to be expanded in a mall, each food service facility shall have a monitoring port. 
(h)  A sample port shall be installed on the effluent line of each grease interceptor. The port shall be a minimum of four inches in diameter and shall be connected to the sewer line at a 90-degree angle to allow for visualization and sampling activities. The port shall be installed so as to be protected from stormwater contamination and maintained in a safe and proper operating condition. The plug on the sample port must be easily removed from the pipe. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1006; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1007. - Discharge criteria for grease interceptors. 
(a)  Where grease is a byproduct of food preparation or cleanup, reasonable efforts shall be made to prevent the inclusion of grease in wastewater. Except as a byproduct of food preparation and/or clean up after such reasonable efforts are made, grease shall not be discharged to any drains or grease interceptors. Grease shall be placed in a container designed to hold such grease and either recycled or properly disposed of at suitable locations. 
(b)  None of the following agents shall be placed directly into a grease interceptor, or into any drain that leads to a grease interceptor: 
(1)  Emulsifiers or any type of product that will liquefy grease interceptor wastes; 
(2)  Any substance that may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
(3)  Hazardous wastes, such as acids, strong cleaners, pesticides, herbicides, paint, solvents, or gasoline; 
(4)  Any substance capable of moving grease interceptor waste from the grease interceptor to the POTW. 
(c)  The influent to interceptors shall not exceed 140 degrees Fahrenheit (140° F). The temperature at the flow control device inspection port shall be considered equivalent to the temperature of the influent. 
(d)  Toilets, urinals, and other similar fixtures shall not discharge through a grease interceptor. 
(e)  Wastewater shall only enter a grease interceptor through the inlet flow control device, then the inlet pipe. 
(f)  Where a food waste grinder is installed, the wastewater from that grinder shall not discharge directly into the POTW without passing through a grease interceptor. Living quarters are exempted from this requirement. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1007; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1008. - Control authority determinations. 
(a)  If the control authority determines that there is a need for installation or upgrading of sample ports or grease interceptors on an existing facility, or that there is a need to increase the frequency with which a grease interceptor is cleaned or serviced, the control authority may issue an order to that effect. 
(1)  If the control authority issues such an order, then the control authority shall serve notice of such order upon the generator. 
(2)  Within ten days of receipt of such order, the generator may demand a hearing to review such order. The control authority shall schedule a hearing to review the order within 30 days of receiving the demand for hearing from the generator, and shall serve notice of the hearing upon the generator at least ten days before the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the generator may present evidence, and the control authority may make new findings and issue new orders concerning the subject of the original order. 
(3)  After receiving notice of such an order, it shall be unlawful for a generator to allow or cause any discharge into the POTW not in compliance with such order. 
(b)  Where grease is generated in only part of a facility, the wastewater containing grease may, at the discretion of the control authority, discharge into a grease interceptor servicing only those areas. If the positioning of a single grease interceptor to receive all wastewater is impracticable, multiple grease interceptors, each individually permitted, may be used with the control authority's approval. 
(c)  The control authority may waive the requirement for a grease interceptor provided the generator can verify that only domestic sewage is being discharged, and that the facility has no floor drains. The verification and any required testing shall be done to the control authority's specifications and at the generator's expense. 
(d)  If the control authority determines that a generator is causing a chronic problem, that generator shall install an external grease interceptor designed to retain at least 1,000 pounds of grease. The external grease interceptor shall be connected to all grease contributing equipment, including, but not limited to three-compartment sinks, mop sinks, dish machines, pre-rinse disposals, food grinders, and floor drains. 
(1)  The control authority shall contact the generator causing a chronic problem in writing. The generator shall take steps to resolve the chronic problem within 30 days of the hand-delivery or certified mailing of the notice. 
(2)  The generator shall submit plans to the building official outlining the installation of the required grease interceptor within 60 days of the hand-delivery or certified mailing of the notice. The generator shall also make application with the building official for all necessary permits and approvals for the installation within 60 days of the hand-delivery or certified mailing of the notice. The generator shall complete said installation within 30 days of receiving all necessary approvals and permits from the building official to do so. 
(e)  If an inspection finds a grease interceptor to be full, immediate steps shall be taken by the generator to evacuate and clean the interceptor. The inspector shall make an evaluation of the advisability of allowing discharge to continue, and may order an immediate cessation of all discharge from the facility. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1008; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1009. - Ports. 
(a)  Required ports shall be in areas where vehicles may not temporarily block access to inspection. 
(b)  Ready inspection or service of inlet flow control devices, interceptors, and ports shall not require the use of ladders or the removal of equipment or stored materials. 
(c)  Ports shall be located so as to allow inspectors quick and easy access to the inlet flow control device, each compartment of the interceptor, and the effluent from the interceptor. The location of all ports shall be approved by the control authority and shall be shown on the approved building plans. 
(d)  A one-piece removable metal plate covering the entire interceptor shall be preferred as an interceptor inspection port, though the control authority may permit standard manhole ports to be installed over each divider in the interceptor. All parts of the interceptor shall be easily accessible for cleaning and visual inspection. 
(e)  The grease interceptor effluent monitoring port shall be as close as possible to the connection with the POTW within the bounds of the facility property, and shall be placed and maintained so that samples taken from the monitoring port are representative of wastewater leaving the grease interceptor. The port shall be installed according to the specifications of the control authority, and maintained at the user's expense. It shall be unlawful for a generator to divert wastewater around a monitoring point into the POTW. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1009; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1010. - Under sink grease interceptors. 
(a)  If the control authority determines that an outside grease interceptor is not physically feasible, an under sink grease interceptor (USGI) may be installed subject to the approval of the building official. 
(b)  Installation requirements. 
(1)  The USGI may be set on the floor, partially recessed in the floor with its top flush with the floor, or fully recessed below the floor to suit piping and structural conditions, so long as the arrangement is acceptable to the building official. 
(2)  There shall be sufficient clearance for the removal of the USGI cover for cleaning. 
(3)  Unless specifically approved by the building official, runs of pipe exceeding 25 feet between fixture and USGI shall not be permitted. 
(4)  A suitable flow control fitting shall be installed ahead of the USGI in the waste line beyond the fixture as close as possible to the underside of the lowest fixture. When wastewater from two or more sinks or fixtures is combined to flow through one USGI, a single flow control fitting shall be used. 
(5)  Air intake for flow control either shall terminate under the sink drain board as high as possible to prevent overflow, or shall terminate in a return bend at the same height and on the outside of the building. 
(6)  To retain water and prevent siphoning, all USGIs shall have a vented waste, sized in accordance with the plumbing code of the city. 
(7)  With the approval of the building official, one USGI may be used to serve multiple fixtures if the fixtures are located close together and the interceptor is sized to meet the combined flow of all the fixtures. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1010; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1011. - Grease recovery devices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to utilize a grease recovery device unless the generator holds a grease interceptor permit for the device. 
(b)  Grease from grease recovery devices shall: 
(1)  Be stored on premises in an integral recovered grease container; 
(2)  Be stored in such a manner as to minimize odors and insects; 
(3)  Not be mixed with edible grease; and 
(4)  Be removed only by a permitted transporter. 
(c)  Recovered grease shall not be stored on-premises longer than two weeks. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1011; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1012. - Interceptor maintenance. 
(a)  A generator shall maintain grease interceptors in proper continuous working condition, and shall ensure that the flow control fitting supplied with the interceptor is in position at all times during operation of the interceptor. 
(b)  A generator is responsible for inspecting, repairing, replacing, or installing all apparatus and equipment necessary to ensure said working condition and compliance with discharge regulations at all times. 
(c)  Grease interceptors shall be serviced and evacuated at least every 90 days by a permitted transporter operating a vacuum truck cleaning service. The control authority may modify this requirement in writing, and may specify cleaning more frequently when quarterly pumping is shown to be inadequate. Additional pumping may be required during time periods where increased loading is anticipated. 
(d)  After service, the generator shall ensure that the interceptor is thoroughly inspected to make certain that inlet, outlet, and air relief ports are clear of obstructions. 
(e)  Grease and other waste removed from a grease interceptor shall not be introduced into any drain, sewer, or natural body of water. The waste shall be placed in proper containers for proper disposal, and shall not be mixed with edible grease or disposed of in such a matter so as to become food for animals or humans. 
(f)  A generator having a grease interceptor shall maintain a maintenance log for each interceptor indicating each evacuation and service of the interceptor for the previous five years. This log shall include the date, time, amount pumped, hauler and disposal site, and shall be kept readily available on the premises of the generator for inspection by the control authority. 
(g)  A generator having a grease interceptor shall maintain copies of the trip tickets for the previous five years on the premises of the facility and readily available for inspection by the control authority. 
(h)  Cleaning and evacuation procedures. 
(1)  A representative of the generator shall supervise grease interceptor cleaning, and shall be physically present and observe the entire cleaning operation. 
(2)  A generator shall cause the liquid waste hauler, transporter, or any other person cleaning or servicing an interceptor to completely evacuate all contents, including floating materials, wastewater, and bottom sludges and solids, of all grease interceptors during servicing. Skimming the surface layer of waste material, partial cleaning of the interceptor or use of any method that does not remove the entire contents of the interceptor shall not constitute a cleaning, servicing or evacuation as required by law. The suction of the floating materials shall be done prior to removal of other contents. After complete evacuation, the walls, top, and bottom of the interceptor shall be thoroughly scraped. The interceptor shall then be washed down and the residue removed. Upon completion of the servicing, the generator's representative shall make an inspection of the interior of the interceptor and personally sign the trip ticket. The generator's representative shall make an appropriate entry in the interceptor maintenance log. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for a generator to allow the discharge of liquid, semi-solids, or solids back into a grease interceptor during or after servicing. Any decanting or discharging of waste into an interceptor from which the waste was removed or in any manner other than through the inlet pipe is prohibited. 
(4)  Each grease interceptor shall be fully evacuated when serviced unless the waste volume is greater than the permitted transporter's tank capacity in which case the permitted transporter shall arrange for the interceptor to be fully evacuated within a 24-hour period following the transporter's inability to fully evacuate the interceptor. 
(i)  Waste removed from a grease interceptor shall be disposed of at a facility permitted and authorized to receive such waste in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations. The waste shall not be returned to any private or public portion of the POTW without prior written approval from the control authority. The waste shall not be returned to any portion of the POTW not specifically designated by the wastewater treatment superintendent. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for a generator to allow grease waste to be removed from his premises by anyone who does not have all applicable federal, state, or local permits or registrations, including a permit from the control authority, and a TCEQ waste hauler's permit. 
(k)  Self-cleaning. 
(1)  The control authority may permit the service and cleaning of a grease interceptor by the generator who owns or operates it under the following conditions: 
a.  The grease interceptor must be capable of retaining at least 30 pounds of grease. 
b.  The grease must be stored on premises in an integral recovered grease container in such a manner as to minimize odors and insects, not be mixed with edible grease, and be removed only by a permitted transporter. 
c.  Recovered grease shall not be stored on-premises longer than two weeks. 
d.  A maintenance log shall be kept by self-cleaning generators that indicates, at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  Date the grease interceptor was serviced; 
2.  Name of the person servicing the grease interceptor; 
3.  Waste disposal method used; 
4.  Amount of grease removed; and 
5.  The signature of the person servicing the interceptor after each cleaning certifying that all grease was removed and disposed of properly, the grease interceptor was thoroughly cleaned, and that all parts were in operable condition. 
(2)  Written requests for authorization to self-clean must be submitted annually to the control authority for approval. The written request shall include the following information: 
a.  The generator name and street address; 
b.  The name, title, and phone number of the generator's representative responsible for the self-cleaning; 
c.  A description of maintenance frequency, method of disposal, method of cleaning and size of the grease interceptor; and 
d.  A signed statement that the generator's representative shall maintain records of waste disposal and produce them for compliance inspections. 
(3)  Violation of any grease interceptor regulation subjects a generator to removal from the self-cleaner program at the discretion of the control authority. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1012; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1013. - Interceptor maintenance service contract. 
(a)  A generator shall obtain a written grease interceptor service agreement with a permitted transporter to maintain required grease interceptors in effective operating condition. A service agreement must be for an annual term and a generator must maintain such an agreement in effect as long as the generator has a grease interceptor. 
(b)  A generator shall provide copies of all written grease interceptor service agreements to the control authority. Any modifications or changes to the contract must be submitted to the control authority within ten working days of the change or modification. It is a violation for a generator to discharge through an interceptor without a written grease interceptor service agreement. 
(c)  A written grease interceptor service agreement shall include: 
(1)  The customer name, address and telephone number, and the name, address, and telephone number of the generator to be serviced if different; 
(2)  The name of a primary and secondary contact person for the generator; 
(3)  The grease interceptor permit number of each interceptor to be serviced; 
(4)  The size of each interceptor to be serviced; 
(5)  The precise location of each interceptor to be serviced, including a diagram if necessary; 
(6)  The frequency of service and evacuation required; 
(7)  The signature of an authorized representative of the generator indicating acceptance of the terms of the contract; 
(8)  The permitted transporter company name, address, and telephone number; 
(9)  The name of a primary and secondary contact person for the permitted transporter; 
(10)  The TCEQ permit number of the permitted transporter; 
(11)  The permitted transporter number issued by the control authority; 
(12)  The signature of an authorized representative of the permitted transporter indicating acceptance of the terms of the contract; 
(13)  The name, address, and telephone number of the disposal site; 
(14)  The TCEQ registration number of the disposal site; 
(15)  A start date and an end date, to include not less than one year; 
(16)  A certificate of insurance for the permitted transporter; 
(17)  A certificate of assurance by the permitted transporter; and 
(18)  A certificate of indemnification. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1013; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1014. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any generator to discharge effluent through a grease interceptor without authorization from the control authority in the form of a grease interceptor permit. 
(b)  Application for a permit shall be made to the control authority. If, after examining the information contained in the grease interceptor permit application, it is determined by the control authority that the proposed discharge does not conflict with the provisions of this article, or any other federal, state, or local requirement or regulation, and the permit fee is paid, a permit shall be issued allowing the facility to discharge effluent through a grease interceptor into the POTW. 
(c)  Each grease interceptor permit shall be issued for a time not longer than one year from the date of the permit. All permits shall expire at 11:59 p.m. on the date specified on the permit. The generator shall apply for permit reissuance prior to the expiration of the grease generator's existing permit. The control authority may issue a permit for less than a year without proration of a permit fee: 
(1)  In order to maintain the facility on the same permit schedule if a facility allows a permit to lapse; or 
(2)  In order to maintain the facility on the same permit schedule as any other permits it may hold from the city. 
(d)  The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the control authority at any time during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in this chapter are modified or other just cause to make such modification exists. The grease generator shall be informed of any proposed change in the issued permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the change. Any change or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1014; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1015. - Grease interceptor treatment products. 
(a)  The use of grease interceptor treatment products, including bacteria, designed to digest grease are specifically prohibited unless the control authority has given prior written consent. 
(b)  The control authority may consider the use of grease interceptor treatment products only where a valid screening test showing the product's ability to treat wastewater and to produce effluent in compliance with this article has been performed in accordance with methods outlined by the control authority. 
(c)  Screening tests for such grease interceptor treatment products shall be designed by the control authority, and the results of the screening tests shall be subject to technical review by the control authority. All costs associated with such screening test shall be borne by the facility whether the product is accepted for use or not. 
(d)  If a grease interceptor treatment product is accepted for use, the control authority will provide written consent to use the product. 
(e)  The permittee must disclose a complete description of the chemical composition of all grease interceptor treatment products to the control authority. 
(f)  The control authority may revoke written consent to use a grease interceptor treatment product where the effluent from the interceptor in which the product is used fails to meet the requirements of the article. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1015; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1016. - Mobile treatment processes. 
    Any person wishing to make use of a mobile treatment process to clean or service grease interceptors shall demonstrate the process to the satisfaction of the control authority. Included with the demonstration shall be a written explanation of the treatment process and a description of the chemical composition of all products used during the process. Any costs to the city associated with the demonstration, such as, but not limited to sampling and analysis, shall be paid by the demonstrator. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1016; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1017. - Facility closure. 
(a)  When a facility with a grease interceptor closes for business, and is subsequently razed or demolished, then any grease interceptors shall be physically removed. 
(b)  When a facility with a grease interceptor closes for business, and the facility is remodeled such that the grease interceptor will not be used, then the grease interceptor may be either physically removed or left in place. If the grease interceptor is left in place: 
(1)  The grease interceptor shall have all effluent pumped out, and the interceptor shall be cleaned thoroughly and left dry and empty; and 
(2)  The grease interceptor shall be re-plumbed as to bypass the existing grease interceptor, either by straight through or by bypassing methods, while leaving the empty interceptor and in place for possible future utilization by another business, or be re-plumbed with a straight line plumbed from the inlet to the outlet, and the remainder of the grease interceptor filled with soil or sand. 
(c)  In all instances, the owner of the facility shall inform the control authority and perform the closure at such a time so as to permit an inspector to be physically present during the removal or filling of the grease interceptor. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1017; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1018. - Inspection and entry. 
(a)  Every facility discharging grease into the POTW shall allow inspection of the facility, its grease interceptor(s) and records by the control authority during the business hours of the control authority. It shall be unlawful for a facility discharging grease into the POTW, whether or not the facility possesses a grease interceptor permit, to refuse to allow inspectors to enter the facility during the business hours of the control authority to determine whether the facility is complying with the requirements of this article and any permit or order issued hereunder. A grease generator shall allow inspectors access to all parts of the premises for inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of additional duties. The right of access of the control authority shall be considered at least as extensive as the authority provided in article VII of this chapter. Arrangements to provide immediate access to the control authority shall have been made ahead of time, and such failure to make adequate arrangements shall not be considered a legitimate reason to refuse access to the control authority. 
(b)  In cases where a facility includes private living quarters, the right of access shall extend to all common areas, and any other areas a facility employee, including the manager and/or owner, may enter without the permission of the residents of such a facility. 
(c)  If the control authority has been refused access to a facility or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article or that there is a need to inspect or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the control authority may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1018; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1019. - Confidentiality and proprietary information. 
(a)  Information and data on a facility or any other entity, collected pursuant to this article shall be available to the public at least to the extent provided by article VII of this chapter. 
(b)  Any facility or other entity may claim information and data collected pursuant to this article to be confidential and proprietary to the extent permitted by article VII of this chapter, using the procedures specified thereunder. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1019; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1020. - Timing. 
    All written reports, applications, and any other such material required by those regulated under this article shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked, faxed or hand delivered to the recipient. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1020; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1021. - Fees and expenses. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts charges, surcharges, and fees for application, operation, enforcement, administration, and reimbursement of costs incurred pursuant to this article, to be established by separate ordinance. 
(b)  A permit fee shall be paid before any permit, including a renewal permit, is issued. 
(c)  A renewal permit fee shall be due on the expiration date of the previous permit. 
(d)  Any permittee violating any of the provisions of a permit, the city's ordinances or state law, and causing damage to or inhibiting the POTW with its grease discharge shall be liable for any expense, loss, or damage caused to the city by such violation. The city shall bill the permittee for the costs incurred by the city for any cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by the violation. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall be cause for termination of water and sewer service. Additionally, an administrative fee equal to one-half of assessed cleanup costs may be levied by the city against the guilty party. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1021; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1022. - Violation. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person or facility to discharge into the POTW in any manner that is in violation of this article. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person causes or permits the plugging or blocking of, or otherwise interferes with or permits interference with a grease interceptor or the POTW, including alteration or removal of any flow constricting devices so as to cause flow to rise above the design capacity of a grease interceptor. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person or facility, whether the facility holds a permit under this article or not, to discharge grease in excess of 500 mg/l to the POTW. 
(d)  Any person or facility who violates any provision of this article, or who fails to comply with any provision hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $2,000.00 for each violation. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(e)  A refusal by a facility discharging grease into the POTW to pay a fine or comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be a violation and shall subject the facility to termination of water and sewer service, in addition to any other fines and/or penalties as may be provided by city ordinances. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1022; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1023. - Additional remedies; remedies not exclusive. 
(a)  The control authority may suspend water or sewer service when such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which: 
(1)  May present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment; 
(2)  Causes stoppages or excessive maintenance to be performed to prevent stoppages in the POTW; 
(3)  Causes interference to the POTW; or 
(4)  Causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES or TPDES permit. 
(b)  Any person or facility notified of a suspension of water or sewer service shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a failure to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take all such necessary steps to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or sewer connection or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall reinstate the water or sewer service when such conditions causing the suspension have passed or been eliminated. A detailed written statement submitted by the facility describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within 15 days of the date of occurrence. 
(c)  The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The control authority may take any legally authorized actions against a noncompliant permittee or facility discharging grease into the POTW. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1023; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Sec. 106-1024. - Authorization. 
    The control authority is authorized to promulgate such rules and procedures as shall be reasonable and necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter according to its terms and intent, including the setting of any additional fees. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1024; Ord. No. 12-2012, § 1, 3-6-2012) 
Secs. 106-1025-106-1038. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - MUNICIPAL SETTING DESIGNATION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal setting designations, Texas Health and Safety Code § 361.801 et seq. 

Sec. 106-1039. - Findings. 
    The city council makes the following findings: 
(1)  There are areas of shallow groundwater within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction that are not usable as potable water sources; 
(2)  Commercial and industrial properties exist in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction underlain with unusable groundwater that have become contaminated by historical on-site or off-site sources; 
(3)  The city does not utilize groundwater as a source for public drinking water; 
(4)  The use of municipal setting designations within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction allows for a state-evaluated corrective action process for groundwater that is directed toward protection of human health and the environment balanced with the economic welfare of the citizens of the city; and 
(5)  Where public drinking water is available, the use of groundwater as a potable water source in designated areas should be prohibited to protect public health and welfare when the quality of the groundwater presents an actual or potential threat to human health. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1039; Ord. No. 23-2008, § 1, 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 106-1040. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affected community means those persons entitled to notice in section 106-1044(a)(3). 
    Applicant means the owner of the land seeking an MSD. 
    Authorized representative means, for purposes of signing an application, if the applicant is a corporation, the president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; if the applicant is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively; if the applicant is a limited liability company, the manager; and if the applicant is a local government, the chief executive officer or his authorized designee. 
    Chemical of concern means any chemical that has the potential to adversely affect ecological or human receptors due to its concentration, distribution, and mode of toxicity. 
    Director means the director of public works, or other employee designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this chapter, or the director's designated representative. 
    Environmental risk assessment means the qualitative and quantitative evaluation performed in an effort to define the risk posed to human health and/or the environment by the presence or potential presence and/or use of contaminants as defined in Texas Health and Safety Code § 361.801(1), as amended. 
    Groundwater means water below the surface of the earth. 
    Municipal setting designation (MSD) means a designation as provided by Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 361, subchapter W, which authorizes the executive director of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) to certify municipal setting designations in order to limit the scope of or eliminate the need for investigation of or response actions addressing contaminant impacts to groundwater that has been restricted from use as potable water by ordinance or restrictive covenant. 
    Potable water means water that is used for irrigating crops intended for human consumption, drinking, showering, bathing, or cooking purposes. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1040; Ord. No. 23-2008, § 1, 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 106-1041. - Use of groundwater in MSD areas as a potable water source prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person intentionally, knowingly, or with criminal negligence uses groundwater in a MSD area as a potable water source. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person intentionally, knowingly, or with criminal negligence uses groundwater in a MSD area for a purpose prohibited in the ordinance creating that MSD. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1041; Ord. No. 23-2008, § 1, 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 106-1042. - Application for city council approval of MSD. 
(a)  A person, excluding the city, seeking city council approval of a MSD for an area within the corporate limits of the city, or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall apply in writing, with the number and format of copies, as determined by the director. 
(b)  An application shall contain: 
(1)  The applicant's name and address, and the name, address, daytime telephone number, and email address of a contact person and the licensed professional who prepared the application; 
(2)  The location and legal description of the proposed outer boundaries of the MSD area for which designation is sought; 
(3)  A copy of the application with the executive director of the TCEQ for a MSD for the area; 
(4)  A statement as to whether a public drinking water supply system exists that satisfies the requirements of Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 341 and that supplies or is capable of supplying drinking water to the area for which the MSD is sought, and property within one-half mile of the area for which the MSD is sought; 
(5)  A description of the groundwater sought to be restricted, including the identified chemicals of concern therein and the levels of contamination known to the applicant, and the identified vertical and horizontal extent of the contamination. If the applicant has not documented groundwater contamination offsite that originates from the area for which an MSD is sought, the application shall include a statement as to whether contamination more likely than not exceeds a residential assessment level offsite and the basis for that statement; 
(6)  Identification of the persons responsible for the contamination of the groundwater, if known; 
(7)  A listing of: 
a.  All state-registered private water wells within five miles from the boundary of the area for which the designation is sought, including a notation of those wells that are used for potable water purposes (if known), and a statement as to whether the applicant has provided the owners with notice as provided in Texas Health and Safety Code § 361.805; 
b.  Each retail public utility, as that term is defined in the Texas Water Code, that owns or operates a groundwater supply well located not more than five miles from the area for which the MSD is sought, and a statement as to whether the applicant has provided the retail public utilities with notice as provided in Texas Health and Safety Code § 361.805; and 
c.  Each municipality, other than the city, with a boundary located not more than one-half mile from the area for which the MSD is sought; or that owns or operates a groundwater supply well located not more than five miles from the area for which the MSD is sought; and a statement as to whether the applicant has provided the municipalities with notice as provided in Texas Health and Safety Code § 361.805; 
(8)  A site map, drawn to scale, including a metes and bounds description of the proposed MSD area, the boundary of the proposed MSD area, the location of groundwater on the proposed MSD area, and the extent of groundwater contamination to the limits that it has been defined. The map shall include a statement by a professional land surveyor registered by the Texas Board of Professional Surveying attesting to the accuracy of the metes and bounds description; and 
(9)  Any other information that the director deems pertinent. 
(c)  The application shall be signed by an authorized representative of the applicant and shall contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in a manner designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(d)  An application shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  A set of printed mailing labels with the names and addresses of persons listed in subsection (b)(7) of this section; 
(2)  An electronic file of the names and addresses of persons listed in subsection (b)(7) of this section, in a format acceptable to the director and compatible with city information systems; and 
(3)  A nonrefundable application fee as established by separate ordinance and actual Wichita County recording fees. 
(e)  An applicant may withdraw its application only in writing by letter sent certified mail, return receipt requested, to the director, and shall forfeit the application fee. If the director has not issued public notice prior to the receipt of the withdrawal letter, the applicant may reapply at any time. If public notice has issued, a new application is subject to limitations of section 106-1047. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1042; Ord. No. 23-2008, § 1, 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 106-1043. - Staff review. 
(a)  For purposes of the times stated in this article, an application is deemed to have been received on the date that the application was actually received by the director, as indicated by the file date stamped on the application by the Department of Public Works. 
(b)  Upon receiving an application for a MSD, the director will distribute a copy to his designee within public works and to the city's Health Department and Planning Department for staff review. The purpose of the review is to determine whether the application is complete, and whether any current or future city property or other interests have the potential to be impacted by the proposed MSD. City staff shall not conduct an environmental risk assessment of the application. 
(c)  City staff must send a written report to the director within ten calendar days of receiving the application noting any discrepancies in the application, and advising of any city interests that may potentially be impacted by the proposed MSD. 
(d)  If after staff review the director determines that the application is incomplete, he will return the application to the applicant, noting the deficiencies in writing. The applicant shall have 30 days from the date of the deficiency letter to correct the deficiencies and resubmit the application. If the applicant fails to submit a corrected application within the allotted time, the application shall be deemed to be withdrawn and the application fee forfeit. 
(e)  If the director determines that the application is complete, he will schedule a public meeting and a public hearing. The public meeting must be held prior to the public hearing. 
(1)  A public meeting will be scheduled approximately 45 days following the day the application was received; and 
(2)  A public hearing of the city council will be scheduled approximately 60 days following the day the application was received. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1043; Ord. No. 23-2008, § 1, 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 106-1044. - Notice of public meeting and public hearing. 
(a)  Notice of the public meeting and the public hearing on a MSD application may be combined and must include the date, time and location of the two events, the identity of the applicant, the location and legal description of the area for which the MSD is sought, the purpose of the MSD, the type of contamination identified in the groundwater of the area for which the MSD is sought, and a statement that a copy of the application is available for public viewing at the Department of Environmental Services. Notice will be made as follows: 
(1)  The director will publish notice of a public meeting and a public hearing for a proposed MSD in the official newspaper of the city, not less than 15 days before the public meeting; 
(2)  The director will request that the city secretary post the notice at city hall, in a place readily accessible to the general public at all times, not less than 15 days before the public meeting; and 
(3)  The director will provide written notice of a public meeting and a public hearing for a proposed MSD, not less than 15 days before the date of the public meeting by properly addressed and regular postage paid, in the United States mail. Notice will be mailed to: 
a.  The applicant; 
b.  The list provided by the applicant pursuant to section 106-1042(b)(7); 
c.  All owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the subject property, as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll. 
(b)  The director will direct the posting of at least one sign upon the area for which a MSD has been requested. Posting shall be in the same manner as zoning amendments. The signs must state that an MSD has been requested for the area and that additional information can be acquired by telephoning the number listed thereon or visiting the web site address listed thereon. The erection and/or the continued maintenance of any such sign shall not be deemed a condition precedent to the holding of any public meeting or public hearing or to any official action concerning the MSD application. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1044; Ord. No. 23-2008, § 1, 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 106-1045. - Public meeting. 
(a)  The purpose of a public meeting is for the applicant to provide information to the affected community about MSDs and the application and to obtain input on the application prior to a formal hearing before the city council. 
(b)  The public meeting will be held in the evening at a location convenient to the affected community. 
(c)  The applicant or its representative must appear at the public meeting. If the applicant fails to appear at the public meeting either in person or by representative, the application shall be deemed withdrawn and the application fee forfeited. 
(d)  The director will conduct the meeting, giving the applicant or its representative the opportunity to present its reasons for requesting an MSD, and giving members of the affected community the opportunity to ask the applicant questions or make oral comments on the application. 
(e)  The director will make a tape and/or video recording of the public meeting available for the public. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1045; Ord. No. 23-2008, § 1, 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 106-1046. - City council public hearing. 
(a)  Prior to the public hearing, the director will provide the city council a copy of the application, and a written report summarizing the request for the MSD approval, any staff comments, and minutes of the public meeting. 
(b)  The applicant or its representative must appear at the public hearing and present the request for an MSD approval. If the applicant fails to appear at the public hearing, the application shall be deemed withdrawn and the application fee forfeited. 
(c)  Persons wishing to speak either in favor of or against the application will be provided the opportunity in accordance with city council guidelines for public hearings. 
(d)  If approving an application, the city council shall: 
(1)  Adopt a resolution supporting the application to be presented to TCEQ; 
(2)  Enact an ordinance prohibiting the potable use of designated groundwater from beneath the MSD area. The ordinance must include a metes and bounds description of the MSD area to which the ordinance applies; a listing of the contaminants; and a statement that the ordinance is necessary because the contaminant concentrations exceed Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) potable water standards; 
(3)  Place other reasonable restrictions on the use of designated groundwater and including, but not limited to, specification of underground construction materials to be used in the MSD area. 
(e)  City council approval of an application shall not be deemed to waive the city's right to comment on an MSD application that has been filed with the Executive Director of the TCEQ as provided by Texas Health and Safety Code § 361.805. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1046; Ord. No. 23-2008, § 1, 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 106-1047. - Limitation on reapplication. 
    If after the public hearing the city council disapproves an application, or if the applicant has withdrawn its application after public notice has issued, no new MSD applications for the proposed MSD area shall be accepted by the city or scheduled for a public hearing by the city council within a period of 12 months of the date of disapproval or withdrawal. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1047; Ord. No. 23-2008, § 1, 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 106-1048. - Additional requirements. 
(a)  A person who has received approval of an MSD from the city, shall upon issuance from the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), provide the director with a copy of the certificate of completion or other documentation issued for the MSD area, showing that response actions, if required, have been completed. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if they fail to provide the director with the documentation required in subsection (a) of this section, within 30 days of its issuance by the TCEQ. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1048; Ord. No. 23-2008, § 1, 4-15-2008) 
Secs. 106-1049-106-1064. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - STORMWATER QUALITY 

Sec. 106-1065. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Construction activity means activities subject to TPDES Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
    Department means the Department of Public Works of the City of Wichita Falls, Texas or an authorized representative thereof. 
    Director means the director of the department. 
    EPA means U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Hazardous materials means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illegal discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drainage system, except as exempted in this article. 
    Industrial activity means activities subject to TPDES Industrial Permits, as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14). 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system or MS4 means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) that are: 
(1)  Owned or operated by the federal government, state, municipality, township, county, district, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state or federal law) including special district under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage districts, or similar entity, or a designated and approved management agency under section 208 of the Act that discharges into surface waters of the state; 
(2)  Designed or used for collecting or conveying solely stormwater; 
(3)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(4)  Not a part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit means a permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drainage system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Notice of intent or NOI means the notice of intent that is required by the NPDES Stormwater Multi-Sector General Permit, the EPA Region 6 NPDES Stormwater Construction general permit, or any similar general permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity that is issued by the EPA or the TCEQ. 
    Person means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
    Pollutant. The term "pollutant" includes the following substances: 
(1)  Used motor oil, antifreeze, or any other motor vehicle fluid; 
(2)  Industrial waste; 
(3)  Hazardous waste, including hazardous household waste; 
(4)  Domestic sewage or septic tank waste, grease trap waste, or grit trap waste; 
(5)  Solid waste, including yard wastes, refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations; 
(6)  Wastewater from: 
a.  A commercial carwash facility; 
b.  Any vehicle washing, cleaning, or maintenance at any rental agency, body shop, repair shop, or maintenance facility; or 
c.  Any washing, cleaning, or maintenance of any business or commercial or public service vehicle, including a truck, bus, or heavy equipment, by a business or public entity that operates more than two such vehicles; 
(7)  Wastewater from the washing, cleaning, de-icing, or other maintenance of aircraft; 
(8)  Wastewater from commercial floor, rug, or carpet cleaning; 
(9)  Wastewater from the washdown or other cleaning of any pavement where any spill, leak, or other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum or hazardous substance has occurred, unless all harmful quantities of such released material have been previously removed; 
(10)  Effluent from an emissions scrubber, emissions filter, or the blowdown from a boiler; 
(11)  Ready-mixed concrete, mortar, ceramic, or asphalt-based material or hydromulch material, or material from the cleaning of commercial vehicles or equipment containing, or used in transporting or applying, such material; 
(12)  Filter backwash from a public swimming pool; 
(13)  Public swimming pool water containing total residual chlorine of one mg/l or more or containing any harmful quantity of muriatic acid or other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the swimming pool water or in pool cleaning; 
(14)  Paints, varnishes, and solvents; 
(15)  Oil and other automotive fluids; 
(16)  Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers, except as runoff from land to which the same was applied in conformity with manufacturer-recommended concentrations; 
(17)  Wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; 
(18)  Noxious or offensive matter of any kind; and 
(19)  Any substance or material that will damage, block, or clog the MS4. 
    Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved. 
    Storm drainage system means publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, rivers, and other drainage structures. 
    Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan means a document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
    Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or TPDES means the program delegated to the State of Texas by the EPA pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b). 
    TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or its successor agency. 
    TPDES means the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
    Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1050; Ord. No. 41-2010, 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 106-1066. - Prohibitions of illegal discharges and illicit connections. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged into the storm drainage system any pollutant or waters containing any pollutant. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to continue any discharge water suspected of containing a pollutant into the storm drainage system after notification by the city's Department of Public Works that the wastewater has been reasonably determined by such department to contain a pollutant. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to introduce or cause to be introduced into the storm drainage system any discharge that causes or contributes to causing the city to violate a water quality standard, the city's TPDES permit, or any state-issued discharge permit for discharges from the city's MS4. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to introduce or cause to be introduced into the storm drainage system any harmful quantity of sediment, silt, earth, soil, or other material associated with clearing, grading, excavation or other construction activities in excess of what could be reasonably retained on site or captured by employing sediment and erosion control measures in accordance with a person's required NPDES permit, TPDES permit, or applicable state or federal requirements. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to discharge used motor oil into the storm drainage system, a septic tank, surface water, groundwater, or watercourse. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to mix or commingle used motor oil with solid waste and: 
(1)  Leave said solid waste in a facility that is intended for city waste pickup; or 
(2)  Dispose of said solid waste in the city landfill. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful to apply used motor oil to a road or land for dust suppression, weed abatement, or other similar use that introduces used motor oil into the environment. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful to construct, use, or maintain any of the following connections to the storm drainage system: 
(1)  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drainage system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and washwater to enter the storm drainage system and any connections to the storm drainage system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by any government agency; or 
(2)  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drainage system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records submitted to and approved by the city. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1051; Ord. No. 41-2010, 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 106-1067. - Permitted discharges into storm drainage system. 
    It shall be an exception to prosecution pursuant to this article that a discharge into the storm drainage system was one or more of the following: 
(1)  Water line flushing (excluding discharges of hyperchlorinated water, unless the water is first dechlorinated and discharges are not expected to adversely affect aquatic life); 
(2)  Runoff or return flow from landscape irrigation, lawn irrigation, and other irrigation utilizing potable water, groundwater or surface water sources; 
(3)  Discharges from potable water sources; 
(4)  Diverted stream flows; 
(5)  Rising groundwaters or springs; 
(6)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration; 
(7)  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
(8)  Foundation and footing drains; 
(9)  Air conditioning condensation; 
(10)  Water from crawl space pumps; 
(11)  Individual residential vehicle washing; 
(12)  Flows from wetlands and riparian habitats; 
(13)  Swimming pool discharges from pools that are not open for public use; 
(14)  Street washwater; 
(15)  Discharges or flows from firefighting activities; 
(16)  Washwater from the cleaning of new or used vehicles awaiting sale; 
(17)  Other allowable non-stormwater discharges listed in 40 CFR 122.26(d)(2)(iv)(B)(l); 
(18)  Non-stormwater discharges that are specifically listed in the TPDES multisector general permit or the TPDES construction general permit; and 
(19)  Other similar occasional incidental non-stormwater discharges, unless the TCEQ develops permits or regulations addressing those discharges. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1052; Ord. No. 41-2010, 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 106-1068. - Suspension of access to the storm drainage system. 
(a)  The department may, without prior notice, suspend, block or terminate a discharge or threatened discharge into the storm drainage system when such suspension, blockage or termination is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the health or welfare of any person. Upon such termination, the department shall, to the extent feasible, place notice of such suspension, termination or blockage on the affected property. 
(b)  The department may, with prior notice placed on the property of the alleged violator and opportunity for hearing, suspend, block or terminate a discharge or threatened discharge into the storm drainage system when such suspension, blockage, or termination is necessary or appropriate to stop or reduce a substantial danger of a discharge that would violate this article or cause the city to potentially violate its NPDES or TPDES permit. 
(c)  If the city takes action to terminate access to the city's storm drainage system, any affected property owner may file a written request with the department for reconsideration and hearing related to the termination. 
(d)  If the city terminates access to the storm drainage system, then, in the absence of authorization from the department, it shall be unlawful to reconnect access of a terminated property to the storm drainage system or allow the continuation of such reconnected access. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1053; Ord. No. 41-2010, 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 106-1069. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
(a)  A person who is the operator of an industrial facility or construction activity of one acre or larger commits an offense if the person discharges, or causes to be discharged water into the storm drainage system without first having obtained a NPDES or TPDES permit to do so unless said person is exempt from the requirements of an NPDES or TPDES permit. 
(b)  Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES or TPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. The department may suspend, block or terminate access to the storm drainage system unless a property owner submits a copy of all documentation determined by the department to be necessary to prove that an operator of an industrial or construction activity is complying with the terms of the aforementioned permit. 
(c)  An operator of a facility who is required to have a NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity shall submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) to the department at the same time the operator submits the original notice of intent to TCEQ. It shall be unlawful to operate a facility that is discharging stormwater associated with industrial activity without having submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the department. 
(d)  An operator of a facility who is required to have a NPDES or TPDES permit shall maintain a copy of its stormwater pollution prevention plan on-site or sign indicating where the plan may be obtained. An operator must be able to present it to a representative of the department upon request at any time during regular office hours of the operator. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1054; Ord. No. 41-2010, 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 106-1070. - Monitoring of discharges. 
(a)  This section applies only to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with: 
(1)  Industrial activity; or 
(2)  Construction activity exceeding one acre in size. 
(b)  Representatives of the department shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the department. 
(c)  Facility operators shall allow the department ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties, as defined by state and federal law. 
(d)  The department shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the department to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(e)  The department may require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as it deems to be necessary to ensure the facility complies with its NPDES and/or TPDES permit. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(f)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the department and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator of the facility. 
(g)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the department access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the department reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(h)  If the department has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the department is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of citizens, then the department may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(i)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any owner or operator of a facility or construction site has information of any known or suspected release of materials which result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into the storm drainage system, then said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall notify emergency response agencies and the department of the occurrence within 24 hours after said person's discovery thereof. The owner or operator of the facility or construction site shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence for at least three years following the release event. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1055; Ord. No. 41-2010, 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 106-1071. - Administrative enforcement. 
(a)  In addition to other available remedies, if the department finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the department may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution, contamination hazards, and other violations of this article; 
(5)  The restoration of any affected property; and 
(6)  Payment of the cost of restoring damaged parts of the city's storm drainage system. 
(b)  Any person receiving a notice of violation may file a written appeal of such determination to the director of the department. The notice of appeal must be received by the director within ten calendar days from the date of the notice of violation. After receiving such written notice of appeal, the director shall give the recipient of the notice of violation an opportunity for a hearing on the violations. 
(c)  If the violation has not been corrected within seven days after the notice of violation or, in the event of a valid appeal, within seven days of the decision of the director upholding the decision of the department, then representatives of the department may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth in this section. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1056; Ord. No. 41-2010, 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 106-1072. - Nuisance, abatement, and lien. 
(a)  Failure of a property owner or facility operator to comply with a notice of violation issued pursuant to this article is deemed to be furtherance of: 
(1)  An unwholesome situation; 
(2)  A condition that may produce disease; 
(3)  The presence of impure or unwholesome matter; 
(4)  Objectionable, unsightly, and unsanitary matter; and 
(5)  A public nuisance. 
(b)  If the owner of property in the municipality does not comply with a municipal ordinance or requirement under this chapter within seven days of notice of a violation, the department may: 
(1)  Do the work or make the improvements required; and 
(2)  Pay for the work done or improvements made and charge the expenses to the owner of the property. 
(c)  In performing or contracting for the aforementioned work or improvements, the department must comply with the procedures established in Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.006, as amended. After following such procedures, the department may assess the expenses of such work against the real estate on which the work is done or improvements are made in accordance with Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.007, as amended. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1057; Ord. No. 41-2010, 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 106-1073. - Penalty and injunction. 
(a)  Violation of a provision of this article is declared to be a violation of an ordinance involving health and safety. Accordingly, it shall be punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00 per violation and as provided by section 1-14. 
(b)  If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the city attorney may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations of this article or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Code 2001, § 106-1058; Ord. No. 41-2010, 8-3-2010) 
Chapter 110 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, adopted Nov. 1, 2016, amended Ch. 110 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 110, §§ 110-16, 110-17, 110-33-110-41, 110-52-110-76, 110-86-110-91, 110-101-110-115, 110-126-110-129, 110-138 and 110-150-110-160, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 2001, §§ 110-1-110-10, 110-21-110-45, 110-55-110-60, 110-70-110-84, 110-95-110-98, 110-107 and 110-117-110-127; Ord. No. 71-2010, § 1, adopted Dec. 21, 2010; Ord. No. 10-2013, § 1(110-27), § 2(110-32), § 3(110-55), § 4(110-117), adopted Feb. 19, 2013. 
State Law reference- Regulation of vehicles for hire, Texas Local Government Code § 215.073. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 110-1-110-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of vehicles for hire, Texas Local Government Code § 215.073. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 110-16. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means a person who is applying for a franchise certificate. 
    City chauffeur's license means a license to operate a taxicab issued to an individual by the director pursuant to this chapter. 
    Conviction means a conviction in a federal court or a court of any state or foreign nation or political subdivision of a state or foreign nation that has not been reversed, vacated, or pardoned. A plea of guilty or no contest to a judge in a deferred adjudication is considered a conviction. 
    Curb means the raised edge of the street, driveway or other public or private way upon which a taxicab is operating, provided that if no raised edge curbing exists, then it means the edge of the area that is paved for vehicular operation. 
    Director means the director of the Department of Aviation, Traffic and Transportation or his designee. 
    Franchise means an agreement between the city and another entity, under which said entity is granted the privilege of operating a taxicab service inside the city for a specific period of time and in accordance with the specific terms and conditions of the agreement. 
    Franchise holder means any person who obtains a franchise from the city. 
    Operate means to drive or to be in control of a taxicab. 
    Operator means the driver or operator of a taxicab. 
    Primary facility means a fixed facility from which the primary administrative operations of the taxicab services are conducted and at which taxicabs are parked, stored, repaired, or maintained, and where all taxicab service documents are stored. 
    Taxicab means a chauffeured motor vehicle used to transport persons for compensation on property on which the city possesses an ownership interest, that operates on irregular routes, irregular schedules, or on a call-and-demand basis. 
    Taxicab inspector means the director or his designee whose duties include taxicab inspections. 
    Taxicab service means a passenger taxicab transportation service pursuant to Texas Local Government Code § 215.004(a), as amended, that is operated for hire that uses one or more taxicabs in the operation of the service. 
    Taxicab stand means a public place reserved exclusively for use by taxicabs. 
    Taximeter means a device that computes a fare based upon the distance traveled, the time the taxicab is engaged, and any other basis for charges which are specified in the operating authority or rate ordinance pertaining to the holder. 
    Waiting time means such time as may be consumed or lost at the special instance and request of a passenger, after such passenger has first engaged and entered a taxicab to make a trip, and before reaching his final destination. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-17. - Taxicab service. 
    It is the city's policy to provide for and to promote adequate and efficient taxicab service in the city. To this end, this article provides for the regulation of taxicab rates and services, to be carried out in a manner that protects the public health and safety, promotes the public convenience and necessity, and respects the concept of free enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Secs. 110-18-110-32. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FRANCHISE CERTIFICATES 

Sec. 110-33. - Required; franchise. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate a taxicab in the city except under authority of a franchise for taxicab service granted by the city. 
(b)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution pursuant to this section that the vehicle alleged to be a taxicab: 
(1)  Operates only on the basis of appointments that are pre-arranged at least one hour before the time transportation is to begin; 
(2)  Is used exclusively for medical transport; 
(3)  Is used exclusively to take passengers to or from a single facility pursuant to a long-term contract with the owner of said facility; 
(4)  Is a bus with a capacity for nine or more passengers; or 
(5)  Is a vehicle used solely for passengers who do not pay for the cost of each trip. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-34. - Qualifications for franchise holder. 
(a)  To apply for a franchise, an applicant must have a representative who is: 
(1)  At least 18 years of age; 
(2)  Currently authorized to work full-time in the United States; and 
(3)  Able to communicate in the English language. 
(b)  The city shall not issue a franchise to an applicant if, as it applies to the applicant: 
(1)  One or more of the following entities has been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude and five years has not elapsed since the conviction and completion of any sentences, parole, or probation that resulted from the conviction: 
a.  The applicant; 
b.  Any of the applicant's owners or officers; 
c.  Any of the applicant's partners, if the applicant is a partnership; 
d.  Any of the applicant's managers or members who have authority to make decisions on behalf of the entire company, if the applicant is a limited liability company; 
e.  Any of the applicant's directors, if the applicant is a corporation or other entity with directors; 
f.  Any of the applicant's trustees, if the applicant is a trust; or 
g.  Any owner of all or part of a primary facility or any taxicab utilized by the applicant. 
For purposes of this subsection (b)(1), a person shall be considered convicted if they entered into a deferred adjudication or otherwise entered a plea of guilty or no contest. 
(2)  One or more of the following entities owes delinquent fees or taxes to the city: 
a.  The applicant; 
b.  Any of the applicant's owners or officers; 
c.  Any of the applicant's partners, if the applicant is a partnership; 
d.  Any of the applicant's managers or members who have authority to make decisions on behalf of the entire company, if the applicant is a limited liability company; 
e.  Any of the applicant's directors, if the applicant is a corporation or other entity with directors; 
f.  Any of the applicant's trustees, if the applicant is a trust; or 
g.  Any owner of all or part of a primary facility or any taxicab utilized by the applicant. 
This subsection (b)(2) shall not apply to the extent the city is prohibited by state or federal law from considering the debt in authorizing a permit or other governmental benefit. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-35. - Franchise application. 
(a)  Every entity proposing to operate a taxicab service in the city shall make application, in writing, in the form promulgated by the director, requesting that the city grant it a franchise certificate to operate a taxicab service under this article. The application shall be filed with the director, setting forth full and complete information on the following matters: 
(1)  The name of the applicant and all other identifying information required by the director. 
(2)  The number of vehicles and a general description of the vehicles the applicant proposes to use in the operation of the taxicab service; a description of the operations of the proposed taxicab service; and location of the primary facility and other fixed facilities to be used in the operation of the taxicab service. 
(3)  A description of the proposed insignia and color scheme for the applicant's taxicab and description of any distinctive items of apparel to be worn by the applicant's taxicab drivers. 
(4)  The person signing the application shall indicate his position with the company as individual owner, partner or corporate officer authorized to sign the document. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-36. - Investigation of application. 
    The director shall obtain a criminal background check on each applicant and its officers and owners. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-37. - Determination on application; requirement for issuance. 
(a)  The director shall review the application and conduct such investigation as he deems appropriate. 
(b)  If the director finds that the requirements of this article have been complied with, he shall grant the franchise by ordinance. Once granted, the franchise shall remain in effect for a period of five years from the date granted or such lesser time as determined by the director. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-38. - Transferability. 
    A franchise issued pursuant to this division may not be transferred to another unless the proposed transferee and new transferor file a written application for the transfer with the director, and the transfer application is approved by the director upon a satisfactory criminal background check of new owner. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-39. - Revocation of franchise. 
(a)  A taxicab franchise is revocable by the director after written notification to the franchise holder and a hearing before the director in which the director finds that such franchise holder is in violation of this article or other laws and the violation warrants revocation. After revocation of a franchise certificate, a franchise holder is not eligible for a franchise certificate for a period of two years. 
(b)  A person whose application for renewal, amendment, or supplemental vehicles is denied, or whose operating authority is revoked or suspended may appeal, in writing, to the city manager or his designee not later than the 30th business day after notice of the denial, suspension or revocation is mailed to the applicant. 
(c)  The city manager shall issue a decision on the appeal not later than the 30th day after receipt of the written appeal. 
(d)  A person whose application for renewal or amendment is denied, or whose operating authority is revoked or suspended may not operate a ground transportation service during the pendency of an appeal. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-40. - Annual franchise fee. 
    The franchise holder shall pay an annual franchise fee to the director. Such fee must be paid at the time of the issuance of the franchise and on or before the first business day of each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Secs. 110-41-110-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATION OF FRANCHISE 

Sec. 110-52. - City chauffeur's license and Sheppard Air Force Base access required. 
(a)  An operator for a franchise holder may not drive a taxicab in the city without a valid city chauffeur's license and the right to provide taxi services to the interior of Sheppard Air Force Base. 
(b)  A taxicab franchise holder shall not employ or contract with a driver or otherwise allow a person to drive for hire a taxicab owned, controlled, or operated by the franchise holder unless the driver: 
(1)  Has a valid city chauffeur's license issued under this article that was sponsored by said franchise holder; and 
(2)  Has a valid right to provide taxi services to the interior of Sheppard Air Force Base. 
(c)  Prior to allowing a driver to operate a taxicab, the franchise holder shall provide the director with a copy of the Sheppard Air Force Base pass for said driver. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-53. - Holder's and driver's duty to comply. 
(a)  In the operation of a taxicab service, a franchise holder shall comply with the terms and conditions of the franchise holder's franchise and, except to the extent expressly provided otherwise by the city, shall comply with this chapter, regulations established under this chapter, and other laws applicable to the operation of a taxicab service. 
(b)  While on duty, a driver shall comply with this chapter, regulations established under this chapter and other laws applicable to the operation of a motor vehicle in this state. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-54. - Franchise holder's telephone number. 
    A franchise holder may not advertise more than one local telephone number and one toll free telephone number for its taxicab service in the city. A franchise holder's dispatch personnel shall answer calls to any telephone number provided for the franchisee 24 hours per day, seven days per week. A franchise holder may not utilize an answering service to answer telephone calls to its advertised numbers. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-55. - Franchise holder's duty to enforce compliance by drivers. 
(a)  A franchise holder shall establish policy and take action to discourage, prevent, or correct violations of this chapter by drivers who are employed by or contracting with the franchise holder. 
(b)  A franchise holder shall not permit a driver who is employed by or contracting with the franchise holder to drive a taxicab if the franchise holder knows or has reasonable cause to suspect that the driver has failed to comply with this chapter, the rules and regulations established by the director or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-56. - Driver as independent contractor. 
(a)  A franchise holder may contract with a driver on an independent-contractor basis. The driver must comply with this chapter. 
(b)  The franchise holder is responsible for the independent contractor's actions and activities as set forth pursuant to this article as he would be for any of his other drivers. The franchise holder's insurance policy must insure and cover the independent contractor's taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-57. - Insurance; taxicabs. 
(a)  Before a vehicle permit is issued to operate a taxicab in the city, the franchise holder shall procure and furnish to the director and shall thereafter keep in full force and effect a liability and property damage insurance policy of not less than the greater of the following: 
(1)  The minimum requirements of the state or federal law; or 
(2)  At least $100,000.00 per accident for injuries and at least $50,000.00 per accident for property damage. 
(b)  Every insurance policy shall insure all of the taxicabs owned, leased, contracted for or controlled by the holder of such franchise and used in such taxicab service for which a franchise has been authorized. Such policy shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property caused by the operation of such vehicles. 
(c)  Every such policy of insurance shall be issued by an insurance company organized and existing under state laws or having a legal right to do business in the state. 
(d)  The franchise holder shall keep current insurance certificates covering all of its vehicles on file with the director during the term of the franchise and shall cause evidence of insurance for each of its vehicles to be continuously kept in the glovebox of each said vehicle. Insurance certificates and policies shall name the city as an additional insured, provide the city with at least 30 days' notice of cancellation, nonpayment of premium, or non-renewal, and include a waiver of subrogation in favor of the city. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-58. - Apparel to be worn by drivers. 
    Each franchise holder shall have uniform dress standards for drivers employed by or contracting with the franchise holder. These standards must be kept on file with the director and must include the following: 
(a)  A driver may not wear: 
(1)  Cut-offs; 
(2)  Apparel with offensive or suggestive language; 
(3)  Tank tops; 
(4)  Halter tops; 
(5)  Outer apparel made of fishnet or undergarment material; or 
(6)  Unhemmed shorts. 
(b)  Shoes must be worn at all times in the manner for which they were designed. A driver may not wear shoes or sandals without socks or hosiery and may not wear beach or shower thongs. 
(c)  A driver and the driver's clothing must conform to basic standards of hygiene and be neat, clean, and sanitary at all times. 
(d)  A driver's hair must be clean and neatly groomed. Facial hair must be neatly trimmed. 
(e)  A franchise holder must require that all of its drivers wear shirts with collars. These shirts must be of the same color and design. Each franchise will have a separate color and design for drivers' shirts, and must be approved by the director. Each franchise holder must ensure that its drivers wear the franchise-specific shirt. Each driver shall wear a shirt specified by the franchise holder while on duty. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-59. - Franchise holder's records and reports. 
    Each franchise holder shall maintain at its primary facility all business records of its taxicab service related to pick-up and drop-off locations, as well as when and where each specific driver worked. The director may specify methods used in maintaining the records, and may require maintenance of certain records which he determines are necessary for monitoring the activities, operations, service, and safety record of a franchise holder. A franchise holder shall make its records available for inspection by the director at reasonable times upon request. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-60. - Citywide taxicab service required. 
    Except as otherwise provided by the franchise holder's operating authority, a franchise holder shall: 
(a)  Provide taxicab service to the general public to and from any point inside the city that is accessible by public street, except that this provision does not require a franchise holder to subject a taxicab to mob violence or destruction; 
(b)  Answer each call received for service inside the city as soon as practicable, and if the service cannot be rendered within one hour, the franchise holder shall inform the caller of the reason for the delay and the approximate time required to answer the call; 
(c)  Provide taxi service 24 hours each day, seven days a week; 
(d)  Provide service to all parts of Sheppard Air Force Base and Wichita Falls Regional Airport that are accessible by paved roadways. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-61. - Representation of availability of taxicab. 
    A driver may not represent that his taxicab is engaged when it is in fact vacant, or vacant when it is in fact engaged. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-62. - Refusal to convey passengers by taxicabs. 
(a)  While driving a taxicab, a driver shall not refuse to convey a person who requests service unless: 
(1)  The person is disorderly; 
(2)  The driver is engaged in answering a previous request for service; 
(3)  The driver has reason to believe that the person is engaged in unlawful conduct; or 
(4)  The driver is in fear of his personal safety. 
(b)  While driving a taxicab, a driver shall not refuse service requested by a radio dispatch when the location for pick up is within a reasonable distance from the location of the taxicab. 
(c)  A driver for a franchise holder may not refuse to accept a passenger who is disabled nor may they charge a higher fee or additional fee to a person who is disabled, based upon the person's disability, use of a service animal, wheelchair, crutches, or other mobility assistive device. 
(d)  A driver is required to transport a service animal, wheelchair, crutches, or other mobility assistive device at the time of the service provided for that disabled passenger, provided that the driver can reasonably accommodate the aforementioned items with the taxicab. If a driver identifies a motorized wheelchair or mobility assistive device at the time of the call for service that may present difficulties with transport in some vehicles, then the franchise holder shall dispatch a vehicle that will accommodate the motorized wheelchair or mobility assistive device and transport said wheelchair and/or device at no additional charge to the disabled passenger. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-63. - Passenger limitations of taxicabs. 
(a)  A driver may not carry more persons than the designed seating capacity of the taxicab. A taxicab shall also not carry more than eight persons in addition to the driver. 
(b)  The director may establish rules governing passenger limitations, as illustrated by, but not limited to, cab sharing, cab pooling, and numbers of passengers with different destinations. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-64. - Carry passengers by direct route. 
    A driver shall carry a passenger to his destination by the most direct and expeditious route available unless otherwise directed by the passenger. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-65. - Solicitation of passengers by taxicabs. 
    A driver may not solicit passengers: 
(a)  From a location other than the driver's compartment or the immediate vicinity of the driver's taxicab; 
(b)  In a way that annoys or obstructs the movement of a person; 
(c)  By paying an employee of another business to solicit passengers for or give preferential treatment in directing passengers to the driver's taxicab; or 
(d)  Without using a taxicab stand at a location where a taxicab stand exists. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-66. - Regulations for use of taxicab stands. 
(a)  While using a taxicab stand, a driver shall not: 
(1)  Go beyond 25 feet of his taxicab except to assist a passenger as reasonably necessary after being engaged; 
(2)  Interfere with the orderly progression of taxicabs from the rear to the front of the taxicab stand; 
(3)  Perform or allow to be performed repairs or maintenance on a taxicab while parked on the taxicab stand; 
(4)  Interfere with a taxicab entering a taxicab stand on which there is a vacant space. 
(b)  A person shall not park a taxicab on a taxicab stand unless the taxicab is for hire. 
(c)  A taxicab left unattended in a taxicab stand is illegally parked and may be removed from the taxicab stand and impounded. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-67. - Conduct of drivers. 
    A driver shall: 
(1)  Act in a reasonable, prudent, and courteous manner; 
(2)  Maintain a sanitary and well-groomed appearance in compliance with this chapter; 
(3)  Not respond to a radio dispatch call assigned to another franchise holder; 
(4)  Not possess, consume, or be under the influence of an alcoholic beverage, narcotic drug, or other substance that could adversely affect the driver's ability to drive a motor vehicle; 
(5)  Not use tobacco products in a taxicab; 
(6)  Not monitor the radio frequency of a taxicab other than the driver's own nor respond to a call for service dispatched to another taxicab service; 
(7)  Not interfere with the director in the performance of the director's duties; 
(8)  Not refuse to discharge a passenger at any place designated by the passenger upon the streets of the city, except when the place so designated is unreasonably hazardous or illegal; 
(9)  Not sell or provide alcoholic beverages or controlled substances to any passenger in a taxicab; and 
(10)  Not use a cellular phone or any other hand held communication device while operating a taxicab except as necessary to receive or respond to the taxi service dispatch. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-68. - Limitations on hours of work. 
(a)  No driver permitted under this chapter shall drive more than 12 hours in any one consecutive 24-hour period. 
(b)  No franchise holder shall allow any driver permitted under this chapter to drive for more than 12 hours in any consecutive 24-hour period. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-69. - Duty to load or unload passengers at curb. 
    It shall be the duty of each taxicab vehicle to load or unload passengers at the curb. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-70. - Return of passenger's property. 
(a)  Upon finding property in a taxicab left by a passenger, the driver shall immediately return the property to the owner. However, if the driver is unable to locate the owner or if the driver does not know the identity or whereabouts of the owner, the driver shall make an immediate report of the property left in the taxicab to the franchise holder, and within a reasonable time, not to exceed two hours from discovery of the property, deliver the property to the franchise holder's primary facility. 
(b)  Upon return of property to the owner or delivery of property to the franchise holder, the driver shall prepare a written report stating the description of the property, the identity of the owner if known, the date the property was left in the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle, the circumstances relating to the loss, and the taxicab, limousine, or shuttle number. The franchise holder shall keep the report on file for at least one year and shall hold the property for not less than three months, at which time the franchise holder will turn the property over to the director, along with a copy of the driver's report. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-71. - Establishment of taxicab stands. 
(a)  Subject to the approval of the director, the city may establish taxicab stands of such character, number, and location as he determines are required by the public convenience and necessity. 
(b)  A franchise holder desiring the establishment of a taxicab stand must file a written request with the director. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-72. - Service regulations for business establishments requesting taxicabs for customers. 
    An employee of a business establishment, other than a taxicab service, who acts as an agent in obtaining taxicab service for prospective taxicab passengers shall not: 
(1)  Solicit nor accept payment from a driver in return for giving preferential treatment in directing passengers to a driver's taxicab; or 
(2)  Interfere with the orderly progression of taxicabs from the rear to the front of a taxicab stand. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-73. - Notification; not for hire status. 
    If a driver is not for hire and does not intend to provide taxicab service, the driver shall place a sign, to be provided by the franchise holder, in the front window on the right side of the taxicab displaying the words "NOT FOR HIRE" printed in letters not less than three inches in height with a stroke of not less than three-eighths-inch. The letters shall be on a backing of sufficient thickness to not easily bend. The driver shall also display the aforementioned sign when transporting an employee of the franchise or a government employee acting in an official capacity. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-74. - Taxicab fare collection procedures. 
(a)  Before changing the taximeter to indicate that the taxicab is vacant, a driver shall call the attention of the passenger to the amount of fare registered on the taximeter. 
(b)  Upon request by a person paying a fare, a driver shall give the person a legible receipt showing: 
(1)  The name and telephone number of the franchise holder under whose authority the taxicab is operated; 
(2)  The taxicab number; 
(3)  An itemized list of charges; 
(4)  The total amount of fare paid; 
(5)  The date of payment; and 
(6)  The driver's signature. 
(c)  A franchise holder shall provide each driver operating a taxicab under its authority with printed receipt forms adequate for providing the information required in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-75. - Driver inspections. 
(a)  Each operator shall inspect his taxicab before going on duty and after discharging each passenger to see that the taxicab is free of cigars, cigarettes, papers, bottles and anything that could cause offensive or objectionable odors. Each operator shall check the trunk to see that no articles have been left in the trunk after each passenger reaches his destination. Any passenger articles left in the taxicab should be discovered during this inspection and should be processed under the requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Each operator shall perform a pre-trip inspection of the taxicab he will use for that shift. The pre-trip inspection shall cover all safety items and cleanliness of the vehicle. The operator shall report all safety deficiencies to the franchise manager on duty, and those safety deficiencies shall be corrected before the taxicab is put into service for that shift. The operator shall retain the inspection form with the cab throughout the shift, present for inspection upon request by the chief of police or director if stopped during the course of its duties. At the end of the shift, the driver will perform a post-trip inspection using the same form. The completed form will be turned into the franchise holder for documentation. Inspection forms used by the franchise holders are subject to approval by the director. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Secs. 110-76-110-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TAXICAB RATES 

Sec. 110-86. - Rate schedule; authority to establish; measurement of distance. 
(a)  The maximum rates and fares that taxicabs may charge are as follows: 
(1)  Flag drop charge: $2.75 plus $0.45 for each fifth of a mile or fraction thereof traveled. 
(2)  For each one minute of waiting time during each trip: $0.42 per minute. 
(3)  Additional fare for passengers in excess of one: $2.00 per additional passenger. 
(4)  For trips originating at or within 300 feet of Sheppard Air Force Base and terminating non-stop at Sikes Senter Mall or Century City/Plaza, and for trips originating at Sikes Senter Mall or Century City/Plaza and terminating non-stop at or within 300 feet of Sheppard Air Force Base, a fixed rate of no more than $20.00 per trip shall be charged regardless of the number of passengers carried. 
(5)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit charges less than the above stated rates and fares. 
(b)  The per-mile surcharge shall be as follows: 
City of Wichita Falls 
Average Cost per Gallon of Fuel Per-Mile Surcharge $3.50 to $3.74 $0.20 $3.75 to $3.99 $0.30 $4.00 to $4.24 $0.40 $4.25 to $4.49 $0.50 $4.50 to $4.74 $0.60 $4.75 to $5.00 $0.70 $5.01 and above Approved by city council  
(c)  The city council shall have the right to change or establish the maximum rates and fares to be charged by taxicabs or vehicles used for public transportation in the city at any time it deems necessary. 
(d)  Any measurement of distance shall be made by the taximeter of the vehicle operating as a taxicab, provided that such taximeter shall have been inspected and tested for accuracy and shall be in good working order at the time such rate or fare is charged. 
(e)  The director may authorize alternate zone or trip-specific rates to be provided at the option of a customer. 
(f)  Regardless of the fare schedule set else in this section, a minimum taxi fare per ride shall be $5.00. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-87. - Request for rate change. 
(a)  Requests for an increase in taxicab rates will be submitted to the director for recommendation to the city council. It shall be the responsibility of the applicants for a rate change to coordinate the application and prove that the rate change is necessary to maintain safe and responsive public transportation. The application for a rate increase shall include at least the following: 
(1)  A cover letter stating the reason for the request of an increase in rates. 
(2)  Comparison of the operating conditions of the taxicab company to the taxicab industry over at least the past two years, to include: 
a.  Gross operating revenues; 
b.  Operating expenses; 
c.  Total miles operated; 
d.  Total paid miles operated; 
e.  Number of passengers carried; and 
f.  Total number of trips. 
(3)  A summary analysis of the items in subsection (a)(2) of this section identifying major operating expense changes necessitating the need for the rate change and the impact on the industry if such change is not granted. 
(b)  The city council will hold a public hearing within 60 days after receipt of the application for a proposed rate change from a majority of the franchise holders. 
(c)  All operational or financial data used in the analysis will be based on the city fiscal year of October 1 to September 30 or by the calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-88. - Fares. 
(a)  A taxicab driver shall not charge a fee in excess of that amount which is computed by the taximeter. 
(b)  A franchise holder may authorize a driver to make a flat-rate charge for a trip to a destination which is not covered in the franchise holder's approved rates of fare, outside the corporate city limits, if the taximeter is kept in operation while the taxicab has a passenger within the corporate city limits. 
(c)  No charge shall be made against a passenger for any time lost on account of any delay other than that which is defined as waiting time. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-89. - Refusal to pay legal fare; hiring taxicabs with intent to defraud. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any taxicab after having hired the taxicab, and it shall be unlawful for any person to hire any taxicab with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such service. Failure to pay the legal fare shall be presumptive of intent to defraud. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-90. - Joint trips. 
(a)  When a taxicab is not originally engaged for a joint trip, nothing in this article shall authorize the carrying of additional passengers without the consent of the passenger who first engaged the taxicab. 
(b)  When more than one passenger occupies a taxicab at the same time, nothing in this article shall prevent the passengers from dividing the cost of the trip in any manner that they may voluntarily agree upon. 
(c)  The maximum rates of this article are per trip; not per passenger. A driver shall not charge a total fare for operating a taxicab in the city that is in excess of the maximum rates set out in this article, regardless of the number of passengers. Notwithstanding, the additional per-passenger fee may be charged as provided in section 110-86. 
(d)  In the event two or more taxicab passengers are going to the same destination, the driver shall collect only one fare as recorded on the taximeter. If the passengers are going to different destinations, the driver shall clear his taximeter at the first destination and charge the first passenger the amount recorded on the taximeter, and then proceed to the next destination as though it were a completely new trip. Other destinations shall be treated likewise. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-91. - Design and testing of taximeters; fees. 
(a)  A taximeter must accurately register in legible figures on the basis of both mileage and time under the rates and charges established in this article. Figures denoting the fare must be illuminated when the meter is activated. 
(b)  A taximeter must be mounted in a conspicuous location in the taxicab in a manner approved by the director so that the face of the taximeter and the fare numerals may be easily seen and read by a passenger sitting in any part of the taxicab. A taximeter must be equipped to indicate whether the taxicab is engaged or vacant. 
(c)  If the taximeter employs a flag, the flag must project at least four inches above the dashboard when in the non-earning position. 
(d)  The taximeter or its drive system must be sealed at all points at which components, if manipulated, could affect the function or accuracy of the taximeter. 
(e)  The design of a taximeter is subject to approval by the director to ensure that it complies with this section. No taximeter shall be used on any taxicab the type and design of which has not been approved by the director. Before installing a taximeter, taxicab owners shall submit the type and design of taximeter to the director. If the taximeter is capable of properly and accurately computing and registering on its face the charge for the distance traveled by and the waiting time of the taxicab, then the director shall approve the taximeter. 
(f)  A franchise holder shall cause each taximeter in taxicabs operating under its authority to be maintained in good operating condition and to be tested and sealed at least once each year in accordance with state and city weights and measures laws. The director may establish a schedule of regular testing days and times for purposes of this section. The franchise holder shall submit any vehicle to the director for inspection prior to utilizing a vehicle with a newly installed taximeter. 
(g)  A person commits an offense if he operates or drives a taxicab that is: 
(1)  Not equipped with a taximeter; or 
(2)  Equipped with a taximeter that: 
a.  Does not have a current vehicle permit and lead seal authorized by the director; 
b.  Has been tampered with or altered; or 
c.  Incorrectly registers or computes taxicab fares because of alterations to the taxicab odometer, including, but not limited to, changes in the gears, tires, or wheels of the taxicab. 
(h)  Both the driver and the franchisee shall be responsible for a violation of subsection (g) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Secs. 110-92-110-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 110-101. - Vehicle permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate a taxicab unless its taximeter has been inspected by the city on an annual basis and the associated annual vehicle permit fee has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-102. - Vehicle permits; expiration. 
    All vehicle taximeter inspections expire on December 31 of the year in which they were issued. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-103. - False representation as taxicab. 
(a)  A person may not represent that a vehicle is a taxicab if the vehicle is not, in fact, a taxicab operated by a franchise holder authorized by the city via a franchise granted under this chapter. 
(b)  A person may not drive a vehicle in the city that is not a taxicab if the vehicle is marked, painted, or equipped in a way that is likely to result in mistaking the vehicle for a taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-104. - Vehicle requirements and inspections. 
(a)  Each franchise holder shall provide the director with a copy of the state-issued vehicle registration for each taxicab that the franchise holder wishes to operate. 
(b)  If, upon inspection, the taxicab inspector determines that a taxicab's meter is not working properly, the director may order the taxicab to be removed from service. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-105. - Required equipment for taxicabs. 
    In addition to other equipment required by this chapter, a franchise holder, owner, or driver shall provide and maintain in good operating condition the following equipment for each taxicab: 
(1)  Seat belts for each passenger, the number of which is determined by the designed seating capacity of the taxicab; 
(2)  Heater and air conditioner; 
(3)  Rates of fare cards or stickers; and 
(4)  Taximeter. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-106. - Lettering and signs. 
    Lettering and signs on taxicabs may be of adhesive decal or letters as approved by the director. If painted, they shall be in enamel or oil paint that will weather the elements and they shall be kept legible at all times. The lettering on all taxicabs owned or controlled by the same franchise holder shall be the same wording, color, size letters and at the same place on each taxicab for such service. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-107. - Required taxicab identification. 
    A franchise holder shall cause each taxicab operating under its authority to be provided with the following uniform vehicle identification: 
(1)  Every taxicab shall have stenciled or painted on the door of the cab the name of the owner or the assumed name under which the owner operates, together with the company's telephone number and the cab number. 
(2)  The number of the cab and the owner or the assumed name under which the owner operates shall be stenciled or painted upon the rear of any such vehicle. All such lettering shall not be less than 3 inches in height and not less than 5/16 -inch stroke, with such stencil or paint as will weather the elements. Such lettering, stencil and/or paint must be kept legible at all times. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-108. - Taxicab display receptacle. 
(a)  Every taxicab must have a display receptacle approved by the director securely affixed to a conspicuous place on the dashboard, as well as placed in a conspicuous location in the backseat. A display receptacle shall be at least 61/4 inches by ten inches in area, constructed of a rigid material, and designed to accommodate the following information in accordance with the required dimensions: 
(1)  At least a two-inch by two-inch colored passport-quality photograph of the driver, with the driver's name as it appears on the driver's state driver's license and the taxicab driver's license number placed under the photograph in block letters and numbers not less than 3/16 -inch high with at least a 1/16 -inch stroke, must be laminated as a single unit not less than 21/4 inches by 31/2 inches. 
(2)  The franchisee's full, legal name and trade name, address of the franchisee's primary facility, and the franchisee's 24-hour phone number in block letters not less than one-half-inch high with at least a one-eighth-inch stroke, with the taxicab number placed under it in block numbers and letters not less than three-quarter-inch high with at least a 3/16 -inch stroke, must be laminated as a single unit not less than three inches by 21/2 inches. 
(3)  Taxi rates in block numbers at least 9/16 -inch high with at least a 3/16 -inch stroke and in block letters at least 1/8 -inch high with at least a 1/32 -inch stroke must be laminated as a single unit not less than 61/2 by six inches. 
(4)  The city's website and information promulgated by the director providing an alternative location for complaints to be submitted concerning taxicab service. 
(b)  A franchise holder or driver of a taxicab commits an offense if he operates or allows operation of a taxicab that is equipped with: 
(1)  No required display receptacles; 
(2)  A display receptacle that does not contain required information; or 
(3)  A display receptacle that contains insufficient or incorrect information. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-109. - Removal of equipment from taxicabs. 
    Whenever a vehicle is removed from service or is no longer authorized to operate as a taxicab, the franchise holder, owner, or driver shall remove from the vehicle all taxicab signs, markings, and equipment that would distinguish the vehicle as a taxicab, including, but not limited to, radios, top lights, meters, and vehicle permits. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-110. - Authority to inspect. 
    The director and his delegates, to include the taxicab inspector, may inspect a taxicab service operating under this chapter to determine whether the service complies with this chapter, regulations established under this chapter, or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-111. - Removal of evidence of authorization. 
    Whenever a franchise holder's operating authority or a taxicab driver's license is suspended, revoked, or denied or whenever a vehicle fails to pass inspection as a taxicab, the director may remove or require the surrender of all evidence of authorization as a franchise holder, taxicab driver, or taxicab, including, but not limited to, removal or surrender of operating authority, licenses, vehicle permits, signs, insignia, radios, top lights, and meters if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-112. - Enforcement by Police Department. 
    Officers of the Police Department shall assist in the enforcement of this chapter. A police officer, upon observing a violation of this chapter or the regulations established by the director, shall take necessary enforcement action to ensure effective regulations of taxicab service. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Secs. 110-113-110-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 110-126. - Criminal penalty. 
(a)  Any business or person violating any prohibition, requirement, duty, or provision of this article shall be deemed to have committed a Class C misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed amounts prescribed in section 1-14. 
(b)  A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this article. A separate offense is committed each day in which an offense occurs. 
(c)  It is prima facie evidence that a taxicab is on duty and serving the general public for hire if there are two or more people in the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-127. - Administrative penalty. 
(a)  In lieu of or in addition to any criminal prosecution or other civil remedy for the violation of any section of this article, the director shall have the duty and authority to enforce this article by administrative action. 
(b)  The director may, after adequate investigation, issue a franchise holder a civil penalty of up to $500.00 per violation of any prohibition, requirement, duty, or provision of this article. A separate penalty may be issued each day a violation occurs. 
(c)  Failure to pay administrative penalties within 45 days from the date of notice of such penalties shall constitute a valid reason for revocation of the franchise by the city council and/or suspension of the franchise by the director. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-128. - Suspension. 
    The following regulations apply to the suspension of a franchise: 
(1)  The director may suspend a franchise if the director determines that the franchise holder: 
a.  Failed to comply with this article. 
b.  Intentionally or knowingly impeded the director, his staff, or other law enforcement officials in their duty or execution of their authority. 
c.  Does not qualify for a franchise under this article. 
(2)  Suspension of a franchise does not affect the expiration date of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-129. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Whenever a civil penalty or franchise suspension is issued by the director, the franchise holder shall be notified in writing of the penalty. Opportunity for a hearing will be provided if the franchise holder files a written request with the city manager within ten business days. The franchise holder shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within ten business days of a request for a hearing. If no request for a hearing is filed within ten business days, the administrative penalty or suspension is sustained and becomes final. 
(b)  A notice as required in this section is properly served when it is personally delivered to the franchise holder or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the franchise holder. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the city. 
(c)  The city manager, or his designee, shall conduct the hearings provided for in this section at a time and place designated by him. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the city manager shall make final findings and shall sustain, modify, or rescind said administrative penalties considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the franchise holder by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Secs. 110-130-110-137. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - FEES 

Sec. 110-138. - Established. 
    Fees shall be as established by separate ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Secs. 110-139-110-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY CHAUFFEUR'S LICENSE 

Sec. 110-150. - Qualifications for city chauffeur's license. 
    To qualify for a city chauffeur's license, an applicant shall: 
(1)  Be at least 18 years of age; 
(2)  Be currently authorized to work full-time in the United States; 
(3)  Hold a valid driver's license issued by the state; 
(4)  Be able to communicate in the English language; 
(5)  Not be afflicted with a physical or mental disease or disability that is likely to prevent the applicant from exercising ordinary and reasonable control over a motor vehicle or that is likely to otherwise endanger the public health or safety; 
(6)  Not have been convicted of more than four moving traffic violations arising out of separate transactions, or been involved in more than two automobile accidents in which it could be reasonably determined that the applicant was at fault during the preceding 36 months; 
(7)  Not have been convicted, placed on probation or deferred adjudication, or completed a sentence (including a term of probation or deferred adjudication) for any felony within the last five years or currently be on probation for any Class B or above misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, violence, or use of a motor vehicle; 
(8)  Not have been convicted of, or discharged by probation or deferred adjudication for, driving while intoxicated within the preceding 24 months more than one time within the preceding ten years; 
(9)  Not be addicted to the use of alcohol or narcotics; 
(10)  Be subject to no outstanding warrants of arrest; 
(11)  Be sanitary and well-groomed in dress and person in compliance with this chapter; 
(12)  Be currently sponsored by a franchise holder; said sponsorship must be in writing and said document must be given to director with the application; and 
(13)  Pay the city chauffeur's license application fee and complete a chauffeur's application form provided by director. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-151. - Investigation of application. 
(a)  Upon request of the director, the Police Department shall investigate each applicant and furnish the director a report concerning applicant's qualification under this chapter. 
(b)  No city chauffeur's license shall be issued to any person until the city performs a background check and a photograph is taken of such chauffeur's applicant. 
(c)  The director may conduct such other investigations as he considers necessary to determine whether an applicant for a city chauffeur's license is qualified. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-152. - Issuance or denial. 
(a)  If the director determines that an applicant is qualified, the director shall issue a city chauffeur's license to the applicant. 
(b)  The director shall delay until final adjudication the approval of the application of any applicant who is under indictment for or has charges pending for any offense listed in this article, or criminal attempt to commit any of those. 
(c)  The director may deny the application for a city chauffeur's license if the applicant: 
(1)  Is not qualified under this chapter; 
(2)  Refuses to submit to or does not pass a medical or written examination authorized under this article; or 
(3)  Makes a false statement of a material fact in his application for a city chauffeur's license. 
(d)  If the director determines that a license should be denied to the applicant, the director shall notify the applicant in writing that his application is denied and include in the notice the reason for denial. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-153. - Expiration of city chauffeur's license; voidance upon suspension or revocation of state driver's license. 
(a)  A city chauffeur's license expires on December 31 of the year it was issued. 
(b)  If a licensee's state driver's license is suspended or revoked by the state, his city chauffeur's license automatically becomes void. A licensee shall notify the director and the franchise holder for whom he drives within three days of a suspension or revocation of his driver's license by the state and shall immediately surrender his city chauffeur's license to the director. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-154. - Voidance upon loss of sponsor. 
    If the sponsoring franchise holder revokes its sponsorship of a holder of a city chauffeur's license in writing to the director, the city chauffeur's license becomes void immediately upon the director's receipt of the revocation. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-155. - Identification card requirements for taxi drivers. 
(a)  After the chief of police has verified an applicant's fingerprints and after the director has authorized issuance of a city chauffeur's license, the director shall issue the chauffeur's license to an applicant who has complied with the terms of this article. Said license shall contain a photo of the licensee and be on a form determined by the director. 
(b)  The driver shall conspicuously display a city chauffeur's license on the clothing of the driver's upper body when operating a vehicle for hire. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-156. - Display of license. 
    A taxicab driver shall allow the director, his delegated representative, or a peace officer to examine the driver's city chauffeur's license upon request. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-157. - Suspension and revocation of city chauffeur's license. 
(a)  If the director determines that a licensee has failed to comply with this chapter or a regulation established under this chapter, the director may suspend the driver's city chauffeur's license for a definite period of time not to exceed 60 days. 
(b)  If at any time the director determines that a licensee is not qualified under this article, or is under indictment or has charges pending for any offense involving driving while intoxicated or any offense involving a crime described in this article or criminal attempt to commit any of those offenses, the director shall suspend the city chauffeur's license until such time as the director determines that the licensee is qualified or that the charges against the licensee have been finally adjudicated. 
(c)  A licensee whose city chauffeur's license is suspended shall not drive a taxicab inside the city during the period of suspension. 
(d)  The director shall notify the licensee and the franchise holder, in writing, via certified mail or by hand delivery, of a suspension under this section and include in the notice the reason for the suspension, the date the director orders the suspension to begin, the duration of suspension or if it is under subsection (b) of this section, and a statement informing the licensee of a right of appeal. The period of suspension begins on the date specified by the director or, in the case of an appeal, on the date ordered by the appeal hearing officer. 
(e)  The director may revoke or suspend a city chauffeur's license if the director determines that the licensee: 
(1)  Operated a vehicle for hire or a taxicab inside the city a period in which the city chauffeur's license was suspended; 
(2)  Made a false statement of a material fact in an application for a city chauffeur's license; 
(3)  Violated any provision of this chapter; 
(4)  Engaged in conduct that could reasonably be determined to be detrimental to the public safety; 
(5)  Used, possessed, or was under the influence of any form of alcoholic beverage or narcotic, or drug while on duty as a driver of a vehicle for hire, whether or not such drug or narcotic is defined as a dangerous drug or as a controlled substance under state or federal law; 
(6)  Was convicted of any felony offense while holding a city chauffeur's license. 
(f)  A person whose city chauffeur's license is revoked shall not: 
(1)  Apply for another city chauffeur's license before the expiration of 12 months from the date the director revokes the license or, in the case of an appeal, the date the appeal hearing officer affirms the revocation; or 
(2)  Drive a vehicle for hire or a taxicab inside the city. 
(g)  The director shall notify the licensee in writing of a revocation and include in the notice the reason for the revocation, the date the director orders the revocation, and a statement informing the licensee of his right of appeal. 
(h)  After receipt of notice of suspension, revocation, or denial of license renewal, the licensee shall, on the date specified in the notice, surrender his city chauffeur's license to the director and discontinue driving a taxicab inside the city. 
(i)  Notwithstanding subsections (c) and (h) of this section, if the licensee appeals the suspension or revocation under this section, the licensee may not continue to drive a taxicab pending the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-158. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Whenever a city chauffeur's license denial, suspension or revocation is issued by the director, the licensee shall be notified in writing of the decision. Opportunity for a hearing will be provided if the licensee files a written request with the director not more than ten business days after receiving notice of the director's action. The licensee shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within ten business days of receipt of a request for a hearing. If no request for a hearing is filed within ten business days, the denial, suspension or revocation is sustained and becomes final. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee shall act as the appeal hearing officer in an appeal hearing under this section. The hearing officer shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present evidence and make argument in his behalf. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing under this section, and the hearing officer shall make his ruling on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. 
(c)  The hearing officer may affirm, modify, or reverse all or part of the action of the director being appealed. The decision of the hearing officer is final. 
(d)  A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the licensee by the hearing officer. Such report is properly served when it is personally delivered to the licensee or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the licensee. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the city. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-159. - Falsifying a license. 
    A person commits an offense if he: 
(1)  Forges, alters, or counterfeits a city chauffeur's license; or 
(2)  Possesses a forged, altered, or counterfeited city chauffeur's license. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 110-160. - Current mailing address of licensee. 
    An individual issued a city chauffeur's license shall maintain a current mailing address on file with the director. The licensee shall notify the taxi inspector of any change in this mailing address within ten business days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Secs. 110-161-110-184. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 21-2017, § 1, adopted June 20, 2017, repealed article IV, §§ 110-185-110-207, 110-221-110-235, which pertained to transportation network company service and derived from Ord. No. 46-2016, § 1, 11-1-2016. 

Secs. 110-185-110-235. - Reserved. 
Appendix A - SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the subdivision and development regulations of the city, as adopted by Ordinance Number 30-2003 on April 1, 2003. Ordinance Number 30-2003 repealed the former appendix A which pertained to the comprehensive subdivision ordinance of the city and derived from Ord. No. 2118, adopted September 28, 1964; Ord. No. 2308, § 1, adopted March 2, 1967; Ord. No. 2386, §§ 1-3, adopted Jan. 22, 1968; Ord. No. 2485, § 1, adopted Feb. 18, 1969; Ord. No. 2506, §§ 1-3, adopted June 17, 1969; Ord. No. 2516, §§ 1-4, adopted July 15, 1969; Ord. No. 2522, § 1, adopted Aug. 19, 1969; Ord. No. 2572, § 1, adopted Feb. 17, 1970; Ord. No. 2589, §§ 1-4, adopted May 19, 1970; Ord. No. 2745, adopted Nov. 7, 1972; Ord. No. 2752, § 2, adopted Nov. 7, 1972; Ord. No. 2767, §§ 1-4, adopted Feb. 20, 1973; Ord. No. 3197, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 7, 1977; Ord. No. 3190, adopted June 16, 1977; Ord. No. 3339, adopted July 12, 1978; Ord. No. 3380, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 3, 1978; Ord. No. 3448, §§ 1-4, adopted April 3, 1979; Ord. No. 3535, adopted Sept. 4, 1979; Ord. No. 3578, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 4, 1979; Ord. No. 3579, adopted Dec. 4, 1979; Ord. No. 3693, §§ 1-5, adopted July 1, 1980; Ord. No. 3738, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 7, 1980; Ord. No. 69-84, adopted June 5, 1984; Ord. No. 77-84, adopted July 3, 1984; Ord. No. 110-84, adopted Sept. 18, 1984; Ord. No. 137-84, adopted Nov. 20, 1984; Ord. No. 52-85, § 1, adopted May 21, 1985; Ord. No. 64-85, §§ 1-3, adopted June 18, 1985; Ord. No. 104-86, § 2, adopted Dec. 16, 1986; Ord. No. 44-87, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 5, 1987; Ord. No. 85-87, § 3, adopted Sept. 1, 1987; Ord. No. 91-87, adopted Sept. 15, 1987; Ord. No. 85-89, §§ 1-3, adopted Nov. 21, 1989; Ord. No. 134-93, adopted Dec. 5, 1993; Ord. No. 113-97, adopted Nov. 4, 1997; and Ord. No. 58-99, § 1, adopted July 6, 1999. Amendments to Ordinance Number 30-2003 are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the Ordinance Number 30-2003. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Charter reference- Authority to adopt subdivision rules and regulations, § 146. 

Sec. 1. - Authority, purpose and extraterritorial application. 
A.  The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the orderly, safe and healthful development of the area within the city and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city and to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community. 
B.  This ordinance shall apply inside the corporate city limits and within two levels within the extraterritorial jurisdiction. Level one shall be along corridors and areas identified on a map approved by the city council, made a part of this ordinance and referred to herein by reference, as the areas most likely to experience growth in the nearest future. Level two-Development Authority shall be within the remaining areas of the extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
C.  The limits of level one and level two will be subordinate to any past or future agreements between jurisdictions that define or redefine the boundaries of the extraterritorial jurisdiction and that would affect the boundar[ies] of level one or level two. 
D.  The boundaries describing the limits of levels one and two are subject to periodic review and may be adjusted by the city council. 
E.  Should a development or improvement be partially within either levels of development, the most restrictive standards shall apply to the entire development or improvement. 
F.  Inside the city limits and within levels one and two, there shall under all situations be a plat filed with the city if located within the certificate of convenience and necessity (CCN) area, and/or where there exist a contract between outside water providers and the city. Such plat shall be provided to the Planning Division in conformance with requirements therein and herein as applicable. 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. 
    Alley. An "alley" is a minor public right-of-way, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a public street. 
    Applicant. An "applicant" is any person or any agent thereof establishing a lot of record or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as that term is defined herein. In any event, the term "applicant" shall be restricted to include only the owner, equitable owner or authorized agent of such owner or equitable owner of land sought to be subdivided. 
    Block. A "block" shall be the property fronting on a street between street intersections or 1,200 feet, whichever is less. Where a street intersects only one side of a block, that side of the street shall be calculated in determining the block regardless of an intervening street. 
    Board of adjustment. The "board of adjustment" is the board of adjustment of the City of Wichita Falls, Texas, pursuant to Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
    Border lines. "Border lines" are water or sewer lines that abut one or more sides of a subdivision, but which serve other land as well as the land in such subdivision. 
    Building setback line. The "building setback line" is the line within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building or structure and the property line. 
    City. Unless otherwise stated herein, "City" shall be city departments, and boards and commissions having purview over these regulations as applicable. "City" may also refer to the area contained within the boundary limits of the City of Wichita Falls. 
    Commission. The "Commission" is the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    Comprehensive plan. The "comprehensive plan" is a plan of the city, adopted by the city council and as may be amended from time to time, that may include details related to growth, development, and city resources. 
    Cul-de-sac. A "cul-de-sac" is a minor street having but one vehicular access to another street and terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
    Dead-end street. A "dead-end street" is a street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet. 
    Development or developed. The term "developed" or "development" shall refer to those situations where water, sewer, streets or other utility, including stormwater provisions, are installed according to standards under this regulation or as may be required. 
    Easement. An "easement" is an interest in land recorded for record that may be granted to a public, quasi public or private entity for installing and maintaining utilities, across, over or under private land together with the right to enter thereon, with machinery and other vehicles necessary for the maintenance of said utilities and that may include areas designated for access to an easement where a utility is located. An easement shall also include those areas reserved for other use that may include ingress and egress, drainage and other such utility. 
    Engineer. An "engineer" is a person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Registration Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice the profession of engineering. 
    Extraterritorial jurisdiction. Area outside of a city as defined by Texas Local Government Code ch. 42. 
    Governmental unit. A "governmental unit" shall be the city, county, state or federal government, or other political subdivision of the state authorized to accept dedications for streets, easements and/or utilities. 
    He. Use of the term "he" shall not be construed as gender specific. 
    Improvement(s). An "improvement" shall be the construction of any structure or site element above the natural grade or additions to or modifications of any such structure or site element. This provision shall also include parking lots. 
    Level of development. "Level of development" shall refer to levels one and two as defined herein. 
    Level one and level two. "Level one and level two" shall refer to the application of standards within areas defined on a map, approved by the city council, and by reference made a part of this ordinance. 
    Lot. A "lot" is an undivided tract or parcel of land which is, or in the future may be, offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement; which is designated as a distinct and separate tract, and which is identified by a tract, lot number, or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been approved by the Commission and properly filed for record. All lots shall provide dedicated access to a public street sufficient for the projected traffic generated by the proposed development, with the exception of lots for single and/or two family residential development which shall have frontage on a public street. 
    Lot of record. A "lot of record" is a tract of land legally recorded as a plat with the land records of the county. 
    Master plan. A "Master plan" is a comprehensive concept plan to show the development of domestic water, sanitary sewer utilities, and storm water drainage within a proposed subdivision. The applicant's master plan shall have documentation to describe the methodology intended to be used along with the preliminary plans with sufficient analyses to verify that the requirements of the city ordinances can be addressed. 
    On-site lines. "On-site lines" are water or sewer lines within a subdivision, or water or sewer lines abutting one or more sides of a subdivision that serve only land in such subdivision. 
    Pavement width. The "pavement width" is the portion of a street available for vehicular traffic; where curbs are laid, it is the portion between the faces of curbs. 
    Person. A "person" is an individual, association, firm or corporation. 
    Plat. A "plat" shall refer to both preliminary and final plats and shall be determined by the section in which it appears. 
    Plat, final. A "final plat" is a plat prepared by a licensed surveyor or registered engineer, bearing the same requirements as a preliminary plat, in the absence of a preliminary plat, and/or in accordance with requirements herein, which is duly acknowledged by the owners, proprietors and those that have interest in the land, or by some duly authorized agent of such owners, proprietors and interest, in the manner required for the acknowledgment of deeds or as required herein and which is to be filed for record in the office of the county clerk of the county or counties in which the land lies. 
    Plat, minor. "Minor plat" is a final plat of four or fewer lots, and not requiring the creation of any new street, or the extension of municipal facilities. 
    Plat, preliminary. A "preliminary plat" is a tentative drawing made by a licensed surveyor or registered engineer for inspection purposes only, showing the entire tract of land sought to be subdivided, accurately describing all of said subdivision or addition by metes and bounds, locating the same with respect to an original corner of the original survey of which it is a part and giving dimensions thereof of said subdivision or addition, and dimensions of all streets, alleys, squares, parks or other portions of same intended to be dedicated to public use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto. 
    Public improvements. A public improvement is any water system, sewer system, or drainage system intended to be used by the public, and excepted by the Public Works Department. 
    Public right-of-way. A "public right-of-way" is a strip of land used, or intended to be used, wholly or in part, as a public street, alley, walkway or drainage way. 
    Residence. A building intended to be or is occupied as the dwelling place of one or more persons in which the use and management of sleeping quarters and all appliances for cooking, ventilating, heating, or lighting are under one control, and which shall include one- and two-family dwellings, apartment houses, boardinghouses and mobile/manufactured homes. 
    Shall, may. The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is discretionary. 
    Streets. A "street" is a public right-of-way or private access which provides vehicular access to adjacent land, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, avenue, lane, boulevard, road, place, drive, expressway, freeway, or however otherwise designated where such designation or classification may be shown on the most recent thoroughfare plan. 
(1)  An "arterial street" is one used primarily to provide circulation to various sections of the city. 
(2)  A "collector street" is one used primarily to provide circulation within the neighborhood, to carry traffic from minor streets to arterial streets or to carry traffic through or adjacent to commercial, industrial or high population density areas such as large apartment developments. 
(3)  A "marginal access street" is a minor street which is parallel and adjacent to an arterial street and which is used primarily to provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(4)  A local street is primarily to provide access for residential or commercial traffic. The street use discourages through-traffic where such traffic does not have origin or destination within respective residential or commercial areas. 
a.  A "Local residential street" is a public road used primarily for access to abutting residential property. 
b.  A "Local commercial street" is a public road used primarily for access to abutting non-residential property. 
    Subdivision. A "subdivision" is the division of any tract of land into two or more parts. Subdivision includes resubdivision. For the purpose of this ordinance, a single lot plat shall be considered a subdivision. 
    Surveyor. A "surveyor" is a person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Registered Public Surveyors Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice the profession of public surveying. 
    Tank battery. A "tank battery" shall generally consist of multiple tanks used for the containment or storage of fuels or fuel products or by-products. A single tank may also be considered a tank battery. 
    Thoroughfare plan. The "thoroughfare plan" is intended to address future development by reserving rights-of-way to support development, and shall be a plan adopted by the city council, and may be amended from time to time, that reflects the existing, future or functional classification of all streets, roads and highways indicated therein and the standards associated with right-of-way and paving width. 
    Words not expressly defined herein are to be construed in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices. 
(Ord. No. 20-2018, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 3. - Platting process and conditions. 
3.1  General. 
A.  Whenever an applicant desires to create a subdivision within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction, he shall plat the property, construct the required site improvements, and meet all of the other requirements of this ordinance at the applicant's expense. 
B.  No subdivision of land shall occur as to make or create a situation as to make any part of the resulting tract, parcel or lot nonconforming or without access. 
C.  No preliminary plat shall be submitted concurrently with a final plat. This may be waived on agreement by the Director of Community Development and the Director of Public Works. 
D.  A presubmittal meeting with city staff shall be required when a proposed subdivision is more than five lots. 
3.2  Plat required. 
A.  Whenever the owner(s) of platted lot(s) within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction proposes to construct or has constructed a structure that crosses a lot line or has violated setback requirements, such owner shall replat the lots in accordance with this ordinance. 
B.  Whenever the owner of a tract of land, within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction, which has not been platted proposes to sell such tract in part, to obtain a site plan for said tract pursuant to Appendix B of this Code, or to construct or expand any building or other structure thereon, or to connect said tract with any water or wastewater utility, he shall plat such tract in accordance with this ordinance. Even though he plats such tract in whole or in part as a single lot, he shall be required to dedicate the required boundary street right-of-way for the entire original tract as it exists prior to the plat, and comply with all other applicable requirements of this ordinance if shown on the thoroughfare plan, in the metropolitan transportation plan or as required by the county. Provided, however, the owner will not have to plat the tract if such tract was subdivided from a larger tract no later than December 31, 1927. However, if the tract was subdivided from a larger tract on or after September 28,1964, the larger tract must be platted to show the smaller tract as a lot therein. 
Under the above condition, the dedication of right-of-way along a remaining unplatted tract or parcel, where the original parcel, tract or lot was unplatted, will not require the platting of the remainder of the tract or parcel if there is no provision of municipal or other services required for the remaining tract. 
3.3  Sequence of approval. Unless otherwise provided for by this ordinance, an application for plat approval shall not be considered filed until: 
A.  A preliminary plat of such property has been approved or conditionally approved by the Commission and all conditions or preliminary plat approval have been satisfied and approved by the Planning Department or via submittal of a final plat; and, 
B.  All public improvements required pursuant to this section have been constructed by the applicant and approved by the city, or secured by the applicant through an approved financing mechanism (i.e. irrevocable letter of credit) in an amount approved by the Director of Public Works. 
If desired by the applicant, a final plat may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat proposed to be recorded and developed, provided such portion conforms to all requirements of this section and that the phases of development are indicated. 
3.4  Platting assistance. Prior to the official submittal of a preliminary plat of more than five lots, the applicant shall meet, consult with and present a proposed plan of subdivision to the Planning Division and Public Works for comments and advice on the procedures, specifications and standards required by the city for the subdivision of land, and who may use the services of other city departments as required. 
3.5  Fees. At the time an applicant applies for approval of a preliminary plat or final plat or replat, he shall pay to the city, through the Planning Division, a fee to cover the costs of reviewing and processing the plat as provided below. The area for revised preliminary plats shall be determined by the area changed from the previous submission. This fee shall be in addition to other fees required by the city. Fees shall be established as provided in the development fee ordinance adopted by the city council, which may from time to time adjust and revise the fees established, without amending this section. 
3.6  Exceptions to platting or fees. 
A.  The following types of plats are specifically exempt from the payment of fees: 
1.  Plats submitted by the city or any of its departments. 
2.  Plats submitted by any governmental or educational agency. 
3.  Plats submitted to correct minor drafting errors in recorded plats. 
4.  Plats filed for the purpose of dedicating land to the city in which no other subdivision of land is shown. 
5.  Replats occasioned by governmental action. 
B.  The following situations are exempt from platting requirements: 
1.  Remodeling an existing structure without adding to the floor area. 
2.  Adding additional floor area or constructing accessory structures to an existing single-family or duplex residential use, when such addition or construction is less than 50 percent of the existing floor area and does not encroach over a utility line or easement and/or does not exceed a value equal to or greater than 50 percent of the tax appraised value of the improvement immediately prior [to] construction. 
3.  Divisions of land where all resulting tracts are (a) 5.00 acres or greater, and (b) each part has access, and (c) no public improvements, including water service, are required or being provided, and (d) no dedication of right-of-way. 
3.7  Submission requirements. 
A.  The applicant or his engineer or surveyor shall submit to the Planning Division: 
1.  A complete application; 
2.  Support documents including but not limited to separate instruments, deeds, easements, or other agreements; 
3.  Four black line copies of the plat; 
4.  A legible-after-reproduction 81/4-inch [by] 11-inch copy of the plat that includes all information contained on the full-size plat, with the exception of field notes, metes and bounds descriptions, and signature blocks; 
5.  A legible 81/4-inch by 11-inch or 11-inch by 17-inch electronic version of the plat including all information contained on the full-size plat in a format required by the Planning Division or Department of Public Works; and 
6.  A fee for reviewing and processing as prescribed by the department. 
B.  Following approval of a final plat by the city, a digital copy of the plat in a format required by the Planning Division and/or Department of Public Works shall be submitted with all corrections as required. If streets are proposed to be constructed in lieu of an escrow, a copy of the plat prior to filing will be required showing angle, bearings, distances, etc. 
C.  All plats must be received at least 28 days prior to the Commission meeting, or as determined by the posted schedule provided by the Planning Division at which they are to be considered for approval. 
D.  The plat shall be drawn on sheets 22 [inches] by 34 inches with a minimum three-quarter-inch binding margin on the left side of the sheet and one-quarter-inch margins on the other three sides. An alternative size may be considered by the Planning Division and/or Department of Public Works if legible in all respects and is compatible with archival requirements of the city. 
E.  The plat shall be drawn to a scale of 100 feet to one inch. Other scales may be considered by the Planning Division and/or Department of Public Works if legible in all respects and is compatible with archival requirements of the city. The Planning Division and/or Department of Public Works may require a reduced scale. When more than one sheet is necessary to accommodate the entire area, an index sheet showing the entire subdivision at an appropriate scale shall be attached to the plat. 
F.  Plats shall be signed and sealed by a registered state of Texas land surveyor in accordance with Texas state law. 
3.8  Plat processing. 
A.  A plat shall be considered "filed" if and when the application is certified complete by the Planning Department after having reviewed that all applications, fees, and documents have been submitted in accordance with this section, and such documents are sufficiently accurate and appropriate to the specific area proposed under the final plat application. 
B.  The Planning Division, Department of Public Works, Department of Parks and Recreation, Health Department, Fire Department, Traffic Division and others whose purview is sought shall check the plat as to its conformity with any plans, standards, and specifications set forth herein or referred to herein. 
C.  A copy of the plat shall be submitted by the Planning Division to various public, quasi-public or private entities that may have a real, tangible or service interest in the property, as approved by the city, to determine conformity with the standards and specifications for their interest. 
D.  The various entities shall return comments to the Planning Division with their recommendations or requirements as to modifications, additions or alterations of such plat if any. 
E.  The Planning Division shall provide the applicant written recommendations, requirements, requested modifications, additions, or alterations of such plat if any. The applicant shall revise the plat and return the plats to the Planning Division for final review and prior to the Commission meeting. 
F.  All requirements and city recommendations will be presented to the Commission for their review and consideration at a scheduled meeting. These comments shall be considered part of the process required for approval unless the Commission acts to modify or remove such requirement unless prohibited from doing so. The Planning Division and/or Department of Public Works may authorize or require minor amendments to the plat to conform to the provisions of this section. 
G.  The Commission shall determine whether the lands are suitable for platting. The services of any department of the city may be utilized to this end. Land subject to flood or deemed to be topographically unsuitable because of relief, drainage, soil character or other conditions shall not be platted for any use which may increase the danger to health, life or property or aggravate erosion or flood hazard. 
H.  Within 30 days after the plat is formally filed, the Commission shall approve or disapprove such plat. 
(Ord. No. 20-2018, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 4. - Preliminary plat. 
4.1  General. Whenever an applicant desires to make a subdivision he shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat by a surveyor or engineer and, when required, site plans and declarations in accordance with this ordinance, and the Code of Ordinances as applicable. 
4.2  Changes to preliminary plats. If, after approval of a preliminary plat, changes thereto are required or desired, a revised preliminary plat shall be submitted following the same procedures as required for the original preliminary plat. 
4.3  Documentation required. 
A.  Completed preliminary plat application; 
B.  Applicant master plans approved by the City Engineer, in writing, when the development is more than five lots, or as required; and, 
C.  Any recorded separate instrument documents for any easements, agreements, right-of-way, or deed that traverses the property or as requested by the Property Management Division or Public Works Department. 
4.4  Plat content. The plat shall show the following: 
A.  Names and addresses and phone numbers of record owner(s), engineers and surveyor. 
B.  Proposed name of the subdivision that shall not have the same spelling as or be pronounced similar to the name of any other recorded subdivision located within the city or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction. The name shall appear at the top of the drawing and shall be the largest lettering on the plat. 
C.  Names of adjacent subdivisions and the owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land, and an indication of whether or not adjacent properties are platted. 
D.  Legal description of the subdivision by metes and bounds. 
E.  Primary control points or descriptions and ties to such control points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, block numbers and similar data shall be referred. 
F.  Subdivision boundary lines indicated by heavy lines and the computed acreage. 
G.  Existing sites as follows: 
1.  The location, name, description, and purpose of all existing or recorded streets, alleys, reservations, easements or other rights-of-way within the subdivision, intersecting or adjacent to its boundary or forming such boundary. Areas previously dedicated and shown on the plat shall be described by volume and page or document number if on file in official county records and have a statement shown in the affected area stating that it has been previously dedicated. 
2.  The location, dimensions, description, name, and purpose of all existing or recorded lots, easements and types, parks, public areas, permanent structures and other sites within or adjacent to the subdivision. 
3.  The location, sizes, dimensions, description and flow line of existing watercourses and drainage structures within the subdivision or adjoining tracts. In the event any portion of the subdivision lies within or abuts an officially designated floodplain and/or floodway, the delineation of such floodplain and/or floodway shall be clearly shown on all plats submitted for approval. 
4.  The location of existing structures if necessary to verify that a nonconforming situation has not been or will not be created. 
5.  All existing features, including, but not limited to, easements, transmission lines, etc., shall be shown by dashed lines. 
H.  The location, dimensions and description of all proposed streets, alleys, drainage structures, parks, other public areas, reservations, easements or other rights-of-way, lots and other sites and all rights-of-way and other public areas dedicated shall state within that area that the property is "proposed to be dedicated." The described shall also be in accordance with the city's adopted Comprehensive Plan, master thoroughfare plan, master utility plans, parks and trails master plan, or their successor documents. 
I.  Date of preparation, written and graphic scales of plat, and north arrow. 
J.  Topographical information shall include contour lines on two vertical feet intervals. 
K.  A number to identify each lot or site. Block numbers may be used. The Planning Division shall determine the applicability and the requirements for meeting this provision. 
L.  Front building setback lines on all lots and sites and side yard building setback lines at street intersections. 
M.  Location of city limits line and the outer border of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction if they traverse the subdivision, form part of the boundary of the subdivision or are adjacent to such boundary. 
N.  The location of any noise contour line, approach/departure clearance surface, inner or outer horizontal surface, conical or transitional surface or other such surfaces as required by the Planning Division and as applicable for Sheppard Air Force Base and/or Kickapoo Downtown Airport. 
O.  A vicinity map that shows the location of the project that shall show arterials and/or highways in the vicinity for reference. 
4.5  Preliminary plat approval. 
A.  Approval of a preliminary plat by the Commission shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the installation of streets, water, sewer and other required improvements and utilities and to the preparation of the final or record plat. Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute automatic approval of the final plat. The plat shall accurately locate all elements as required herein. The accuracy of such information shall be the responsibility of the property owner and/or his agent. 
B.  Approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for two years. 
C.  If no development has occurred which would affect the previously approved plat, prior to the end of the two years of effective approval, the Commission may, upon application of the, applicant extend the approval another two-year period without the submission of a new preliminary plat by voting an approval of the original preliminary plat. 
D.  A preliminary plat shall be revised if there are discovered to be constraints to the development as proposed on the preliminary plat. Should such constraints or obstacles be found, the Planning Division and/or Department of Public Works shall require the submission of an amended preliminary plat that recognizes, mitigates or otherwise allows for the effects of the constraint or obstacle as approved by the Planning Division and/or Department of Public Works. 
(Ord. No. 20-2018, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 5. - Final plat. 
5.1  General. Whenever an applicant desires to make a subdivision he shall cause to be prepared a final plat by a surveyor or engineer, appropriate site improvement plans, and complete the certificates prescribed in this section. If desired by the applicant, and following approval by the Planning Division and Department of Public Works, the final plat may consist of only that portion of the approved preliminary plat that he proposes to record at that time. However, such portion shall conform to all of the requirements of this section. A plat shall not be considered approved by the Commission unless it complies with all requirements herein. 
5.2  Documentation required . 
A.  Completed final plat application; 
B.  Any recorded separate instrument documents for any easements, agreements, right-of-way, or deed that traverses the property or as requested by the Property Management Division or Public Works Department. 
5.3  Plat requirements. 
A.  The final plat shall contain all of the features required for preliminary plats or as required by the Planning Division and/or Department of Public Works and it shall be accompanied by the following site improvement plans bearing the seal of an engineer: 
1.  Sanitary sewers. Detailed engineering plans of the proposed sewer facilities as required by the standard specifications. 
2.  Water. Detailed engineering plans of the proposed water facilities as required by the Department of Public Works. 
3.  Storm drainage. If within level one, detailed engineering plans of the proposed storm drainage facilities as required by the Department of Public Works. 
4.  Streets, curbs and gutters. If within level one, detailed engineering plans of the proposed streets, curbs and gutters as required by the Department of Public Works. [If] within level two detailed engineering plans of the proposed streets as required by the Department of Public Works. Determination of the need for curb and gutter within level two areas shall consider the density of existing development, plans or preliminary plats considered or approved within the last five years, and other such issues. A plat that includes both level one and level two areas shall require the submission of curb and gutter requirements for the entire development, or as required herein. 
B.  The final plat and the accompanying site improvement data shall be approved by the Director of Public Works. 
C.  Street dedications within level two, and those areas within level one shall be made to the county in which the street is proposed. The width of the required dedication shall be the greater width between the city and county requirements. 
D.  All lots shall be served by water, sewer, and public streets unless otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works. 
E.  Final plats that require a preliminary plat shall not be considered until there is an approved preliminary plat. 
5.4  Plat content. A. In addition to the requirements for the preliminary plat, the final plat shall also include the following: 
1.  The exact location, dimensions, name, description, and purpose of all existing or recorded streets, alleys, reservations, easements or other rights-of-way within the subdivision, intersecting or adjacent to its boundary or forming such boundary, with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflecting angles and radii, area, and central angle, degree of curvature, tangent distance and length of all curves where appropriate. Areas previously dedicated and shown on the plat shall be described by volume and page or document number if on file in official county records and have a statement shown in the affected area stating that it has been "previously dedicated." 
2.  The exact location, dimensions, description, name and purpose of all proposed streets, alleys, drainage structures, parks, other public areas, reservations, easements or other rights-of-way, residential lots, and other sites, with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflecting angles. These areas dedicated for public use shall state that they are "herein dedicated" within the area affected. 
B.  The final plat shall also include the following: 
1.  Owner's acknowledgment: 
"State of Texas       County of _______.   
The owner of land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, and in person or through a duly authorized agent hereby dedicates to the use of the public forever all streets, alleys, parks, watercourses, drains, easements and public places thereon shown for the purpose and consideration therein expressed and further warrants that he has lawful authority to make such dedications. 
_____
Owner  
State of Texas       County of _______   
Before me, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared ___________, known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he executed the same for the purposes and considerations therein expressed and in the capacity therein stated. Given under my hand and seal of office this _____ day of _______, 20___. 
_____
Notary Public, 
_______ County, Texas.  
2.  Certificate by director of public works: 
"The Director of Public Works of the City of Wichita Falls, Texas, hereby certifies that this subdivision plat conforms to all requirements of the subdivision regulations as to which his approval is required. 
_____
Director of Public Works  
3.  Approval of the Commission of the city: 
"This plat has been submitted to and considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Wichita Falls, Texas, and is hereby approved. 
Dated this _____ day of _______, 20___. 
By: _______ Chairman By: _______ Secretary  
OR 
In the case of a minor plat, approval by the director of community development: 
"This plat has been submitted to and considered by the City of Wichita Falls, Texas, under the terms and conditions of a minor plat and is hereby approved. 
Dated this the _____ day of _______, 20___. 
_____
Director of the 
Department of 
Community Development  
4.  Surveyor's certification: 
"I hereby certify that this plat has been prepared from an actual and accurate field survey of the land under my personal supervision on (date); and that all information shown is true and correct; and that all monuments shown thereon were properly placed under my personal supervision, in accordance with the subdivision regulations of the City of Wichita Falls, Texas. 
_____
Surveyor  
5.  A certificate from the city tax collector and from the proper official of all other taxing authorities within whose jurisdiction the proposed subdivision lies to the effect that all ad valorem taxes have been paid on the land included within the subdivision and that there are no recorded liens by any taxing authority. 
6.  Where any plat wholly or in part lies outside of the corporate limits of the city, and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction as defined by state law, a legible statement shall appear on the plat as follows: 
"The area indicated on this plat as outside of the City limits of Wichita Falls on the date of approval of this plat is within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Wichita Falls and subject to annexation." 
5.5  Processing of final plat. 
A.  No final plat will be considered unless a preliminary plat has been approved by the Commission. If circumstances prevail in which a single unplatted parcel may be platted into lots in only one obvious manner, no preliminary plat will be necessary. The Planning Department shall determine the necessity of preliminary plats in such cases. 
The director of community development may approve minor plats involving four or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities. The director of community development shall not disapprove such plat but refer any plat that he refuses to approve to the Commission. 
B.  A final plat of an approved preliminary plat or a portion thereof shall be submitted to the Commission within two years of the date of approval of preliminary plat, otherwise the approval of the Commission shall become null and void. 
C.  With the exception of minor situations or drafting errors authorized by the joint approval by the Department of Community Development and Department of Public Works, no changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in any final plat of a subdivision after approval has been given by the Commission and endorsed on the plat in writing, unless said change, revision or modification is first submitted to and approved by the Commission. Errors affecting existing ROW and easements shall be corrected and a new or revised plat shall be submitted to the Commission. 
D.  The director of public works shall certify by his signature on the final plat that all improvements required under this section have been completed prior to submittal of the final plat, or that one of the following types of guarantees has been furnished. If such a guarantee is furnished, it shall provide that all improvements shall be completed within 12 months, unless an extension of time is granted in writing by the director of public works for good cause. Such guarantees are as follows: 
1.  The applicant may furnish an approved surety, payable to the governmental unit authorized to accept surety, in an amount sufficient to cover the entire cost of such improvements as required herein, as estimated by the applicant and approved by a person authorized by the governmental unit. 
2.  The applicant may deposit cash, or other instrument readily convertible into cash at face value, either with the governmental unit, or in escrow with a bank. The use of any instrument other than cash, and, in the case of an escrow account, the bank with which the funds are to be deposited, shall be subject to the approval by the governmental unit. If an instrument readily convertible into cash is deposited with the governmental unit, it may be reduced to cash at the discretion of the governmental unit. The amount of the deposit shall be sufficient to cover the entire cost of the required improvements, as estimated by the applicant and approved by the governmental unit. In the case of an escrow account, the applicant shall file an agreement between himself and the bank guaranteeing that such funds shall be held in trust until released by the governmental unit, and may not be used nor pledged by the applicant as security in any other matter during that period; that in case of failure of the applicant to complete said improvements within the time specified, then the bank shall immediately make the funds in such account available to the governmental unit for use in the completion of such improvements. Provided, however, periodic payments may be made from the cash deposited with the governmental unit or from the escrow account for progressive payments of construction costs of the required improvements, which payments shall be based upon progress work estimates prepared by the applicant's engineer and approved by the governmental unit. 
3.  The applicant may provide, from a bank or other reputable financial institution approved by the governmental unit, a letter of credit, which is approved by the city attorney. Such letter of credit shall state that the creditor guarantees funds in an amount equal to the cost of constructing such improvements, as estimated by the applicant and approved by the governmental unit. In case of failure on the part of the applicant to complete such improvements within the specified time, the creditor shall pay to the governmental unit immediately, and without further action, such funds as are necessary to complete such improvements, such letter of credit may not be withdrawn, or reduced in amount, until released by the governmental unit. 
If one of such guarantees is furnished to the governmental unit by the applicant, it shall be filed with the governmental unit. 
4.  The applicant, at his option, may elect to, during the course of improvements, to deposit cash, or other instrument into cash at face value, either with the governmental unit or in escrow with a bank for the balance of improvements yet to be installed. The amount shall be sufficient to cover the cost of the remainder of the improvements. The estimate shall be provided by the applicant and approved by the governmental unit. 
E.  A final plat shall become void if there are discovered to be constraints to the development as proposed on the plat. Should such constraints or obstacles be found, the Planning Division and/or Department of Public Works shall require the submission of an amended plat that recognizes, mitigates or otherwise allows for the effects of the constraint or obstacle as approved by the Planning Division and/or Department of Public Works. A nonconforming condition shall also be considered a constraint or obstacle. 
F.  Once all conditions are provided and accepted by the Planning Division and Public Works the final plat shall be recorded with the county. A copy of the recorded plat shall be provided to the Planning Division. 
(Ord. No. 20-2018, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 6. - Standards, specifications and conditions. 
6.1  General. 
A.  Staking for the proposed street construction will be provided by a competent engineer in the employment of the applicant. 
B.  Upon completion of a street, drainage, water and/or sewer improvement as may be required, the respective governmental unit will inspect the finished work and provide the developer with a letter of approval. 
C.  No preliminary or final plat shall be approved by the Commission and no completed site improvements shall be accepted by the respective governmental unit unless they conform to requirements herein. 
D.  No final inspection shall be made or certificate of occupancy issued on a project unless all requirements under this regulation are installed and approved; and as defined by or under the requirements of the building permit and/or approved site plan unless approved or conditionally approved by the director of community development. The director of community development may require guarantees or commitments that development and/or improvements will occur within a specific time. 
E.  Conformity with the city's master plans. The subdivision shall conform to the city's comprehensive plan, utility master plans, thoroughfare plan, and parks and trails master plans, or their successor documents and the standard specifications, as applicable. 
F.  Provisions for future subdivisions. If a tract is subdivided into parcels larger than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged to allow the opening of future streets and logical future subdivisions. 
G.  Reserve strips prohibited. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to land dedicated or intended to be dedicated to public use. 
H.  Suitable building sites. Every lot must contain a suitable building site unless otherwise required by the city that a lot be identified for reference and legal description where such is open space, easement, or other such situation as required by the Planning Division, Department of Public Works, Department of Parks and Recreation or other administrative department of the city as applicable. 
I.  Suitability of land use. Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be used. 
J.  Level of development requirements. Should a development be within two development levels, the most restrictive standards shall apply. 
6.2  Streets. 
A.  General requirements for streets. 
1.  Street layout. Adequate streets shall be provided by the applicant, the arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of which shall conform to the most recent thoroughfare plan or as required herein and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to safety and convenience, and their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
2.  Relation to adjoining street system. Where necessary to the neighborhood pattern, existing principal streets in adjoining areas shall be continued and shall be at least as wide as such existing streets and in alignment therewith. 
3.  Projection of streets. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall make provision for the proper projection of streets into such unsubdivided areas. Dead-end streets are prohibited. 
Streets projecting into unsubdivided areas shall be provided with a cul-de-sac in accordance with standards herein. The Department of Public Works may consider and authorize a temporary cul-de-sac. Such temporary cul-de-sac shall be constructed in accordance with city standards and shown on the preliminary and final plat or by separate instrument. The length of a temporary cul-de-sac shall be no longer than allowed herein. The director of public works may approve a waiver of the requirement for a temporary cul-de-sac. 
4.  Street jogs. Street jogs, with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be allowed. 
5.  Half streets. No new half streets shall be constructed unless approved by the director of public works. The director of public works may only approve the construction of half streets that are arterial functional classification or are four-lane divided streets. 
6.  Street intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as practicable, giving due regard to terrain and topography. 
7.  Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 600 feet in length in residential areas and 900 feet in length in commercial and industrial areas and shall have a turn around right-of-way of not less than 100 feet in diameter in residential areas and not less than 200 feet in diameter in commercial and industrial areas unless otherwise allowed herein. 
The Planning Division, Department of Public Works and Fire Department shall evaluate the length and turn-around for each cul-de-sac by considering emergency access, density of residential, intensity of commercial, topography, sight distance, alternative access and other such issues. The above city departments shall have sole discretion to modify requirements herein in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare of the area and adjacent development and future development. 
8.  Access to arterial streets prohibited. Unless approved by the Directors of Community Development and Public Works, no residential subdivision shall be platted so that a residence fronts on or has direct access to an arterial street, highway, or highway frontage road. The directors may use the services of the metropolitan planning organization as necessary. 
9.  Main driveway opening on street. Each residential lot shall have the main driveway to the garage, carport, or off-street parking area opening on a local residential or collector street, except where the subdivision is platted to allow main driveway opening on the alley as provided herein. 
10.  Streets on thoroughfare plan. Where a subdivision embraces a street, as shown on the most recent thoroughfare plan, such street shall be platted in the location and of the right-of-way width indicated by the thoroughfare plan. Where a subdivision embraces an existing street or road not indicated on the thoroughfare plan, such street shall be platted in the right-of-way width indicated herein. 
11.  Local residential streets. Local residential streets shall be laid out as to discourage their use by through traffic where such traffic does not have its origin or destination within the residential area. This shall not include proposals or needs to connect adjoining residential subdivisions. 
12.  New adjacent arterial streets. The applicant shall dedicate right-of-way sufficient in width to meet the requirements of the thoroughfare plan or as required herein. 
13.  Adjacent existing streets or half streets. Where the proposed subdivision abuts upon an existing dedicated street or half street that does not conform to the thoroughfare plan or requirements herein, the applicant shall dedicate right-of-way sufficient to make the full right- of-way width conform to the requirements of the most recent thoroughfare plan or as required herein. 
14.  Single lot subdivision. All required right-of-way dedication shall also apply to plats wherein a parcel is platted or replatted as a single lot and as required herein. 
15.  Street names. New streets shall be named in accordance with provisions of the Code of Ordinances and approved by the Planning Division. 
B.  Design standards for streets. 
1.  Curb and gutter in accordance with city standards shall be required on all streets within level one unless exempted under section 94-100 of this Code. The Department of Public Works shall evaluate and may amend the need for curbs and gutters by evaluating the ownership of the roadway, plans for widening the roadway or other situations that may exist where the installation of curbs and gutters does not serve the public purpose. 
2.  Curb and gutter may not be required by the Department of Public Works within a level two area. The creation of a multiple-lot subdivision or the creation of a new street may require curbs and gutters. 
3.  Curbs and gutters shall be installed by the applicant on both sides of all interior streets and on the subdivision side of all streets forming part of the boundary of the subdivision. An exception to boundary street dedication and paving may exist where the other side of the street is developed and/or improved and shall consider alignments and other identifiable factors, under which case there may be required a dedication and paving on one or both sides of the street. Curbs and gutters shall be constructed to city specifications. All streets shall be paved by applicant to city specifications. 
4.  Curb cut and driveway widths shall be in accordance with Appendix B of the Code of Ordinances. Upon approval by an authorized official of the state Department of Transportation, a 45-foot wide driveway width may be allowed on state-designated highways and frontage roads. 
5.  Right-of-way and pavement widths shall be in accordance with the following: 
a.  Right-of-way and paving width shall be in accordance with the thoroughfare plan. 
b.  Unless otherwise required or approved by the Department of Public Works, existing or proposed streets or roads within level one and level two areas not addressed in the thoroughfare plan or under other plans, shall be provided meeting city standards. If it is a state road or highway, the right-of-way and paving requirements shall be in accordance with state specifications, or where no standards or requirements exists, the minimum right-of-way requirement shall be the greater of 60 feet or as required by the county. Additional right-of-way and paving width may be required as determined by long range plans, density or intensity of development, historical traffic conditions and counts, and other appropriate factors. 
c.  The minimum right-of-way width and paving width, if the street is not indicated on the thoroughfare plan, shall be as required on the thoroughfare plan for the type and function of the street proposed unless additional width is required along state or county roads. 
d.  The Planning Division and Department of Public Works shall be responsible for approving the street classification and/or type by considering the type, nature, density or intensity of proposed or future land uses related to or affecting the street. Local streets that serve, propose to serve, or may serve 150 or more dwellings shall be required to be upgraded to a minor collector under standards of the thoroughfare plan. Density calculations for local streets in adjacent or neighboring residentially zoned areas shall be based on 3.5 dwellings units per acre. In evaluating the street classification, consideration shall be given to other access. 
6.  Street Medians. 
1.  Definitions. 
a.  Medians: a strip of land, whether raised or flush, between the lanes of opposing traffic on a divided street. 
2.  Generally. 
a.  Raised medians shall not be allowed except when required by the thoroughfare plan or other government agency. 
b.  Any required raised median shall be made of solid material that requires no routine maintenance nor designed to contain vegetation including, but not limited to grass, shrubs, or trees. 
c.  Flush medians shall have the surrounding pavement structure extended across the entire median. The flush median shall be delineated with approved pavement markings. 
d.  Director of Public Works or designee may approve a variance to the items above where circumstances allow. 
C.  Access management. 
1.  Curb cuts on state-designated or state-controlled streets, roads or highways shall receive first approval by the state Department of Transportation. Additional approval by the Planning Division and/or Department of Public Works will consider sight visibility in relation to the posted speed of the road, street or highway, topography, roadway design and distance between curb cuts in accordance with accepted standards. 
2.  The distance between curb cuts on arterial streets and state-owned streets and roads shall be governed by the nature and type of land use, existing or potential for conflicts, speed and condition of the roadway, location and spacing of traffic signals, the ability for alternative access, the intended function of the roadway, and existing land uses. 
3.  As feasibly possible, marginal access streets or access easements shall be used for all commercial development to allow access to all properties or uses without the need to access these individually from a public street. 
4.  The city, county and/or state may require the closing or partial closing of any curb cut or drive opening where such creates or has the potential to create a hazardous condition. Should the opening be closed, the property owner shall provide a curb and remove the drive approach. An alternative to the removal of a drive approach may be considered by the installation of an approved barricade, generally only where affected roads or streets carry 300 ADT or less. 
5.  Chapter 6200, exhibit B of Appendix B, Zoning Ordinance of the Code of Ordinances, shall be considered as a guideline used to calculate the distance requirements between curb cuts and intersections. The Planning Division and Department of Public Works shall have final authority to modify conditions therein in the interest of public safety and as intended herein. 
6.  Section 102-40, visibility sight triangles, of the Code of Ordinances shall be considered a guide to sight visibility requirements. The Planning Division and Department of Public Works may amend requirements therein in the interest of public safety, and in consideration with the above situations, and may require the installation of acceleration/deceleration lanes, modifications or installation of medians and turning bays, and other situations that will enhance public safety. 
D.  Subdivision access. 
1.  All residential subdivisions shall have safe and reliable street access for daily use and emergency purposes. 
a.  All preliminary plats showing 80 or more lots must be designed to show a minimum of two means of access to an existing collector or higher classification street as indicated on the Thoroughfare Plan. 
b.  Upon final platting of 80 or more lots within a proposed subdivision or section of a subdivision, a separate connection/access point providing secondary access to an existing collector or higher classification street must be dedicated, installed, and completed according to the provisions referenced in Appendix D. of the fire code and Section 6.2 of Appendix A - Subdivision and development regulations. 
6.3  Easements. 
A.  A developer or property owner may provide or be required to provide utility easements in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Utility easements shall be provided at the front and/or rear of all lots or as required by the Department of Public Works or utility company. 
2.  Utility easements shall be centered on or adjacent to a common property line of two abutting lots and shall be continuous for the entire length of the block as required by the Department of Public Works or utility company. Unless otherwise permitted by the Director of Public Works, a developer or property owner shall provide utility easements in accordance with the following minimum width standards: 
  10 feet when adjacent to a street right-of-way. 
  10 feet when occupied by a non-city public utility and not containing or intending to contain city utilities. 
  15 feet when occupied by a city utility up to 12 inches in diameter, running between common lot lines with public right of way at end for access and not exceeding [two] lots in length. 
  20 feet when occupied by a city utility up to 36 inches in diameter. 
  30 feet when occupied by a city utility greater than 36 inches in diameter. 
  15 feet when occupied by a city utility when placed at the boundary of a development adjacent to unowned property. This requirement may be reduced to [ten] feet if the developer or property owner is able to secure [ten] feet of utility easement from the adjacent unowned property. 
  Additionally, if the existing utility is constructed of any material other than PVC or a material approved by the Director of Public Works, the easement shall be an additional five feet wide when a line is buried more than seven feet in depth. The easement shall be an additional ten feet wide when a line is buried more than [12] feet in depth. The easement shall be an additional [15] feet wide when a line is buried more than [20] feet in depth. 
3.  Utility easements shall be approximately parallel to the frontage of the street or as required by the Department of Public Works or [the] utility company. 
4.  No permanent or temporary encroachments shall be located within any easement, except fences may be placed along property lines, driveways and parking lots for ingress and egress, and sidewalks required in the City of Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances. The city may allow permanent or temporary encroachments with an encroachment agreement at the discretion of the Property Management Administrator in agreement with the Director of Community Development and Director of Public Works. 
5.  Lift stations shall be placed in utility easements, and must provide a five-foot clear space around all sides between the equipment and the fence, as well as a 15-foot access easement with a six-inch thick and 12-foot wide flexible base access road provided from an adjacent street to grant direct access to the pumps. 
6.  Any pre-existing encroachment that does not have an encroachment agreement shall obtain agreement upon notice by the city or remove said encroachment. 
B.  Maintenance of easements shall be the responsibility of the owner of the land upon which it is located. 
C.  Normal curb and gutter shall be required where utility easements intersect streets. 
D.  Where utility easements are not themselves straight within each block, or if the same do not connect on a straight course with the utility easements of adjoining blocks, then an additional easement shall be provided for the placing of guy wires on lot division lines in order to support poles set on curving or deviating rights-of-way of alleys. 
E.  The property owner shall be required to identify buried, aerial or above-ground pipelines or other buried, aerial or above-ground utility, and if such is not within an easement recorded for record shall contact the utility owner and dedicate or have dedicated such an easement and recorded and filed on a plat or separate instrument as required by the governmental unit. 
F.  Access easements. Access easements, where allowed, shall be in accordance with the following: 
1.  Residential: Access easements, where permitted, serving single-family or duplex dwellings, shall have a minimum width of 20 feet as measured from property line(s), and a minimum unobstructed paving width of nine feet. 
2.  Commercial: Access easements, where permitted, shall have a minimum, unobstructed paved width of 12 feet. Additional easement width may be necessary for utilities, drainage, etc. 
If more than one commercial lot or use is being accessed, there shall be no use of an access easement to provide primary access. The minimum width shall be 60 feet, measured from property line(s) with a minimum unobstructed paving width of 36 feet, or as required by the city. The Planning Division may consider or require an exception to this provision based on the type of development proposed. 
3.  All access easements shall be approved by the Planning Division and/or Department of Public Works. 
4.  All drive surfaces shall be hard-surfaced with Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete (HMAC) or concrete suitable for continued use by vehicles of the type intended. The Department of Public Works may require details of paving sections, and modifications thereof, prior to plan or permit approval to ensure function and longevity for the intended use. Proposed alternatives to address the intent of this provision shall be considered on a case-by-case basis. 
5.  No access easement shall provide ingress or egress to or from an arterial street or highway unless approved by the Planning Division and/or Department of Public Works as part of a nonresidential development where the easement is intended to serve multiple land uses. 
6.  Access easements shall be maintained by the property owner(s). Should the access easement fall into disrepair and pose a hazard or undesirable situation, as determined by the Planning Division and/or Department of Public Works, the responsible property owner(s) shall be provided with written notice that such shall be repaired within a time period agreed to by the governmental unit. Failure to repair shall subject all affected property owners to provisions of section 11. 
7.  All required paved driving surfaces shall be kept clear of all obstacles including, but not limited to dumpsters, utility poles, personal property and other such situations. 
G.  Other easements. 
1.  Should, through a plan for a planned unit development under Appendix B of the Code of Ordinances, or described under other plans, there be defined a trail system, paths, ponds, lakes, drainage easements or other such easement or open space not directly related to a physical utility, there shall be dedicated such on a final plat or separate instrument. 
2.  Should paving, sidewalk, grading, landscaping or other improvement be required with an easement or open space, such shall be installed at time of platting or the amount placed in escrow with the city to cover all costs according to provisions herein. 
3.  Responsibility for maintenance of the easement(s) or open space shall be the responsibility of the property owner unless otherwise accepted by the responsible governmental unit. 
H.  Drainage easements. 
1.  Drainage easements shall be provided where required by the Department of Public Works. 
2.  The width and location of such drainage easements shall be in accordance with the current city stormwater design criteria. 
3.  No structures shall be placed in a drainage easement. These include but are not limited to fences, portable buildings, permanent structures, etc. In addition no vegetation shall be installed in this easement other than what has been approved by the Department of Public Works. 
4.  Encroachments existing on April 1, 2008, may be allowed to remain if the director of public works determines the encroachment will not constrict the flow of stormwater. 
5.  All stormwater detention facilities shall require the dedication of a drainage easement in accordance with chapter 106, article VIII, Stormwater Management of this Code. 
6.  Drainage easements shall be solely for the conveyance of stormwater and the placement of city owned utilities. Drainage easements shall not be combined with non-city utility easements and/or access easements without the approval of the Director of Public Works. 
7.  Drainage easements shall be a minimum width of 15 feet when on the common lot line between two properties to convey stormwater in a concrete flume or pipe up to 36 inches in diameter with 20 feet minimum width for a pipe greater than 36 inches. 
8.  The Director of Public Works shall have the discretion to determine the level of maintenance necessary for drainage easements and may elect to maintain any easements in their natural condition. 
6.4  Oil and gas wells. 
[(1)]  For the purpose of this regulation, the term "plugged" shall refer to cementing a well to remove the well from production in accordance with standards of the Texas Railroad Commission. 
[(2)]  It shall be unlawful for any person acting either for himself or acting as agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant for any person to drill any well, assist in any way in the site preparation, re-working, fracturing or operation of any such well or to conduct any activity related to the production of oil or gas without first obtaining a permit issued by the director of public works in accordance with this section. Such activities include, but are not limited to seismic exploration, site preparation, re-working, drilling, fracturing, operation, construction of rigs or tank batteries, fracturing and pressurizing of wells. A permit shall not be required for seismic exploration unless such survey activities will be conducted on city property or public utility easement. Explosives shall not be used within the city. 
[(3)]  A permit shall authorize seismic exploration, site preparation, re-working, drilling, fracturing, operation, construction of rigs or tank batteries, and well pressurization for a period of one year after issuance. If a well is completed as a result of permitted drilling activity, the permit shall authorize continued operation of the well. 
A.  Permit application and contents. The application for the permit, required by this [appendix], shall include the following information: 
1.  A copy of the application to drill which has been filed with the state railroad Commission and copies addressing the requirements of the state railroad Commission for which is required to be met based on the application, together with bonding requirements, if required. 
2.  The name, address, and phone number of the operator of the lease and property owner, with the name of the contact person for the operator. 
3.  A description of the lease or the lands involved in the exploration, drilling or maintenance, and the length of time that surface operations are expected to occur. 
4.  A plat showing the location of the well, the ownership of the land, property lines, structures, and offset operators or landowners. 
5.  The name and address of the drilling contractor. 
6.  A site plan accurately depicting the proposed site and the location, distance to and nature of adjacent land uses. 
7.  A statement warning of possible hazardous formation conditions that may be encountered during or as a result of the proposed drilling or exploration operation or maintenance of an existing well site. 
8.  A copy of the operator's spill prevention plan. 
9.  The fee for a permit in the amount of $500.00 or as established in the fees chapter of this code. 
10.  A bond or letter of credit approved for form by the city attorney in the amount of $25,000.00 along with the permit application for the initial permit applied for by an operator. The bond shall be executed by the operator, as principal, and a corporate surety on the list of authorized insurance companies published by the State Board of Insurance of the State of Texas, as surety, in a form approved by the city attorney and with the bond in favor of the city conditioned that the operator will comply with all of the terms, conditions and requirements of this chapter and any permit issued pursuant hereto, and further conditioned that the operator will repair any damages to city roads, streets, highways, or other city property, as determined by the director of public works of the city, caused by the equipment and vehicles used by the permittee in going to and from the drill site with such repairs to be in compliance with specifications therefor prepared and provided to the operator by the director of public works. The security shall remain effective until the operations on the drill site are terminated. 
11.  A certificate of insurance showing the insurance required in this section. 
B.  Insurance. No well shall be drilled or any maintenance or exploration conducted unless the drilling firm, lease owner and/or contractor at all times carries minimum insurance coverage for bodily injury of $500,000.00 for each occurrence and $1,000,000.00 aggregate and for property damage of $500,000.00 for each occurrence and $1,000,000.00 aggregate, and for the cost of controlling a well that is out of control, re-drilling or restoration expenses, seepage and pollution damage as first party recovery for the operator and related expenses, including, but not limited to, evacuation of residents, in the amount of at least $5,000,000.00 per occurrence. The lease owner shall at all times carry this minimum limit of insurance until such time that the well is out of production and all appurtenances removed from the site. The insurance under all situations and at all times shall list the City of Wichita Falls as additionally named insured. 
C.  Location, maintenance and fencing of tanks and tank batteries. 
1.  The oil or fuel storage tank or tank battery shall be erected in conformance with the spill prevention control and countermeasure plan published by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
2.  The oil or fuel storage tank or tank battery shall be completely enclosed by: 
a.  A minimum six-foot tall all metal chainlink fence with two-inch maximum mesh interwoven with opaque slats, topped by at least three strands of barbed wire; 
b.  A solid minimum eight-foot tall masonry wall; or 
c.  Other fencing material approved by the director of public works. 
3.  In no event shall a tank or tank battery be located nearer than 150 feet from any residence, or dwelling, unless the tank or tank battery existed prior to the residence or dwelling, or nearer than 30 feet from any combustible structure. 
4.  Oil and fuel storage tanks or tank batteries shall be kept well painted and in good repair. 
5.  If the well(s) associated with an oil storage tank or tank battery is/are plugged, or if the storage tank or tank battery is no longer in use, the storage tank or tank battery and associated pipelines shall be removed and the land restored. This provision may include all associated appurtenances with the wells and tank or tank batteries. This removal shall occur within six months unless documentation can be provided that the well and tank or tank battery will be used within the next two years. For the purpose of this provision, the term "no longer in use" shall mean that the tank or tank battery, while it or they may contain some residue or fuel, has not been pumped into or out of within the past six months. The director of public works may waive this requirement if the operator requests such waiver in writing, and the director determines that failure to pump is due to a reason other than the tank(s) no longer being in use. 
6.  Other oil or fuel storage tanks that receive products from transmission or distribution lines that are not pumped into or pumped out of for a period of six months shall be considered abandoned and/or unused. The leaseholder shall disassemble and completely remove such tanks from the site unless it is shown that there are plans to reuse the storage tanks within the next two years. 
7.  Within six months after removal of any oil storage tanks or tank batteries, the permittee shall restore the property to its original state insofar as possible, to include removal and/or restoration of any unremediated soil. 
D.  Pumps to be electrically powered. No pumping unit used for the purpose of lifting oil shall be powered with any power other than electricity. If electrical power lines are proposed to be buried or are buried, a private easement shall be created and the Department of Public Works shall note the location of said easement and/or its encroachment into or within a public easement. Such easement shall be made a matter of public record by the filing of a plat or separate instrument. 
E.  Pumping units. 
1.  All surface equipment shall be kept clean, painted, in good repair, and properly lubricated in order that they will operate quietly. The noise produced by wells, jacks or units on a producing well shall not exceed 50 decibels at any boundary of the parcel on which the well is located. 
2.  All pumping units, compressors, and other powered equipment shall be completely enclosed by: 
a.  A minimum six-foot tall all metal chainlink fence with two-inch maximum mesh interwoven with opaque slats, topped by at least three strands of barbed wire; 
b.  A solid minimum eight-foot tall masonry wall; or 
c.  Other fencing material approved by the director of public works. 
F.  Flow lines. 
1.  All flow lines and/or water and/or oil or gas lines shall be buried at least one foot under the ground unless permission is obtained from the surface owner. The Planning Division and/or Department of Public Works may require that flow lines and transmission lines be buried at a greater depth depending upon adjacent land uses and proposed streets, roads and highways. 
2.  All flow lines shall be shown on a plat or separate instrument and filed for public record. Upon the removal of the associated tank batteries and/or the plugging of wells associated with such pipelines, the pipelines shall be removed. The Department of Public Works may consider an alternative to the removal of the pipelines if the lines are flushed to remove any potential contaminates. Such exception shall apply to only those situations where removal is not technically feasible. 
3.  The Department of Public Works shall have sole authority to regulate the location and installation of such lines, which will also incorporate standards by the appropriate government agency. 
G.  Waste oil or water to be cleaned up. Any waste oil or water in, on, or around any premises within the city or the extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be immediately cleaned up and the ground shall be cleaned of any oil-bearing dirt. 
H.  Drilling operations generally. The owner, leaseholder, property owner or other who is responsible for drilling of a well or well site shall proceed with the drilling operations with the highest degree of care so as not to injure adjoining property or persons in any manner by: 
1.  Keeping the premises suitably fenced or guarded 24 hours a day in such manner as to avoid trespassing during the drilling and exploratory operations; 
2.  Removing all drilling mud upon the completion of such drilling operations; 
3.  Immediately clearing the grounds around the well of all drilling mud and/or all oil, salt water or water. The area shall be made to conform in appearance to the lands in the neighborhood wherein such drilling, exploration or maintenance operations are so conducted. All pits must be steel or lined with a minimum six-mil impermeable liner. All pits and contents shall be removed from the premises and drill site within 30 days after completion of the well; 
4.  Prior to the commencement of any drilling operations, installing private roads used for access to the drill site and the operation site which are at least ten-feet wide, have an overhead clearance of at least 14 feet and are surfaced with asphalt, crushed rock, or gravel, and maintained to prevent dust and mud in accordance with the requirements of the director of public works. The requirements governing surfacing of private roads may be altered at the discretion of the director of public works after consideration of all circumstances, including, but not limited to, the following: 
[(i)]  Distances from public streets and highways; 
[(ii)]  Distances from adjoining and nearby property owners; 
[(iii)]  The purpose for which the property of such owners is or may be used; 
[(iv)]  Topographical features; 
[(v)]  Nature of the soil; 
[(vi)]  Exposure to wind; and 
[(vii)]  Preference of the surface owner. 
5.  It shall be unlawful to create sound during drilling operations that exceeds: 
[(i)]  60 decibels during daytime hours between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., measured at any occupied structure on a parcel other than the parcel on which the oil well is located. 
[(ii)]  50 decibels during nighttime hours between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., measured at any occupied structure on a parcel other than the parcel on which the oil well is located. 
I.  Spacing. 
1.  It shall be unlawful to drill any well, the center of which, at the surface of the ground, is located: 
a.  Within 25 feet of any storage tank or source of ignition; 
b.  Within 100 feet of any building accessory to the well, public street, road, highway, right-of-way or property line; 
c.  Within 300 feet of any water well used as a potential source of drinking water; 
d.  Within 400 feet of any commercial or industrial building; or 
e.  Within 600 feet of any residence. 
2.  The minimum distances described in subsection 1.d and 1.e may be reduced by: 
a.  A waiver granted by the city council; or 
b.  Written notarized waivers granted by all owners of all buildings within the radius being protected from drilling. All waivers must identify the property address, block and lot number, subdivision name (if applicable), and plat volume and page or document number if on file in official county records. Such waivers must be filed, at the expense of the operator, in the Wichita County records prior to the issuance of the permit. 
J.  Fracturing operations. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct fracturing operations on a well during the nighttime hours between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. It shall further be unlawful for any person to create sound during such fracturing operations that is greater than 60 decibels, measured at any occupied off-site structure, unless a higher maximum decibel level has been provided by the director of public works. If a higher decibel level has been provided by the director of public works, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
1.  Create sound during fracturing operations that exceeds the decibel level provided by the director of public works; or 
2.  Conduct fracturing operations in a manner that fails to comply with the special conditions established by the director of public works. 
K.  Easements. Wells shall be serviced from an existing public street or a dedicated access easement. 
1.  A 25-foot access easement allowing entry of city personnel and other public safety personnel shall be provided from a street to the wellhead, tank, tank battery, flare and mud pits or any other areas where machinery is located. 
2.  The operator shall pay the city for any damage it causes to city property within 30 days after notification of such damage by the director of public works. 
3.  Once a well is plugged to remove from production and the site is restored as required herein, the easement may be removed. 
L.  Floodplains. The floor of any drilling rig and the top of any well head shall be placed at least one foot above the base flood elevation in the area of any special flood hazard as such terms are defined in section 54-26. The base of any pumping units and oil storage tanks must be placed above the base flood elevation. 
M.  Enforcement. Violation of the terms of this section shall be punishable by a fine of up to $2,000.00 per day, cancellation or suspension of the permit by the director of public works, or injunction. Prior to cancellation or suspension of a permit, the director of public works shall give the permit holder at least ten days' written notice, posted on the drill site, an opportunity for hearing, and at least one opportunity to cure the failure of at least ten days following the hearing. 
6.5  Water. 
A.  All subdivisions shall be provided by the applicant with water supply and water distribution systems approved by the Department of Public Works and/or Health Department. 
B.  Fire hydrants, in accordance with city standards, shall be installed as part of the water distribution system by the applicant so that every lot is within 500 feet of a fire hydrant or as required by the Texas Insurance Commission. 
C.  Extension of water lines shall be in accordance with chapter 106, article VI, Extensions, of the Code of Ordinances. 
6.6  Sewer. 
A.  All subdivisions shall be provided by the applicant with an approved sewage disposal system. 
B.  Connection with the sanitary sewer system shall be required except where the Department of Public Works determines that such connection will require unreasonable expenditure when compared with other methods of sewage disposal. Where on-site sewer systems are installed, the design for the system will be in accordance with requirements of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). If the applicant proposes to install a sanitary sewer disposal system, the plans for such a system must be approved in accordance with standards and requirements of the Health Department and TCEQ prior to approval of the final plat by the Commission. Unless otherwise advised, the City of Wichita Falls/Wichita County Health Department is the authorized TCEQ representative. 
C.  Extension of sanitary sewer lines shall be in accordance with chapter 106, article VI, Extensions, of the Code of Ordinances. 
6.7.  Utility lines. 
A.  All city owned sanitary sewer and water utilities shall be placed in the street right-of-way. For any previously approved applicant master plan, when economically feasible, provisions shall be made to transition from the rear of lots to the street right of way for future extensions. Utility transition routing shall be coordinated with Public Works. 
B.  All utility lines that pass under a street or alley shall be installed before the street or alley is paved. When it is necessary that utility lines pass under pavement, they shall be installed to a point at least three feet beyond the edge of the pavement. An exception to this requirement exists where underground construction technology (e.g., boring) is used at the utility company's or contractor's option. All necessary utilities shall be installed before building permits and/or certificates of occupancy are issued for work within the subdivision. 
C.  All telephone, cable television and electrical utility lateral and service lines shall be placed underground throughout new subdivisions for which final plats are approved subsequent to the effective date of this subsection subject to the following conditions: 
1.  All electrical transmission lines, meaning those electrical lines operated at nominal voltages of 60,000 volts or higher, may be placed overhead. 
2.  Any electrical feeder lines, meaning those electrical lines that emanate from substations to distribute power throughout an area, may be placed overhead. 
3.  Where electrical service is to be placed underground, electrical service for street or site lighting shall also be placed underground except for the lighting standards. 
4.  Temporary electrical service during construction may be provided by overhead utility lines and facilities prior to activation of the underground service. Following activation of the underground permanent service, the temporary overhead electrical service shall be removed as soon as possible. 
5.  The electrical utility company may plan and construct overhead lines on perimeters of subdivisions or property. Telephone and cable television lines may be constructed overhead where overhead electric utility lines are permitted. 
6.  Each of the utility companies shall be responsible for developing administrative policies and cost reimbursement procedures for the installation and extension of their underground utilities. Nothing herein shall prohibit or restrict any utility company from recovering the difference in cost of overhead facilities and underground utilities from the owner or developer in accordance with the provisions of such utility's approved tariff. No utility company shall be required to begin construction of underground facilities unless and until the owner or developer of the subdivision has made arrangements satisfactory to the specific utility company for the payment of such difference between the cost of overhead facilities and underground facilities. No plat shall be approved without a certification by all electric, telephone and cable television companies that such satisfactory arrangements have been made being affixed to the plat. The city shall not be responsible for any portion of such cost unless the city determines that the owner, developer or consumer should not pay such difference in cost and the city refuses to grant an exception allowing overhead construction. 
7.  All electrical, cable television and telephone support equipment (transformers, amplifiers, switching devices, etc.) necessary for underground installation shall be pad mounted or placed underground and the difference in cost of such facilities shall be paid to the installing utility company in accordance with provisions established under paragraph 6 [of this section]. 
8.  Nothing herein shall be construed to require a utility to install underground facilities or any facilities other than standard overhead facilities, unless the increased cost associated with the underground or other non-standard facilities has been paid to the utility by the developer or the city prior to construction. 
9.  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to require any existing overhead facilities to be placed underground or to prohibit the upgrading, reconstruction, relocation, or reconductoring of any existing overhead facilities with overhead construction. 
10.  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to alter the intent of any utility Franchise Agreement Ordinance in effect on the effective date of this section. 
6.8  Surveying standards. All surveys performed in connection with these regulations shall be performed by a registered professional surveyor in good standing licensed by the state. All surveys shall meet the minimum standards of professional practice promulgated by the state board of professional land surveying. 
6.9  Drainage. 
A.  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, natural channel or stream, there shall be provided an easement or right-of-way conforming substantially to the limit of such watercourse, plus additional width to accommodate future needs as determined by the Department of Public Works. 
B.  Drainage facilities shall be provided and constructed by the applicant in accordance with chapter 106, article VIII, Stormwater Management, of the Code of Ordinances, and as required by the Department of Public Works. 
6.10  Lots and setbacks. 
A.  All lots shall have access to, and front on a public street unless otherwise approved as required herein. Lots designated for stormwater detention shall not be required to front on a public street, but shall be accessed by approved easements. Once so shown and described on a final plat, such lot shall not thereafter be used for other than as intended unless approved by the Planning Division and Department of Public Works. Lots separated from a street right-of-way by strip of land owned by: 
1.  A utility, used for the sole purpose of providing utilities; 
2.  A pipeline company, used for the sole purpose of transporting liquids; or 
3.  A railroad company, used for the sole purpose of transport; 
shall not be required to front on a public street, provided that a permanent easement is obtained from the aforesaid utility company, pipeline company or railroad company, providing for vehicular access between the lots and the public street. 
B.  Unless otherwise required herein, or allowed under Appendix B of the Code of Ordinances, minimum width at the building limit line of 50 feet as measured along the building limit line or within 25 feet of the right-of-way line, whichever is closer. 
C.  The area of a lot for the purposes of compliance with this regulation shall be the net horizontal area within the lot boundary lines and shall exclude any street or alley rights-of-way, but shall include easements. 
D.  If a portion of a legally existing lot is acquired for public use in any manner including dedication, condemnation, or purchase, the remainder of such lot shall be considered as complying with the requirements of these regulations. 
E.  Lot width shall be measured between the side lot lines along the minimum required front setback line, or the front lot line if no front setback is required. 
F.  Setbacks shown herein shall apply within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction in the absence of county requirements. Setbacks within the city limits shall be governed by Appendix B, Zoning, of the Code of Ordinances. 
G.  Setbacks within level one: 
Front setback: 25-foot minimum. 
Interior side setback: Five-foot minimum. 
Exterior side setback: 
15 feet for single-family or duplex residential use. 
25 feet for uses other than single-family or duplex use. 
Rear setback: 
1.  For single-family or duplex dwellings, five-foot minimum from common lot line or one-foot minimum from alley. 
2.  For all other uses, five-foot minimum. In no case shall the roof overhang extend over the property line. 
3.  If a lot has double frontage, 25 feet. 
H.  Setbacks within level two: 
Front setback: 
100-foot minimum from a U.S.-designated roadway or interstate highway. 
50-foot minimum from a state road. 
40-foot minimum from other road. 
Interior side setback: Five-foot minimum. 
Exterior side setback: 
15 feet for single-family or duplex residential use. 
25 feet for uses other than single-family or duplex use. 
Rear setback: 
1.  For single-family or duplex dwellings, five-foot minimum from common lot line or one foot minimum from alley. 
2.  For all other uses, five-foot minimum. However, in no case shall the roof overhang extend over the property line. 
3.  If a lot has double frontage, 25 feet. 
I.  Should the project cross county lines or level of development, the most restrictive standards between the city and county shall apply to the entire development within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
J.  All setbacks shall be measured from the edge of an existing right-of-way or following any required dedication. 
K.  A required setback shall be measured parallel to and for the entire length of the lot line on the side of the lot for which the setback is being measured. No building or structure shall be located, erected, or altered so as to have a smaller setback than the minimum setback required herein. The area between the setback and the lot line on the side of the lot for which the setback is being measured, shall be known as the setback area. 
L.  A required setback area shall be kept free of any building or structure higher than two feet. 
6.1[1]  Erosion control. Reserved. 
6.12  Regulations related to airport proximity. All development and improvements within the city limits and within levels one and two, and those areas located outside of level two where such regulation is required in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare of north central Texas, shall be subject to standards and regulations contained under Chapter 6400, Airport Zoning Regulations, of Appendix B, Zoning Ordinance of the Code of Ordinances and as authorized under the Airport Zoning Act, Texas Local Government Code ch. 241. 
6.13  Request for easement, license, or abandonment of city property interest. 
A.  An owner of property underlying an easement held by the city may request that the city abandon all or a portion of said easement. 
B.  An owner of property abutting city property or right-of-way may request that the city license the use of city property or right-of-way or execute an easement for an encroachment on city property or right-of-way. 
C.  A request for such abandonment, license, or easement will be filed in writing with the property management division of the city's Department of Community Development and be accompanied by a fee the greater of [a fee established by separate ordinance] or the value of the requested property interest, with said property interest value to be determined by the city's property administrator. The city's property administrator may waive the aforementioned fee upon a determination that: 
(1)  The requested right or abandonment is of de minimis value and requires minimal staff time to research and define; or 
(2)  The requested right or abandonment is in exchange for a property interest of similar or greater value. 
D.  If the city's property administrator determines that a survey or appraisal is necessary to determine the size or nature of the property or its value, the requesting owner shall pay for the cost of said survey or appraisal or provide same. 
E.  If the city manager determines that the city's interests are sufficiently protected by the proposed abandonment, license, or easement and that the execution of said document is in the interest of the city, then the city manager may execute all documents necessary to allow the underlying or abutting property owner to utilize the requested interest in the property. 
F.  This section authorizes actions that are within the discretion of city staff with respect to property interests owned by the city. This section does not reduce the right of the city council to authorize or abandon a city interest in property. This section is not adopted pursuant to Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code. A decision of an official pursuant to this section is not appealable pursuant to sections 8 or 9 of this appendix to the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 38-2003, § 1, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 88-2005, § 2, 11-1-2005; Ord. No. 56-2006, § 2, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 103-2007, § 1, 12-18-2007; Ord. No. 21-2008, § 1, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 29-2009, § 2, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 45-2009, § 1, 7-21-2009; Ord. No. 63-2010, 11-16-2010; Ord. No. 10-2011, § 1, 2-15-2011; Ord. No. 20-2018, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 7. - Responsibility for payment of installation cost. 
A.  The applicant shall pay all design, engineering, material, construction and installation costs of all improvements required by this section unless otherwise provided in this section. 
B.  In the event [an] applicant desires the extension of water or sewer lines to serve his subdivision, he shall bear the entire design, engineering, material, construction and installation cost of all border, off-site and on-site lines. The Department of Public Works shall specify the size of all such lines, taking into consideration the city's master plans, standard specifications, and anticipated requirements of adjacent areas of future growth which must be served by such lines. The decision of the Department of Public Works concerning the size of the required lines shall be final. 
C.  The construction of water and sewer lines in accordance with city plans and specifications will be done by a contractor of the applicant or property owner's choice; provided however, that such contractor shall furnish a performance bond and warranty bond, executed by a corporate surety authorized to do business in the state acceptable to the city and maintaining in the county an agent upon whom service of citation may be had, in an amount equal to the total construction cost. Said bond shall be conditioned upon: 
1.  Completion of the entire construction in full conformity with the plans and specifications promulgated or approved by the Department of Public Works; and 
2.  Payment in full by the contractor of all claims for labor performed or materials furnished, in connection with such construction. All such construction work shall be subject to inspection by the Department of Public Works and/or the respective governmental unit as required, and no portion of any line installed in any excavation shall be covered unless and until the construction of such portion shall have been inspected and approved by the Department of Public Works and/or the respective governmental unit as required. 
D.  Should the Department of Public Works require the installation of water and sewer facilities of a larger capacity than necessary to provide adequate water or sewer service to the applicant's property, the difference between the cost of such larger facilities and the size facility required to serve the subdivision will be paid for by the city. Such facilities may be constructed under contract awarded by the city, with a predetermined rate for the developer's share to be deposited with the city prior to the award of the contract. At the option of the city, such facilities may be constructed under a contract awarded by the developer, provided city and state requirements are met. Under either system, the pro rata share of the cost to be borne by the developer shall include all material, construction, and installation cost for the size facility adequate to serve the developer's property. For the purposes of this article, the minimum size line required to serve a subdivision shall not be less than eight-inch water and/or sewer. 
E.  All sewer and water lines constructed or installed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall, when completed and accepted by the Department of Public Works, become the property of the city, free and clear of all encumbrances. The applicant shall provide a maintenance bond on the public improvements for a period of one year after the date on which the city accepts the property. Each and every contract entered into between [an] applicant and a contractor for the installation of sewer or water lines pursuant to the provisions of this section shall recite therein the provisions of this subsection. 
F.  No sewer or water lines shall be installed or constructed except within a public street or alley, or within an easement granted to the city by appropriate written instrument filed for record with the county clerk of [the] county at the expense of the person requesting the extension of existing lines. 
G.  No lift station, sanitary sewer system, or force main shall be constructed as part of the sewer line extension unless the applicant agrees that he will, at his own expense, construct such elements in accordance with the design standards provided by the Department of Public Works or in the case of lift stations a design prepared by the applicant's engineer and approved by the Department of Public Works. 
H.  If the Commission or plans adopted by the city council requires the installation of any street with pavement over 48 feet, the city shall award the contract for construction and the developer shall deposit his share of the cost of construction with the city prior to award of the contract. The developer's share of the cost will include curbs and gutters including median curbs as required, and pavement for a 48-foot street. 
I.  In no event shall the city be obligated to proceed under the terms of this section if sufficient funds are not available. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as a surrender by the city of its control over the streets, alleys, public ways or public easements within the city. 
J.  No person shall acquire any vested rights under the provisions of this section. 
K.  Withholding improvements until plat approved. 
1.  The city shall withhold all city improvements of whatsoever nature including the furnishing of sewage facilities and water service from all subdivisions, which have not been approved as provided by law and further, no permit shall be issued by the building official of the city on any piece of property other than an original or a resubdivided lot in a duly approved and recorded subdivision, except the building official may issue a temporary connection of utilities permit for construction purposes and only during the time of actual construction on unplatted tracts of land if the owner of such property will sign an agreement stating that he will forthwith start proceedings to have such property approved and platted in accordance with these regulations and further acknowledge his understanding that a certificate of occupancy and a permanent permit for connection of public utilities shall be withheld until the platting of such property has been so approved and recorded. 
The temporary permit shall automatically terminate within 100 days from its issuance date or upon completion of construction. The master plat must be approved and recorded within 100 days from the temporary building permit issuance date. 
The following is the procedure required for the owner of such property to follow before entering into a platting agreement: 
a.  Cause an abstractor or lawyer's certificate of ownership to be prepared and furnished to the Planning Division. 
b.  Cause a dedication instrument to be prepared covering the dedication of property for public use, as determined by existing ordinances of the city. All lien holders of record shall be required to subordinate their lien on the property dedicated for public use. These instruments shall be placed in the custody of the city and/or the respective governmental unit as required to be recorded by the city and/or the respective governmental unit as required in the county clerk's office of the county(ies) in which the project is located, in the event that the person executing a platting agreement fails to complete the platting process forthwith as agreed. 
2.  The building official shall not issue a building permit until he has received approval from departments having purview over the plat requirements. 
L.  The developer or contractor shall furnish to the city and/or the respective governmental unit as required a maintenance bond, or an approved surety, for the percentage amount show below in section M based upon the total cost of improvements constructed or installed pursuant to the provisions of this section, conditioned that the applicant shall pay all costs of maintaining, repairing, and replacing any defective parts, workmanship, or equipment for a period of one year after the improvement is accepted by the Department of Public Works and/or the respective governmental unit as required. The said maintenance bond shall be provided before the city engineer and/or the respective governmental unit as required issues a letter of acceptance or approval for the said improvements. 
M.    
Cost of Improvements Required Bond Amount Shall be % of Cost of Improvements $0-$100,000 100% $100,001-$249,999 75% $250,000-$499,999 50% Over $500,000 25%  
(Ord. No. 20-2018, 5-1-2018) 
[Secs. 8-10. - Reserved.] 
Sec. 11. - Parks. 
A.  All applicant shall be required to set aside land for park purposes under conditions set out in subsection B of this section when the master park plan of the city shows a park is required in the area to be subdivided and the applicant shall show such land set aside in compliance with this section on the master plat or preliminary plat. All areas set aside for park purposes shall conform to the master park plan as to general location, area and type of development. The parks and recreation department should be consulted when developing the master plat so that few revisions will be necessary later. 
B.  The city shall be granted an option to purchase the land so set aside for park purposes upon the following terms. If at the end of one year from the date of approval by the Commission of the master plat or preliminary plat if there is no master plat, the total area covered by said plat has been at least 50 percent developed, then and in that event the city shall be required to exercise its option within 30 days thereafter or release the same to the applicant with the purchase price to be computed as set out in subsection C of this section. If at the end of one year there has not been a 50 percent development, then and in that event the option shall continue in full force and effect until said total area has been at least 50 percent developed with the city then required to exercise or release its option as set out above. 
C.  The price to be paid by the city for the land set aside for park purposes shall be based on the fair market value of the raw land as of the date the master or preliminary plat is first filed with the board, plus the pro rata part of all development cost attributable to the park land so purchased, including abutting streets and utilities necessary to serve the park land. 
D.  All applicants shall also submit on the master plat an indication showing how the park area is to be developed in the event the city is unable to purchase the property or rejects it because of other reasons. 
E.  All areas reserved for park land shall conform to the city master park plan as to general location, area and type of development. The city shall have the right to accept or reject park land proposals as shown on the developer's master plat, at such time as the master plat is brought before the Commission for approval. The one year option period, which the city has to buy the land, shall begin with the Commission's approval of the developer's master plat. 
(Ord. No. 20-2018, 5-1-2018) 
Sec. 12. - Penal provisions. 
    If any individual (including any officer, agent or employee acting in behalf of any individual, firm, association or corporation) violates any provision of this ordinance, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction of such violation he shall be fined an amount as provided by section 1-14 of the Code of Ordinances. Each day that such violation continues shall be a separate offense. Prosecution or conviction under this provision shall never be a bar to any other remedy or relief for violations of this ordinance. 
Sec. 13. - Enforcement other than penal. 
A.  No permit shall be issued by the Health Department and/or Department of Public Works for the installation of an on-site sewerage system upon any lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved or on a lot in a subdivision in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
B.  No building, repair, plumbing or electrical permit shall be issued by the building official for any structure on a lot in a subdivision in which a final plat has not been approved or on a lot in a subdivision in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full, except in those situations described herein. 
C.  The Department of Public Works and/or the respective governmental unit as required shall not repair, maintain, install or provide any streets or public utility services in any subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved or in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
D.  The city shall not sell, supply or allow to be sold or supplied any water, gas, electricity or sewerage service within a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved or in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
E.  On behalf of the city and/or the respective governmental unit as required, the city attorney may institute appropriate action in the district court to enjoin any violation of this ordinance or the standards referred to herein which violation occurs within the city limits or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or as such jurisdiction is determined. 
F.  If any subdivision exists for which a final plat has not been approved or in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full, the city attorney may, on behalf of the city and/or the respective governmental unit as required, cause an instrument to be filed in the deed records of the county or counties in which such subdivision or part thereof lies. The instrument may state the fact of such noncompliance or failure to secure final plat approval and the fact that the provisions of paragraphs A, B, C and D of this section will apply to the subdivision and the lots therein. If full compliance and final plat approval are secured after the filing of such instrument, the city attorney shall forthwith file an instrument in the deed records of each such county stating that paragraphs A, B, C and D no longer apply. 
Sec. 14. - Modification of subdivision regulations. 
A.  Where existing conditions require a modification from the standards and regulations herein contained because of a distinct and unusual condition that does not prevail on other undeveloped land generally in the city, the Commission may approve a modification from specific standards to permit the equitable treatment of the land or tract in light of the unusual condition. 
B.  The Commission may authorize a modification from these regulations when in its opinion deprivation of use of land will result from requiring strict compliance. The applicant shall have the responsibility of proving that the strict application of the subdivision ordinance creates a deprivation of use of land. The following conditions must be present for consideration: 
1.  There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land; and, 
2.  The granting of the modification will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area; and, 
3.  The granting of the modification will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other lands in the area in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; and, 
4.  A more appropriate design solution exists which is not currently allowed in this chapter; and, 
5.  The granting of the modification is harmonious with the engineered design of the infrastructure of any neighboring subdivision. 
C.  The modification may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter so that the public health, safety, and welfare may be secured and substantial justice is done. Economic hardship to the applicant shall not be deemed to constitute a deprivation of use. The Commission may reach a conclusion that a deprivation exists if it finds that: 
1.  If the applicant complies strictly with the provisions of this chapter, the applicant can make no reasonable use of the property; and 
2.  The deprivation of use relates to the applicant's land, rather than personal circumstances; and 
3.  The deprivation of use is unique to the property, rather than one shared by many surrounding properties; and 
4.  The deprivation of use is not the result of the applicant's own actions or actions of a previous owner or owner's agent. 
D.  The request for modification shall be made in writing to the Planning Director and accompanied by a fee as set forth by separate ordinance. 
E.  In cases where a modification was submitted in conjunction with a Final Plat, the plat is considered incomplete until the modification receives approval or denial by the Commission. Following the Commission determination on the modification, a complete Final Plat will be submitted to the Commission for approval or denial at the next available meeting. 
F.  In granting a modification, the Commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified and maintain the spirit and intent of the standards herein set forth. 
G.  A determination by the Commission shall require an affirmative vote by six members to grant a modification. 
H.  A determination may be appealed to city council by either the applicant or City Manager or his designee. Any appeal will be heard de novo and shall require an affirmative vote by five members to affirm or overturn the decision of the Commission. 
(Ord. No. 20-2018, 5-1-2018) 
APPENDIX B - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the zoning regulations of the city, as adopted by Ordinance Number 38-85 on April 23, 1985. Amendments to Ordinance Number 38-85 are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt and regulate zoning, Texas Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq. 

1000. - LEGAL PROVISIONS 

[Sec.] 1010. - Title. 
    Sections 1000 through 9999 of this [ordinance] shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Wichita Falls, Texas. 
[Sec.] 1015. - Purpose of this zoning ordinance. 
    The purpose of this zoning ordinance shall be to promote the public health, safety, morals and the protection and preservation of places and areas of historical, cultural, or architectural importance and significance or general welfare of the city and residents thereof; and to attain the objectives of the Wichita Falls Comprehensive Plan. It has been designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. 
[Sec.] 1020. - Consistency with comprehensive plan. 
    It is the intent of the city that this zoning ordinance shall be consistent with the Wichita Falls Comprehensive Plan, and with any supplemental land use and community development policies which may be adopted by the city council. In the event this zoning ordinance becomes inconsistent with the Wichita Falls Comprehensive Plan or with any supplemental land use and community development policies of the city, by reason of the adoption of a new plan or by amendment of the existing plan or supplemental policies, it is the intent of the council that this zoning ordinance be amended within a reasonable time so as to become or remain consistent with the revised or amended comprehensive plan and land use and community development policies. 
    Additionally, it is the intent of the council that all amendments to this zoning ordinance shall maintain and enhance the consistency between this zoning ordinance and the Wichita Falls Comprehensive Plan. 
[Sec.] 1025. - Applicability. 
    This zoning ordinance shall apply to all of the incorporated areas of the city. The use of all land and any buildings or structures located upon the land, and the construction, reconstruction, alteration, expansion, or relocation of any building or structure upon the land shall conform to all regulations applicable to the district in which the land is located except as otherwise provided below. No land, building, structure or premises shall be used for any purpose or in any manner other than is permitted in the district in which such land, building, structure or premises is located except as provided below. The provisions of this zoning ordinance shall be applied to all land, buildings, structures and premises of the incorporated areas of the city on the 23rd day of April 1985. However, the provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to buildings, structures, or land under the control, administration, or jurisdiction of any federal or state agency, or the city where properly exempted by law. 
[Sec.] 1035. - Conflicting provisions. 
    This zoning ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. It is not the intent of this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, or other deed restriction or agreement between parties. When this zoning ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or land, or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations, or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall control. 
[Sec.] 1040. - Relief from other provisions. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided, no provision of this zoning ordinance shall be construed as relieving any party to whom a site plan approval, permit or variance is issued from any other provision of state or federal law or from any provision, ordinance, rule, or regulation of the city requiring a license, franchise, or permit to accomplish, engage in, carry on or maintain a particular business, enterprise, occupation, transaction or use. 
[Sec.] 1045. - Severability of provisions. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of this ordinance, it being hereby expressly declared that this ordinance and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase hereof would have been prepared, proposed, adopted, approved and ratified irrespective of the fact that any one or more other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
[Sec.] 1055. - Completion of uses and structures. 
    Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a building permit has been heretofore issued, and plans for which are on file with the director of community development at the time of the passage of this ordinance [April 23, 1985,] and the construction of which in either case shall have been started and diligently prosecuted within six months of the date of such permit, and the ground story framework of which, inclusive of walls, shall have been completed within such time, and which entire building shall be completed, according to such plans as filed, within two years from the date of the passage of this ordinance. 
[Sec.] 1060. - Enforcement, legal procedure and penalties. 
    Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor offense, punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-14 of the Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation nor permit it to continue, and each day that the violation is maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of such penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 27-2003, § 1, 4-1-2003) 
[Sec.] 1065. - Annexed territory. 
    All territory hereafter annexed to the City of Wichita Falls shall be temporarily classified as SF-1 Single-Family Residential District, until a permanent zoning classification is given to the area by the city council. 
    The procedure for establishing a permanent zoning classification shall be the same as is provided by law for amendment of this zoning ordinance. 
2000. - DEFINITIONS 

[Sec.] 2010. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to define the terms used in this ordinance and to promote consistency in the interpretation of this zoning ordinance. For the purpose of this ordinance, all terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as set forth in this section [2000], except where the context of such words or phrases clearly indicates a different meaning or construction. Sections 2000 through 2999 shall be known as "Definitions." 
[Sec.] 2020. - General construction of language. 
    The following general construction of language shall apply to the textual provisions of this ordinance: 
    Conjunctions. The following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: 
A.  And indicates that all connected items or provisions apply. 
B.  Or indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singly or in any combination. 
C.  Either/or indicates that the connected items or provisions shall apply singly but not in combination. 
    Illustrations. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of any provision and any illustration, the text shall control. 
    Person. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual. 
    Shall and may. The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word may" is discretionary. 
    Tense and numbers. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, and the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular, unless the text clearly indicates the contrary. 
    Used or occupied includes the words intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied. 
[Sec.] 2030. - Terms defined. 
    Abutting. Having adjoining or common boundaries. 
    Accessory building. A building for a use which is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the use of the principal building, such a use is customarily found in connection with the main building. 
    Accessory dwelling. A detached unit accessory to a principal use on the same site. 
    Accessory use. An accessory use is one which: 
(a)  Is subordinate to and serves a principal use; and 
(b)  Is subordinate in area to the principal use served; and 
(c)  Is located on the same lot as the principal use (see section 6500). 
    Accident Potential Zone I (APZ I). An area of accident potential and noise located beyond the clear zone of each runway. 
    Accident Potential Zone II (APZ II). An area of accident potential and noise located beyond APZ I of each runway. 
    Addition. Any construction which increases the size of a building or structure in terms of site coverage, height, length, width, or gross floor area. 
    Administrative appeals. An appeal of the interpretation of an administrative decision of the building official to the board of adjustment (see section 7400). 
    Adult entertainment and sexually oriented commercial establishments. Specifically defined as adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, businesses or enterprises which offer nude human modeling for a consideration, and businesses or enterprises that offer for consideration, physical contact between persons when one or more of such persons are nude or seminude, as defined in section 5500. 
    Agent of owner. Any person who can show certified or written proof that he is acting for the property owner. 
    Agricultural equipment sales and services. Firms which sell or service large agricultural equipment, including tractors, large farm implements and irrigation equipment which require outdoor storage. 
    Agricultural uses includes farming, stabling animals, raising animals, excluding hogs, and keeping animals in kennels. 
    AICUZ. Air Installation Compatible Use Zone. 
    Airport. The Sheppard Air Force Base/Wichita Falls Regional Airport and/or Kickapoo Downtown Airport. [Pertains to airport zoning.] 
    Airport elevation. The established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area measured in feet from mean sea level. This elevation has been established at the Sheppard Air Force Base/Wichita Falls Regional Airport as 1,015 feet above mean sea level. The elevation for Kickapoo Airport has been established at 998 feet above mean sea level. 
    Airport hazard. Any structure, tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for the flights of aircraft or which obstructs or interferes with the control or tracking and/or data acquisition in the landing, taking off or flight at an airport or at any installation or facility relating to flight and tracking and/or data acquisition of the flight craft; or which is hazardous, interfering with, or obstructing such landing, taking off or flight of aircraft; or which is hazardous to or interferes with tracking and/or data acquisition pertaining to flight and flight vehicles. 
    Airport hazard area. Any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established if not prevented as provided herein. 
    Airport reference point. "Airport reference point" shall means the point established as the approximate geographical center of the airport landing area. 
    Alcoholic beverage sales and service. (See section 5400.) 
    Alley. A service way providing a secondary means of public access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alteration. Any construction or physical change in the internal arrangement of rooms or the supporting members of a building or structure, or change in relative position of buildings or structures on a site, or substantial change in appearance of any building or structure. 
    Antenna. An "antenna" shall be an attachment to a tower or other structure used to transmit, receive, reflect or is otherwise associated with wireless communications. 
    Apartment. (See Dwelling, multifamily. ) 
    Approach surface. [The term] "approach surface" shall be a surface longitudinally centered on the airport centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth under [section] 6400. In plan, the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
    Approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones. Zones or imaginary surfaces as set forth under [section] 6400. 
    Art gallery/museum. An institution for the collection, display and distribution of objects of art, history and science. 
    Automobile sales and services. The use of any building, land area or other premises for the display, rental or sale of new or used automobiles, including any warranty repair work and other repair service conducted as an accessory use. 
    Automobile service station. Any building, land area or other premises or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels; and including as an accessory use the sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries, and similar accessories. 
    Automotive repair services. Repair of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, or boats, including wheel and brake shops, body and fender shops, and similar repair and service activities, but excluding dismantling or salvage. 
    Awning. A roof-like cover, temporary in nature, extending from the wall of the building/structure, over an area to provide shade and/or shelter. The awning shall be entirely supported by the exterior wall of the building, with no independent means of support. 
    Basic industry and manufacturing. A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw materials, or a use engaged in storage of, or manufacturing processes utilizing flammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes which potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. 
    Bed and breakfast homestay. (See section 5700.) 
    Bed and breakfast inn. (See section 5700.) 
    Board of adjustment. An officially constituted body whose principal duties are to grant variances from the strict application of this zoning ordinance. (See section 7800.). 
    Boardinghouse. A dwelling, or part thereof, in which lodging is provided by the owner or operator to more than three boarders. 
    Boat sales and services. The uses of any building, land area or other premises for the display and sale of new or used boats, including any warranty repair work and other repair service as conducted as an accessory use. 
    Buffer areas. A strip of land identified on a site plan or by zoning ordinance, established to protect one type of land use from another land use which is incompatible. Buffer [area] zones may be zoned or shown on a site plan. Normally, a buffer zone is landscaped and kept in open space uses. 
    Buffering. Separating one use from another to shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances. 
    Building. Any structure designed, built, or intended for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind, or for an accessory use. When separated by an absolute fire separation, each portion of such structure so separated shall be deemed a separate building. This definition shall include the structures wholly or partly enclosed with an exterior wall. 
    Building line. A line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line at [a] specified distance, marking the minimum distance from the street line that a building may be erected. For existing buildings, the building line shall be the exterior wall or omitted wall line which is closest to the street. (See section 4200.) 
    Building official. The building official of the City of Wichita Falls, Texas. 
    Business and trade schools. A higher education facility primarily teaching usable skills that prepare students for jobs in a trade. 
    Bus station. Any premises for the transient housing or parking of motor-driven buses and the unloading and loading of passengers. 
    Carport. A roofed space, one story in height, covered with a flat or hipped roof and ordinarily used as a shelter under which vehicles are parked. 
    Car wash. A building or portion thereof containing facilities for washing automobiles. 
    Cemetery. A place dedicated to and used and intended to be used for the permanent interment of the human dead. It may be a mausoleum for vault or crypt interment, crematory, or combination. 
    Centerline. A line extending through the midpoint of each end of a runway. 
    Centerline, streets or alleys. A line erected midway between the bounding right-of-way lines of [a] street or alley. Where the bounding right-of-way lines are irregular, the centerline shall be determined by the city engineer. 
    Change of use. The replacement of an existing use by a new use, or a change in the nature of an existing use, but not including a change of ownership, tenancy, name, or management. 
    Clinic. An institution or station for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted outpatients by a physician or group of physicians. 
    Club. A building or portion of a building, together with the grounds and related facilities, used primarily by an association, its members, and their guests for social, fraternal, or recreational purposes. (This definition does not include private clubs as defined by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code; see section 5400.) 
    Coin-operated amusement machine. Any machine or device of any kind or character which is operated by coins, tokens, slugs, bills, credit or debit cards, for the purpose of dispensing or affording amusement, skill, pleasure, or redemption as allowed by state law. This definition shall include, but not be limited to, arcade games, video arcade games, pinball machines, and billiard tables with or without coin operation. This definition does not include service coin-operated machines such as pay toilets and pay telephones, food or beverage vending machines, or an amusement machine designed primarily for the entertainment of a child. 
    Coin-operated amusement machines establishment. An establishment where 50 percent or more of the gross floor area accessible to patrons is dedicated to the use and operation of coin-operated amusement machines, as defined herein. This definition shall include, but not be limited to, arcades, pool halls, and similar facilities. 
    College and university. An academic institution of higher learning, accredited or recognized by the state and offering a program or series of programs of academic study. 
    Co-location. To affix additional antennas on an existing tower that may include the placement of support ground equipment. 
    Commission. "Commission" shall be the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    Common open space. A parcel or parcels of land, or an area of water or combination of land and water within a site designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of a defined group of residents and owners (e.g., of a planned development project). Common open space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of residents and owners. (See section 4450.) 
    Communications tower. A "communications tower" shall mean and include all structures and accessory facilities relating to transmitting, receiving, reflecting or any other event or action associated with the use of the radio frequency spectrum or other frequencies associated with wireless communications. This may include, but shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone devices and exchanges, microwave relay facilities, telephone transmission facilities, and private and commercial mobile radio service facilities. A communications tower may include, but [is] not limited to, any of the following structures, singularly or in concert: 
a.  A lattice tower. 
b.  Stealth towers, where a tower is concealed within another structure. 
c.  A cylindrical steel structure, sometimes referred to as monopole, similar in appearance to a light pole, used to support antennas. 
    Community residential center. A publicly or privately operated use providing housing and care for individuals legally confined. Such use is historically described to include, but not limited to, prisons, jails, boot camps and similar uses. 
    Compatible land use. Includes any use of land adjacent to an airport that will protect the owners, occupants or users of the land from levels of noise or vibrations created by the operations of the airport, including the taking off and landing of aircraft, that may endanger the health, safety or welfare of the owners, occupants or users of the land and protect airport users from airport hazards. 
    Comprehensive plan. A comprehensive long-range plan intended to guide the growth and development of a community or region and one that includes analysis, recommendations and proposals for the community's population, economy, housing, transportation, community facilities and land use. 
    Conditional use. (See section 7200.) 
    Condominium. A building, or group of buildings, in which units are owned individually, and the structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. 
    Conical surface. A "conical surface" means a surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
    Contiguous. Next to, abutting, or touching and having a boundary, or portion thereof, which is coterminous. (See Abutting. ) 
    Contractors' yards. Yards with outdoor storage of equipment and material used by contractors. 
    Convalescent services. A use providing bed care and in-patient services for persons requiring regular medical attention, but excluding a facility providing surgical or emergency medical services, and excluding a facility providing care for alcoholism, drug addiction, mental disease, or communicable disease. 
    Convenience store. A retail establishment in which goods requiring no processing are normally bought in small lots in which accumulation and checkout time is minimal. Gasoline may be sold as an accessory use. 
    Convention center. A building or portion thereof designed to accommodate the assembly of large numbers of people. 
    Conversion. A change in the use of land or a structure. 
    Cul-de-sac. A turnaround at the end of a dead-end street. 
    Curb. A stone or concrete boundary usually marking the edge of the roadway or paved area. 
    Curb cut. The opening along the curbline at which point vehicles may enter or leave the roadway. 
    Day care center, commercial. Same as Day care center, limited , but not limited to a maximum of six individuals. 
    Day care center, limited. A facility or use of a building or portion thereof that provides care for less than 24 hours a day for six or fewer individuals. Care for an additional six individuals may be provided if the facility qualifies as a registered family home or group day care home as permitted by the Texas Department of Human Resources. This term includes nursery schools, preschools, day care centers for children or adults and similar uses but excludes public and private primary and/or secondary educational facilities. (Note: If facility is operated as a home occupation, see section 5100 for additional restrictions.) 
    Deed. A legal document conveying ownership of real property. 
    Deed restriction. (See Restrictive covenant. ) 
    Density. The relationship of dwelling units or rooms to the area of the lot or tract upon which a residential structure is located or erected. 
    Discontinuance of use. To cease or discontinue a use or activity, excluding temporary or short-term interruptions to a use or activity during periods of restoring, remodeling, maintaining, or otherwise improving a facility, or normal, seasonal cessation of a use, or other temporary cessation resulting from a change of use. 
    Donation box. Any box, container, building, enclosed trailer, or other receptacle that is intended for use as a collection point for donated clothing or other donated household materials. 
See Exh. A: Donation boxes; Zoning Districts Map, following [Sec.] 3610. 
    Drive-through/drive-in use. An establishment which by design, physical facilities, [or] service, encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods, or be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicles. 
    Driveway. A permanently surfaced (asphalt or gravel, or similar surfaces) area providing vehicular access between a street and an off-street parking or loading area. 
    Dwelling, duplex or two-family. A building containing two dwelling units joined at one or more sides by a party wall, roof or abutting separate walls, each having a single front entrance and being otherwise indistinguishable from a one-family dwelling in exterior appearance. 
    Dwelling, multifamily. A building containing three or more dwelling units. The term includes cooperative apartments, condominiums, and the like. For the purpose of these regulations, regardless of how rental units are equipped, any multifamily dwelling in which units are available for rental periods less than one week shall be considered a hotel. 
    Dwelling, single-family attached. (See Dwelling, duplex or two-family. ) 
    Dwelling, single-family detached. A dwelling designed and constructed for occupancy by one family and located on a lot or separate building tract. 
    Dwelling unit. A residential unit other than a mobile home providing complete, independent living facilities for one family, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, and cooking. 
    Dwelling, zero lot line. A dwelling which is located on a lot where the building limit line on one side is zero. (See section 5200.) 
    Easement. A privilege or right of use or enjoyment granted on, above, under, or across a particular tract of land by the owner. 
    Eaves. The lower borders of a roof that overhang the wall. 
    Exterminating service. Services related to the eradication and control of rodents, insects, and other pests with incidental storage on lots other than where the service is rendered. 
    Fabrication and assembly. The manufacturing from standardized parts of a distinct object differing from the individual components. 
    Facade. The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by persons not within the building. 
    Factory-built house. A dwelling unit that is constructed and assembled at a factory and transported to the building's site and placed on a prebuilt foundation. 
    Family. One or more persons related by blood, adoption, or marriage, or a group of not more than six unrelated persons occupying a single dwelling unit. Domestic servants, employed on the premises, may be housed without being counted as a family, and not more than three boarders may be accommodated. The term "family" shall not be construed to mean a fraternity, sorority, club, or institutional group. 
    Fence. A structure erected to enclose and screen areas of property. 
    Fence, privacy. A fence constructed of masonry and/or wood having a minimum height of six feet. 
    Firearm. Any device, designed to be used as a weapon or modified to be used as a weapon, from which a projectile is expelled through a barrel by the force of an explosion or other form of combustion. 
    Flea market. A collection or group of outdoor stalls, booths, tables or other similar arrangement, used by individual vendors, for the display and sale of various items of new or used merchandise. The hours of operation for flea markets shall be limited to no earlier than 6:00 a.m. and no later than 12:00 midnight. All merchandise for sale shall be displayed in an approved all-weather structure, or may be temporarily displayed in the open air for a period not to exceed 72 consecutive hours. 
    Floor area. The total square footage of all floors in the building measured to the outside faces of exterior walls or to the line of an omitted wall, whichever includes the largest area. 
    Floor area ratio. The ratio between the total square feet of floor area and the total square feet of land in the lot. 
    Fraternity or sorority house. A dwelling or dwelling unit maintained exclusively for fraternity or sorority members and their guests or visitors and affiliated with an academic or professional college, university or other institution of higher learning. 
    Freight hauling. Establishments engaged in undertaking the transportation of goods from shippers to receivers for a fee. 
    Frontage, lot. (See Lot frontage. ) 
    Frontage, streets. The length of all property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets measured along the line of the street, or if the street is a dead end, then the length of all property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the end of the dead-end street. 
    Front yard, residential. An area defined as the area across a lot bounded by the front lot line, the front yard line, and the side lot lines. 

    Fuel and chemical storage. Storage in aboveground containers for subsequent resale to distributors or retail dealers outlet. 
    Funeral home. A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation. 
    Garage sales. Periodic sale of used merchandise conducted at a residence. (See section 5130.) 
    Grade. The average elevation of the highest and lowest elevation measured at the finished surface of the ground at any of the exterior corners of the building or structure. 
    Group homes. A residential living arrangement defined in the Community Home for Disabled Persons Location Act, licensed by the state to provide food and shelter; personal guidance; care; supervision for not more than six disabled persons and two supervisors. This classification includes assisted living for the aged for no more than six persons and two supervisors or nursing personnel. This does not include activities defined under Personal care home. 
    Habitable. "Habitable" shall refer to housing units that have windows and doors installed, do not have holes in the exterior sides, roof or flooring of the unit, are not boarded up, and meet the city's minimum housing standards, as may be amended. 
    Halfway house. A publicly or privately operated use providing housing for juveniles or adults, regardless of the number of residents, for any of the following: 
(1)  Residence in lieu of institutional sentencing; 
(2)  Housing for parolees; 
(3)  Residence to those needing correctional institutionalization. 
    Hazardous material. Includes, but is not limited to, inorganic mineral acids of sulphur, fluorine, chlorine, nitrogen, chromium, phosphorous, selenium and arsenic and their common salts; lead, nickel and mercury and their inorganic salts or metallo-organic derivatives; coal, tar acids such as phenol and cresols and their salts; and all radioactive materials. 
    Hazard to air navigation. An obstruction determined to have [an] adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 
    Heavy machinery sales and service. A building or open area, other than a public parking area or right-of-way used for the display, sale, rental and storage of heavy equipment. 
    Height. (See section 4300.) 
    Height. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this provision and shown in the AICUZ study, zoning ordinance or maps, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. [Pertains to airport zoning.] 
    Historic district. A geographically definable area which possesses significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of buildings, structures, sites, areas, or land, which in turn are united by architectural, historical, archaeological, or cultural importance or significance. 
    Home occupation. (See section 5100.) 
    Homeowners' association. An incorporated nonprofit organization operating under recorded land agreements through which: 
a)  Each lot owner in a planned development or other described land area is automatically a member; and 
b)  Each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of expenses for the organization's activities, such as maintaining common property. 
    Horizontal surface. A "horizontal surface" is a plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zones. 
    Hospital. A hospital is a legally authorized institution in which there are complete facilities for diagnosis, treatment, surgery, laboratory, X-ray, and the prolonged care of bed patients. 
    Hotel. An establishment where lodging is provided for compensation other than in dwelling units. Unless otherwise specified by district regulations, hotels may serve meals to both occupants and others. For purposes of these regulations, the term "hotel" shall be construed to include a motel. 
    Imaginary surface. An "imaginary surface" shall include an approach or departure zone or surface, transition, conical or horizontal zones or surfaces as defined herein. 
    Indoor sports and recreation. Uses conducted within an enclosed building. Typical uses include bowling alleys, ice and roller skating rinks, and indoor racquetball courts. See section 5905 for coin-operated amusement machines establishment regulations. 
    Industrial park. A large tract of land that has been planned, developed and operated as an integrated facility for a number of individual industrial uses, with special attention to circulation, parking, utility needs, aesthetics, and compatibility. 
    In-fill housing: "In-fill housing" shall be housing installed or built on a lot which may have been previously occupied by another structure, and/or which may be located within an area occupied by other housing units. 
    Instrument runway. Existing or planned runway(s) of at least 4,000 feet for which there is or is planned to be an instrument landing procedure published by a defense agency of the federal government or by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    Internal circulation pattern. Streets and access ways within a site. 
    Kennel. Any premises, except where accessory to an agricultural use, where six or more dogs, cats, or other domesticated pets are kept. (See Chapter 14, Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances.) 
    Landfill. An area of land used for solid waste disposal in which refuse is buried underground between layers of dirt or fill material. 
    Landing area. The surface area of the airport used for landing, take-off or taxiing of aircraft 
    Landmark. (See section 6300.) 
    Landowner. Shall mean the legal or beneficial owner or owners of the land. The holder of an option or a purchase contract by other persons having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land shall be deemed to be a landowner for the purpose of this ordinance. 
    Landscape. An expanse of natural scenery or the addition of lawns, trees, plants, and other natural and decorative features to land. 
    Land use. A description of how land is occupied or utilized. 
    Land use plan. A plan showing the existing and proposed location, extent and intensity of development of land to be used in the future for varying types of residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, educational and other public and private purposes or combination of purposes. 
    Library, public. A collection in which literary, musical, artistic or reference materials (books, manuscripts, films) are kept for use by the general public. 
    Light manufacturing. A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of such products, and accessory storage, sales and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing. 
    Loading space. An area used for loading or unloading of goods from a vehicle in connection with the use of the site on which such space is located. 
    Local street. A street which is intended primarily to serve traffic within a neighborhood or limited residential district, and which is not necessarily continuous through several residential districts. 
    Lot. A parcel of land described and recorded as a lot in the records of [the] county, or in the event any lot or lots of land acreage as recorded are subdivided or cut up into smaller or different parcels of land, or in the event any parcel of such lot or lots of land acreage is used for the purpose of placing on any such parcel a principal building and its accessory buildings, each such parcel of land shall become a separate lot for the purposes of this ordinance, and the boundaries of each such lot shall be determined and defined so as to contain sufficient area to include the principal building and its accessory buildings to be erected thereon and the open spaces required under this ordinance. 
    Lot area. The square foot area of a lot within the bounding property lines and exclusive of dedicated streets and alleys. (See section 4100.) 
    Lot, corner. A lot situated at the junction of two or more streets. 
    Lot coverage. That portion of the lot that is covered by buildings and structures. 
    Lot depth. The horizontal distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line. 
    Lot frontage. The length of the front lot line measured at the street right-of-way line. 
    Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot line. A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space. 
    Lot, through. An interior lot having a frontage on two streets. 
    Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required building setback line. 
    Lumberyard. A site used for the storage, wholesale, and limited retail sales of lumber. This does not include business enterprises which sell home improvement supplies and lumber on a predominantly retail basis. 
    Manufactured housing. "Manufactured housing" refers to a HUD-code manufactured home constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to rules of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (act), and which is further defined and referenced under Texas Occupations Code § 1201.001 et seq. This term does not include those situations where the housing unit has been modified or provide openings or a pass-through not originally provided by the factory where the housing unit is subject to construction and safety inspection for HUD-code compliance; nor has received inspection and approval of such modifications by an inspector certified under the act to perform such inspections. Housing units so modified without such inspections shall thereafter be subject to applicable city building codes which may thereafter apply to the entire unit. 
    Manufactured housing, individual accessory use. "Manufactured housing, individual accessory use" shall be a housing unit located on the site of a commercial or industrial land use intended for use by security personnel subject to approval by the Department of Community Development. 
    Manufactured housing park. A "manufactured housing park" shall be a parcel of land, under single ownership, on which two or more manufactured homes or mobile homes in the aggregate are located and occupied as permanent dwelling units; and which may or may not allow for temporary use vehicles. 
    Manufactured housing sales. "Manufactured housing sales" shall be a building or area used for the sale of manufactured housing. 
    Manufactured housing subdivision. A "manufactured housing subdivision" shall be an area of not less than four acres so designated for the purpose of subdividing land into residential lots to be sold for the use of manufactured housing. 
    Marquee. Any hood, canopy, awning or permanent construction which projects from a wall of a building, usually above an entrance. 
    Medical office. An office of one or more medical doctors, dentists or similar members of the medical profession. 
    Metes and bounds. A method of describing the boundaries of land by directions and distances from a known point of reference. 
    Mine. 
(1)  A cavity in the earth from which minerals and ores are extracted; 
(2)  The act of removing minerals and ores. 
    Mining and excavation. The extraction of minerals, including solids, such as coal and ores; liquids, such as crude petroleum; and gases, such as natural gases. This term also includes quarrying; well operation; milling, such as crushing, screening, washing and flotation; and other preparation customarily done at the mine site or as part of a mining activity. 
    Mini-warehouse. A structure containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on an individual basis. (See Self-storage facility. ) 
    Mixed use development. The development of a tract of land or building or structure with two or more different uses, such as, but not limited to, residential, office, manufacturing, retail, public, or entertainment, in a compact urban form. 
    Mobile home. "Mobile home" means a structure other than a site-built house or manufactured home constructed prior to June 15, 1976. This term shall not be interpreted to include modular housing as defined and regulated by the state as industrialized housing, travel trailers, motorized homes or other such units designed or intended as temporary and/or recreational housing units. 
    Motel. A building or group of buildings developed as an integral unit in which there are: 
a)  Guest rooms for living or sleeping accommodations which are primarily for transient occupancy and which may be rented on a daily basis; 
b)  Desk or lobby service, telephone, maid, linen room, and similar services; and 
c)  Individual entrances from outside the building(s) to serve each individual living or sleeping unit. 
    Motor vehicle salvage yard. Any outdoor storage yard used for the deposit of dismantled or junked motor vehicles or any outdoor storage yard used for the deposit of any discarded material which has been a part of or is intended to be a part of any motor vehicle. 
    Movie theater. A building for showing motion pictures. 
    Museum. (See Art gallery/museum. ) 
    Neighborhood. A contiguous area containing residences which are of similar size, age, and construction style and sharing a common street system. Neighborhoods are defined by major streets, natural boundaries, subdivision boundaries or zoning districts. 
    Noise. Any undesired audible sound. 
    Nonconforming development. A parcel of land, improvement or use that was lawful prior to the enactment of this ordinance, effective May 23, 1985, or any amendment thereto, but that does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance except for the provisions of section 6100. 
    Nonconforming parcel. A parcel of land that is not in conformance with the Code of Ordinances or is not in conformance with provisions contained in this ordinance. Nonconformity may include lot size, frontage or lot width, or other conditions related to the area or width of a parcel or development of the parcel. This definition shall not be interpreted to mean a parcel which was established contrary to regulations contained under appendix A of the Code of Ordinances, or within this ordinance since the rezoning of property or since zoning was enacted in the city unless a variance to such regulations has been lawfully obtained. Such a parcel developed contrary to regulations in the Code of Ordinances shall be an illegal parcel. 
    Nonconforming site elements. Site elements are those elements which are ancillary to a use, structure or parcel which include, but are not limited to parking number and layout, provision of required handicapped parking, landscaping and irrigation, signage, free-standing or attached canopies or awnings, ingress and egress points and curb cut location(s), site circulation patterns compatible with the use and/or mixture of uses, outdoor lighting, and similar elements, features or provisions. 
    Nonconforming structure. A structure which is not in compliance with this ordinance as it relates to lot coverage, height, setback and other provisions which are intended to regulate the size, location or other element relating to the structure or placement of a structure. This definition shall not be interpreted to include building codes. 
    Nonconforming use. With respect to any provision of this appendix other than airport zoning, a legal use which is not a permitted use in that zoning district and which existed prior to the enactment of zoning within the city or a rezoning within a zoning district. [The term] "nonconforming use" may also apply to nonconformance with regulations which apply to parking, landscaping and signage requirements as applied to the current use which is in itself nonconforming. This definition shall not be interpreted to mean a use which was established since the rezoning of property or since zoning was enacted in the city, and is not permitted in that zoning district, not authorized by a conditional use permit, or which has not obtained a waiver of this ordinance from the city council, such use is an illegal use. 
    Nonconforming use. Only with respect to airport zoning, any structure or use of land which was inconsistent with these provisions on October 31, 1982, or amendments thereto. [Pertains to airport zoning.] 
    Nonprecision instrument runway. A "nonprecision instrument runway" is a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area-type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been planned or approved. 
    Nuisance. An interference with the enjoyment and use of property. 
    Nursery. Land used to raise and store flowers, trees, shrubs and plants for sale, which may also contain a structure for maintenance of the property. 
    Obstruction. With respect to any provision of this appendix other than airport zoning, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levy, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel, rectification, bridge, culvert, conduit, building, wire, fence, rock-, gravel-, refuse-filled structure, which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life and property. 
    Obstruction. Only with respect to airport zoning, any structure, growth or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in this provision. [Pertains to airport zoning.] 
    Office. A room, studio, suite, or building or any part thereof in which a person provides professional services. This definition shall not include business and personal services. Additionally, this definition shall not include offices which are related to and accessory to other on-site uses. An office shall not involve on-site manufacturing, fabrication, production, processing, assembling, cleaning, testing, repair, or storage of materials, goods and products; or the sale and delivery of any materials, goods or products which are physically located on the premises. Furthermore, an office shall not be used as a place of congregation for work off the premises. 
    Off-street parking space. A temporary storage area for a motor vehicle that is directly accessible to an access aisle, and which is not located on a dedicated street right-of-way. 
    Oil drilling. (See Mining and excavation. ) 
    Openings for light and air. Any window, window wall, or glass located in the building, but not including doors which are used only for ingress and egress. 
    Open space. Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space. 
    Open space ratio. Total area of open space divided by the total site area in which the open space is located. 
    Outdoor display. An area on public sidewalks used for display incidental and accessory to a primary use on the same lot and in close proximity of the primary use building or lease space. Outdoor display areas shall abut and be contiguous or align in-front of the primary use selling such merchandise. An encroachment agreement is required for outdoor display on public sidewalks (See sections 3980-3986). 
    Outdoor entertainment and recreation. Recreational uses conducted in open or partially enclosed or screened facilities. Typical uses include driving ranges, miniature golf courses, golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts, and outdoor racquetball courts. 
    Outdoor food court. An established lot or parcel of land with facilities allowing two or more mobile food establishments to be parked on the property for the purpose of vending on that property. 
    Outdoor seating. Seating not enclosed, but which may include a roof, awning or other such cover. 
    Outdoor storage. Any material, vehicle or equipment that has been used, damaged or partially dismantled and is: 
(1)  Stored outside indefinitely; or 
(2)  Held outside as inventory for future sale, processing or use. 
Such articles include, but are not limited to, inoperable motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts, appliances, boxes, crates, pipe or pipe fittings, paper, metal, tires, toys, concrete blocks, bricks, furniture, fixtures, machinery, motors, lumber, buildings or portions of buildings, building materials, barrels or clothing. 
    Owner. An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest to seek development of land. 
    Parcel. A lot or tract of land. 
    Park. A tract of land designated and used by the public for active and passive recreation. 
    Parking area. Any public or private land area designed and used for parking motor vehicles, including parking lots, garages, private driveways and legally designated areas of public streets. 
    Parking facility. An area or structure devoted to the parking or storage of automobiles for a fee. 
    Parking space. A space for the parking of a motor vehicle within a public or private parking area. 
    Party wall. A common shared wall between two separate structures, buildings, or dwelling units. 
    Permit. Written governmental permission issued by an authorized official, empowering the holder thereof to do some act not forbidden by law, but not allowed without such authorization. 
    Permitted use. Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district. 
    Person. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association or body politic and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian or other representative. 
    Personal care home. A residential living arrangement that provides food, shelter and guidance for no more than six persons and two supervisors or nursing personnel, including but not limited to, maternity homes, shelters for victims of crime, abuse and neglect. 
    Planned unit development (PUD). A planned unit development is a development of land which is planned and developed as a whole in a single development operation or programmed series of development, and which includes streets, utilities, lots or building sites, and which indicates all structures and their relationship to each other and to adjacent uses and improvements, as well as open spaces. A planned unit development may consist of dwelling units and detached, semidetached, attached or multifamily structures or any combination thereof and may also include nonresidential uses such as religious, cultural, recreational, commercial, or industrial uses, compatibly and harmoniously incorporated into the unitary design of the planned unit development. 
    Planning and Zoning Commission shall mean the City of Wichita Falls Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    Plat. A "plat" shall refer to both preliminary and final plats and shall be determined by the section in which it appears. 
    Plat, final. A "final plat" is a plat prepared by a licensed surveyor and submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for final approval which is duly acknowledged by its owners or proprietors of the land in the manner required for the acknowledgement of deeds and which is to be filed for record in the office of the county clerk of the county or counties in which the land lies. 
    Plat, preliminary. A tentative drawing made by a licensed surveyor for inspection purposes only, showing the entire tract of land sought to be subdivided, accurately describing all of said subdivision or addition by metes and bounds, locating the same with respect to an original corner of the original survey of which it is a part and giving the dimensions thereof of said subdivision or addition, and dimensions of all streets, alleys, squares, parks or other portions of same intended to be dedicated to public use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto. 
    Porch. A roofed space open on three sides, one or more stories in height. 
    Power generation. Production of electric current. 
    Precision instrument runway. A "precision instrument runway" is a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing System (ILS) or a Precision Approach Radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is indicated on an approved airport layout plan or other planning document. 
    Premises. Any lot or unplatted tract, or any combination of contiguous lots or unplatted tracts held under single ownership. 
    Primary building. The building on a lot which is occupied by the primary use. 
    Primary surface. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. Where the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed under [section] 6400 of appendix [B] of the Code of Ordinances, for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. 
    Primary use. A use which fulfills a primary function of a household, establishment, institution or other entity. 
    Private recreational areas, limited. Outdoor and indoor recreational areas designed to meet the needs of a residential neighborhood, and intended primarily to be used by the residents of that neighborhood. 
    Prohibited use. A use that is not permitted in a zone district. 
    Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. [The term] "publicly owned treatment works" or "POTW" shall have the same meaning as defined in section 106-566 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Wichita Falls, Texas. 
    Public right-of-way. A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription or condemnation, and used or intended to be used as a public use. 
    Public safety services. Fire stations, ambulance services, and police stations. 
    Recreational vehicle. A "recreational vehicle" is a vehicular-type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use that either has its own motive power or is mounted on or towed by another vehicle. The basic entities may include, but [are] not limited to, a camping trailer, fifth wheel trailer, motor home, travel trailer, and truck camper. 
    Recreational vehicle parks. "Recreational vehicle parks" shall be parks used exclusively for temporary use vehicles. The term "RV park" shall also include this definition. 
    Refinery. A building and equipment for refining metals and oil. 
    Religious assembly. Places of worship and activity where people gather. A property tax exemption obtained pursuant to the Property Tax Code of the state shall constitute prima facie evidence of religious use. 
    Repair services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of repair services to individuals and households rather than firms, but excluding automotive and equipment services use types. Typical uses include appliance repair shops, watch or jewelry repair shops, or musical instrument repair shops. 
    Residence. A home, abode or place where an individual is actually living at a specific point in time. 
    Residential care facility. A building with on-site supervisory personnel which provides shelter and care for abandoned, battered, disabled, or homeless individuals regardless of legal relationship. 
    Residential character. Refers to the appearance and nature of a residential area. Specifically showing no commercial intrusion, home occupations which do not attract attention, a high degree of maintenance and yard care and limited outdoor storage. 
    Residential use. Shall refer to such uses as single-family attached or detached dwellings, apartment complexes, condominiums, townhouses, duplexes, mobile/manufactured homes, nursing homes, retirement communities, or similar uses characterized by the long-term occupancy of a dwelling, as opposed to uses characterized by a short-term or transient nature, such as hotels, motels, halfway houses, RV parks or other such facilities and other such uses. 
    Residential zoning district. Shall refer to any zoning district which, as a permitted use, allows a residential use as defined herein, but which excludes the general commercial (GC) zoning district. 
    Restaurant. An establishment where food and drink are prepared, served and consumed primarily within the principal building. 
    Restaurant, limited. A business engaged in the serving of prepared foods which are served and primarily consumed on site and is contained within an area of not more than 1,200 square feet. Such enterprises may include, but are not limited to, salad bars, sandwich shops, ice cream parlors, tearooms, and similar uses. 
    Restriction. A limitation on property which may be created in a property deed, lease, mortgage, through certain zoning or subdivision regulations, or as a condition of approval of an application for development. 
    Restrictive covenant. A restriction on the use of land usually set forth in the deed. 
    Retail trade. The selling of merchandise to the general public. 
    Retail warehousing. Warehousing of inventory to include, but not [be] limited to, appliances, parts, home furnishings, showrooms or other such areas not generally accessed by the public or where there is provided areas for the display of products or merchandise which normally require specialized equipment for moving. 
    Rezone. To change the zoning classification of particular lots or parcels of land. 
    Right-of-way. 
(1)  A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, waterline, sanitary storm sewer, and other similar uses; 
(2)  Generally, the right of one to pass over the property of another. 
    Roof. The outside top covering of a building. 
    Runway. A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and take-off of aircraft along its length. 
    School, primary. Includes grades one through six and may or may not include a kindergarten. 
    School, secondary. Includes grades seven through 12, popularly known as junior and senior high schools. 
    Screening. A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms or densely planted vegetation. 
    Self-storage facility mini-warehouse. (See Mini-warehouse. ) 
    Service, business. Establishments primarily engaged in rendering services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis (e.g., janitorial, fax, lawn care, etc.). 
    Service, personal. Establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his apparel (e.g., laundering facilities, dry cleaners, photography studio, beauty/barber shop, shoe repair, reducing salons, tailor, etc.). 
    Service, professional. (See Office. ) 
    Services. Establishments primarily engaged in providing services for individuals, business and government establishments and other organizations. 
    Service station. (See Automotive service station. ) 
    Setback. The minimum distance from the street right-of-way line or any other lot line that establishes the area within which the principal structure must be erected or placed. 

    Setback area. Shall be the area between the property line and the minimum building setback as established by the zoning district in which the lot is located or which is according to a final plat filed for record with the county. 
    Setback, front. The distance extending for the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the front wall of the structure. 
    Setback, rear. The distance between the rear lot and the rear wall of a primary structure, and bounded on both sides by the side setbacks. 
    Setback, side. The distance between the side property lines and the side wall of a structure and bounded by the front setback line and rear lot line. Any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line is a side lot line. Where a lot has only three lot lines, those lot lines which do not front on a street shall be deemed as side lot lines. 
    Setback, side (exterior). The side setback on the street side property line of a corner lot. 
    Setback, side (interior). The side setback from the property line which is abutting to another lot. 
    Shooting range (indoor). A facility which is completely enclosed within a building or structure for the use of archery and/or discharging of firearms (i.e., handgun, pistol, rifle, shotgun) for the purposes of target practice, marksmanship training, league shooting, or temporary competitions. Designed to prevent a projectile fired from a firearm at a target from going beyond the boundaries of the area, by use of a backstop or other barrier that is designed to completely stop the projectile or prevent a potentially dangerous ricochet. 
    Shooting range (outdoor). A recreational facility designed and constructed for the practice of and teaching of archery and/or marksmanship and discharging of firearms using live ammunition for the purposes [of] target practice, silhouette, skeet and trap shooting, black powder, self-defense, temporary competitions or similar recreational and/or professional shooting. 
    Shopping center. A group of commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer access, aesthetic considerations and protection from the elements. 
    Sign. Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illuminations or projected images. This definition shall not include the national and state flag. 
    Single-family dwelling. "Single-family dwelling," as the term is used herein, is not intended to discriminate between the various types of dwellings that may be used by a single family. This term, as used herein, shall be used to differentiate between site-built housing subject to city-adopted building codes and other housing types that could function as a single-family residence. 
    Site. Any plot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or parcels of land. 
    Site plan. A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, all of the buildings, structures and principal site development features, including parking, access, and landscaping and screening, and uses proposed for a specific lot or site or parcel of land. 
    Slaughterhouse-meat packing. Establishments where animals are butchered and packaged for sale. 
    Stable. A structure with a capacity for more than two horses or mules. 
    Stand. A "stand" is a specific area within a recreational vehicle park that is set-aside for use by a recreational vehicle. 
    Stockyards. Stockyards and commercial feedlots shall be defined, for the purposes of this section, as confined areas for feeding and/or holding of certain animals, such as cattle, swine, sheep and goats. 
    Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling. 
    Street line. A dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a continuous street. 
    Structural alteration. Any change in either the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams and girders, or in the dimensions or configurations of the roof or exterior walls. 
    Structure. With respect to any provision of this appendix other than airport zoning, a "structure" may be a building, derrick, silo, elevator, electrical transmission tower, exhaust stack, light standard, pole or similar such use. 
    Structure. Only with respect to airport zoning, an object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including, but not limited to, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formations and overhead transmission lines. [Pertains to airport zoning.] 
    Subdivision. The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale, development or lease. 
    Substantial improvements. An improvement which increases the floor area of an existing structure by more than 50 percent or represents an investment of greater than 50 percent of the present market value of the existing structure. 
    Supermarket. A retail establishment primarily selling food as well as other convenience and household goods. 
    Swimming pool. A water-filled enclosure, permanently constructed or portable, having a depth of more than 18 inches below the level of the surrounding land, or an above-surface pool having a depth of more than 30 inches, designed, used and maintained for swimming and bathing. 
    Temporary use vehicles. A "temporary use vehicle" shall be a travel trailer or recreational vehicle manufactured by recognized manufacturers of such vehicles, but shall exclude tent trailers and similar such units. 
    Therapy and rehabilitation. A use engaged in a therapeutic and/or rehabilitation activity by personnel licensed by the state. 
    Townhouse. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a series or group of not less than three contiguous units, but limited in this ordinance to a maximum of ten contiguous units. 
    Trailer park or court. A unified development designed to supply parking and utility connections for travel trailers, motor homes, and other transient residential trailers/vehicles. 
    Transitional surfaces. "Transitional surfaces" extend outward at 90-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet horizontal for each foot vertical from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces, which projects through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at 90-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
    Travel trailer. A transportable, factory-built structure, which in the traveling mode is less than eight body feet in width and less than 40 body feet in length and designed as a temporary use dwelling unit. 
    Trucking facility. A building or area in which freight brought by [a] motor truck is assembled and/or stored for shipping interstate and intrastate commerce by [a] motor truck. 
    Use. The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended, or for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained. 
    Utility, service. 
(1)  Any agency which, under public franchise or ownership, or under certificate of convenience and necessity, provides the public with electricity, gas, heat, steam, communication, rail transportation, water, sewage collection, or other similar service; 
(2)  A closely regulated private enterprise with an exclusive franchise for providing a public service. 
    Variance. (See section 7300.) 
    Veterinary services. An establishment where animals and pets are admitted for examination and treatment. 
    Warehouse. A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials. 
    Warehousing facilities. Terminal facilities for handling freight with or without maintenance facilities. 
(Ord. No. 28-86, § 7, 4-1-1986; Ord. No. 76-87, § 1, 8-18-1987; Ord. No. 23-88, § 1, 3-1-1988; Ord. No. 39-88, § 2, 3-15-1988; Ord. No. 64-88, § 2, 5-31-1988; Ord. No. 92-88, § 1, 8-2-1988; Ord. No. 30-89, § I, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 27-90, § 7, 5-1-1990; Ord. No. 81-90, § 3, 12-6-1990; Ord. No. 31-91, § 1, 4-2-1991; Ord. No. 109-92, 12-1-1992; Ord. No. 158-93, § 2, 12-21-1993; Ord. No. 74-94, § 2, 5-17-1994; Ord. No. 75-96, § 1, 6-4-1996; Ord. No. 95-96, §§ 1, 2, 7-2-1996; Ord. No. 70-97, § 1, 8-5-1997; Ord. No. 35-98, §§ 1, 2, 4-21-1998; Ord. No. 66-99, § 1, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 71-2000, § 3, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 103-2000, § 2, 10-3-2000; Ord. No. 32-2001, §§ 2, 3, 4-3-2001; Ord. No. 45-2001, § 1, 5-1-2001; Ord. No. 95-2001, § 2, 10-2-2001; Ord. No. 96-2001, § 1, 10-2-2001; Ord. No. 2-2002, § 1, 1-3-2002; Ord. No. 53-2002, § 2, 7-16-2002; Ord. No. 62-2003, § 1, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 78-2006, § 3, 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 43-2016, 11-1-2016; Ord. No. 44-2016, 11-1-2016; Ord. No. 51-2018, § 3, 10-2-2018) 
3000. - ZONING DISTRICT TYPES AND REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section II of Ord. No. 30-89, adopted May 2, 1989, amended § 3000 in its entirety, but substantive provisions were made only in these sections indicated in the history notes to each section. 

[Sec.] 3010. - Zoning districts established. 
    The city is hereby divided into the following zoning districts: 
Section No. Map Code Zoning 
District 
Name 3040 SF-1 Single-family residential (large lot) 3100 SF-2 Single-family residential (standard lot) 3170 MFR Multifamily residential 3250 RMU Residential mixed use district 3320 MHR Manufactured housing residential 3360 LO Limited office district 3370 LC Limited commercial district 3450 GC General commercial district 3510 LI Light industrial district 3580 HI Heavy industrial district Special-Purpose Zoning Districts 3640 PUD Planned unit development 3700 RDD River development district 3780 CBD Central business district 3840 BA Brook Avenue district 3900 CC Commercial corridor  
(Ord. No. 64-88, § 3, 5-31-1988; Ord. No. 72-99, § 1, 8-3-1999; Ord. No. 71-2000, § 7, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 32-2010, § 1, 6-1-2010) 
[Sec.] 3020. - Application of zoning districts. 
    A zoning district shall apply to each lot, parcel, or site within the city. A zoning district designation may apply also to a portion of a site. 
[Sec.] 3030. - Hierarchy of zoning districts. 
    References to less restrictive and more restrictive zoning districts shall refer to the zoning districts established in section 3010, and shall represent a progression from SF-1 Single-Family Residential (large lot) being the most restrictive to HI Heavy Industrial as the least restrictive. The special-purpose zoning districts shall not be included in the hierarchy. 
[Sec.] 3035. - Permitted and conditional uses. 
    Uses allowed in each zoning district shall be in accordance with the permitted and conditional uses listed for each district. Uses which are not specifically listed, but are similar in nature and meet the purpose of the zoning district, may be allowed by the Commission. 
3040. - SF-1-SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (LARGE LOT) 

[Sec.] 3050. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the SF-1 Single-Family Residential District is to preserve low-density, large lot single-family development. This district is suitable where there are large lots of 8,500 square feet or more. 
[Sec.] 3060. - Permitted uses. 
A.  The following uses are permitted in the SF-1 Single-Family Residential district: 
Residential uses: 
Dwelling, single-family detached. 
Group homes. 
B.  The following uses are permitted in the SF-1 Single-Family Residential District subject to the site plan review provisions of section 7100: 
Civic uses: 
Park. 
School, primary. 
(Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 75-96, § 2, 6-4-1996) 
[Sec.] 3070. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the SF-1 Single-Family Residential District subject to the approval process provided in section 7200: 
Residential uses: 
Bed and breakfast homestay. 
Dwelling, zero lot line single-family, subject to the provisions of section 5200. 
Limited multifamily residential uses, subject to the provisions of section [5920]. 
Manufactured home, subject to the provisions of section 5600. 
Personal care home. 
Civic uses: 
Day care centers, commercial (nonresidential building). 
Day care centers, limited (not conducted as a home occupation). 
Private recreation areas, limited. 
Public safety services. 
Religious assembly. 
Utility service. 
Commercial uses: 
Bed and breakfast inn. 
Oil drilling, subject to the provisions of appendix A, Subdivision and Development Regulations, section 6.4 Oil and Gas Well, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 31-91, § 3, 4-2-1991; Ord. No. 75-96, § 2, 6-4-1996; Ord. No. 8-2003, § 2, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 10-2003, § 2, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 62-2003, § 2, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 29-2007, § 1, 3-20-2007) 
[Sec.] 3080. - Development regulations. 
    Each site in the SF-1 Single-Family Residential District shall be subject to the following site regulations except zero lot line single-family dwellings and limited multifamily residential developments: 
l.  Lot area: 8,500 square feet, minimum for single-family dwelling; 5,000 square feet minimum for other uses. 
2.  Lot width: 60 ft., minimum for single-family dwelling; 50-foot minimum for other uses. 
3.  Residential density: One primary dwelling unit per lot, maximum. 
4.  Height: 35 ft., maximum. For school and religious assembly uses, the maximum height shall be 45 feet. 
5.  Front Setback: 25-foot minimum, except for rear access subdivision where reduced setback as per section 4240 shall apply. 
6.  Side setback, interior: Five feet, minimum. 
7.  Side setback, exterior: l5 feet, minimum, except 25-foot minimum for nonresidential. 
8.  Rear setback: 
A.  Single family dwelling: Five-foot minimum from common lot line or one foot minimum from alley. (See section 6500 for accessory structure setbacks and section 6210 for setback requirements for rear vehicular access.) 
B.  All other uses: Five feet, minimum. However, in no case shall the roof overhang extend over the property line. 
9.  Building coverage: 50 percent of lot area, maximum 
Note- See section 4600 for buffering requirements. 
(Ord. No. 28-86, § 1, 4-1-1986; Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 27-90, § 3, 5-1-1990; Ord. No. 81-90, §§ 2, 3, 6, 12-6-1990; Ord. No. 10-2003, § 2, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 39-2003, § 1, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 92-2007, § 1, 10-2-2007) 
3100. - SF-2-SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (STANDARD LOT) 

[Sec.] 3110. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the SF-2 Single-Family Residential district is to provide for residential areas that are protected from intrusion by uses which diminish the quality of the neighborhood, and to promote visually attractive and quiet neighborhoods. This district is suitable for existing residential areas as well as for development of additional single-family residences. 
[Sec.] 3120. - Permitted uses 
A.  The following uses are permitted in the SF-2 district: 
Residential uses: 
Dwelling, single-family detached. 
Group homes. 
B.  The following uses are permitted in the SF-2 district subject to the site plan review provisions of section 7100: 
Residential uses: 
Dwelling, zero lot line single-family, subject to the provisions of section 5200. 
Civic uses: 
Park. 
School, primary. 
(Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 75-96, § 2, 6-4-1996) 
[Sec.] 3130. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the SF-2 district subject to the approval process provided in section 7200: 
Residential uses: 
Bed and breakfast homestay. 
Dwelling, duplex or two-family. 
Limited multifamily residential uses, subject to the provisions of section [5920]. 
Manufactured home, subject to the provisions of section 5600. 
Personal care home. 
Civic uses: 
Day care centers, commercial (nonresidential building). 
Day care centers, limited (not conducted as a home occupation). 
Library, public. 
Private recreation areas, limited. 
Public safety services. 
Religious assembly. 
School, secondary. 
Utility service. 
Commercial uses: 
Bed and breakfast inn. 
Oil drilling, subject to the provisions of appendix A, Subdivision and Development Regulations, section 6.4 Oil and Gas Well, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 31-91, § 3, 4-2-1991; Ord. No. 75-96, § 2, 6-4-1996; Ord. No. 90-2002, § 1, 11-5-2002; Ord. No. 8-2003, § 1, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 10-2003, § 2, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 62-2003, § 3, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 29-2007, § 2, 3-20-2007) 
[Sec.] 3140. - Development regulations. 
    Each site in an SF-2 district shall be subject to the following site regulations except for zero lot line single-family residential use and limited multifamily residential developments: 
1.  Lot area: 5,000 square feet, minimum. 
2.  Lot width: 50 feet, minimum. 
3.  Residential density: No more than one primary dwelling unit per lot, except for duplex residential. 
4.  Height: 35 feet, maximum. For school and religious assembly uses, the maximum height shall be 45 feet. 
5.  Front setback: 25-foot minimum, except for rear access subdivision where reduced setback as per section 4240 shall apply. 
6.  Side setback, interior: Five feet, minimum. 
7.  Side setback, exterior: l5 feet, minimum except, 25-foot minimum for nonresidential use. 
8.  Rear setback: 
A.  Single family and duplex dwelling: Five-foot minimum from common lot line or one-foot minimum from alley. (See section 6500 for accessory structure setbacks and section 6210 for setback requirements for rear vehicular access.) 
B.  All other uses: Five-foot minimum. However, in no case shall the roof overhang extend over the property line. 
9.  Building coverage: 50 percent of lot area, maximum. 
Note- See section 4600 for buffering requirements. 
(Ord. No. 28-86, § 1, 4-1-1986; Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 27-90, § 4, 5-1-1990; Ord. No. 81-90, §§ 2, 3, 6, 12-6-1990; Ord. No. 10-2003, § 2, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 39-2003, § 1, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 92-2007, § 2, 10-2-2007) 
3170. - MFR-MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

[Sec.] 3180. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the MFR Multifamily Residential District is to accommodate multifamily residential units which provide basic services and facilities to residents, including parking and useful recreation areas. These districts would be located near major streets and commercial facilities and other selected areas where multifamily uses may be desirable. 
[Sec.] 3190. - Permitted uses. 
A.  The following uses are permitted in the MFR Multifamily Residential District: 
Residential uses: 
Dwelling, duplex or two-family. 
Dwelling, single-family detached. 
Group homes. 
Civic uses: 
Day care centers, limited. 
Private recreational areas, limited. 
B.  The following uses are permitted in the MFR Multifamily Residential District subject to the site plan review provisions of section 7100: 
Residential uses: 
Bed and breakfast homestay. 
Boardinghouse. 
Condominiums, residential. 
Dwelling, multifamily, up to 25 units per acre. 
Dwelling, zero lot line single-family, subject to the provisions of section 5200. 
Fraternity and sorority houses. 
Townhouse, subject to the provisions of section 5300. 
Civic uses: 
Day care centers, commercial. 
Library, public. 
Park. 
Public safety services. 
Religious assembly. 
School, primary and secondary. 
Utility service. 
Oil drilling, subject to the provisions of appendix A, Subdivision and Development Regulations, section 6.4 Oil and Gas Well, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 31-91, § 3, 4-2-1991; Ord. No. 75-96, § 2, 6-4-1996) 
[Sec.] 3200. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the MFR district subject to the approval process provided in section 7200: 
Residential uses: 
Dwelling, multifamily, exceeding 25 units per acre. 
Manufactured homes, subject to the provisions of section 5600. 
Personal care home. 
Civic uses: 
Convalescent services. 
Residential care facility. 
(Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 75-96, § 2, 6-4-1996) 
[Sec.] 3210. - Development regulations. 
    Each site in an MFR district shall be subject to the following site regulations except for zero lot line single family residential and townhouses: 
1.  Lot area: 5,000 square feet, minimum. 
2.  Lot width: 50 feet, minimum. 
3.  Front setback: 25-foot minimum, except for rear access subdivision where reduced setback as per section 4240 shall apply. 
4.  Side setback, interior: Five feet, minimum 
5.  Side setback, exterior: 25-foot minimum, except 15-foot minimum for single-family and duplex dwellings. 
6.  Rear setback: 
A.  Single-family and duplex dwelling: Five-foot minimum from common lot line or one ft. minimum from alley. (See section 6500 for accessory structure setbacks and section 6210 for setback requirements for rear vehicular access.) 
B.  All other uses: Five-foot minimum. However, in no case shall the roof overhang extend over the property line. 
7.  Height: 40 feet, maximum, except for multifamily dwellings exceeding 25 units per acre. For school and religious assembly uses, the maximum height shall be 45 feet. 
8.  Building Coverage: 50 percent of lot area, maximum. 
9.  Open space: 20 percent of lot area, minimum, for multifamily dwellings containing 25 units or more. 
Note- See section 4600 for buffering requirements. 
(Ord. No. 83-85, § 1, 8-6-1985; Ord. No. 28-86, § 1, 4-1-1986; Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 27-90, § 4, 5-1-1990; Ord. No. 81-90, §§ 2, 3, 6, 12-6-1990; Ord. No. 39-2003, § 1, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 92-2007, § 3, 10-2-2007) 
3250. - RMU-RESIDENTIAL MIXED USE DISTRICT 

[Sec.] 3260. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the RMU Residential Mixed Use District is to accommodate areas which now have residential uses intermixed with various types of nonresidential uses. Due to the mixed use character of these areas, commercial uses will be allowed as conditional uses. 
[Sec.] 3270. - Permitted uses. 
A.  The following uses are permitted in the RMU Residential Mixed Use District: 
Residential uses: 
Dwelling, duplex or two-family. 
Dwelling, single-family detached. 
Group homes. 
Civic uses: 
Day care centers, limited. 
Private recreational areas, limited. 
Commercial uses: 
Agricultural uses, as permitted by state law, in lots which have a minimum area of 10,000 square feet. 
B.  The following uses are permitted in the RMU Residential Mixed Use District subject to the site plan review provisions of section 7100: 
Residential uses: 
Boardinghouse. 
Condominium, residential. 
Dwelling, multifamily, up to 25 units per acre. 
Dwelling, zero lot line single-family, subject to the provisions of section 5200. 
Fraternity and sorority house. 
Townhouse residential, subject to the provisions of section 5300. 
Civic uses: 
Convalescent services. 
Day care centers, commercial. 
Library, public. 
Park. 
Public safety services. 
Religious assembly. 
School, primary and secondary. 
Utility service. 
Commercial uses: 
Oil drilling, subject to the provisions of appendix A, Subdivision and Development Regulations, section 6.4 Oil and Gas Well, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 75-96, § 2, 6-4-1996) 
[Sec.] 3280. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the RMU Residential Mixed Use District subject to the approval process provided in section 7200: 
Residential uses: 
Dwelling, multifamily, exceeding 25 units per acre. 
Manufactured homes, subject to the provisions of section 5600. 
Manufactured housing parks, subdivisions, subject to the provisions of section 5600. 
Manufactured housing, outside of mobile home/manufactured housing parks or manufactured housing. 
Personal care home. 
Civic uses: 
Residential care facility. 
Commercial uses: 
Alcoholic beverage sales, subject to the provisions of section 5400. 
Art gallery/museum. 
Auto repair service. 
Auto sales and services. 
Automotive service stations. 
Boat sales and service. 
Business and trade schools. 
Clinic. 
Club. 
College and university. 
Contractor's yard. 
Convenience store. 
Exterminating service, without chemical storage. 
Flea market. 
Funeral home. 
Hospital. 
Hotel. 
Indoor sports and recreation. 
Kennel. 
Medical office. 
Motel. 
Movie theater. 
Nursery. 
Office. 
Parking facility. 
Radio and TV transmitting towers. 
Repair services. 
Restaurants. 
Retail trade. 
Self-storage facilities/mini-warehouse. 
Services. 
Stable. 
Veterinary services. 
Heavy commercial uses: 
Warehousing facility. 
(Ord. No. 28-86, § 13, 4-1-1986; Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 75-96, § 2, 6-4-1996; Ord. No. 35-98, § 1, 4-21-1998; Ord. No. 71-2000, § 4, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 103-2000, § 5, 10-3-2000; Ord. No. 95-2001, § 5, 10-2-2001) 
[Sec.] 3290. - Development regulations. 
    Each site in the RMU district shall be subject to the following development regulations except for zero lot line residential, townhouses, and mobile home parks and subdivisions. 
l.  Lot area: 5,000 square feet, minimum 
2.  Lot width: 50 feet, minimum 
3.  Front setback: 25-foot minimum, except for rear access subdivision where reduced setback as per section 4240 shall apply. 
4.  Side setback, interior: Five-foot minimum 
5.  Side setback, exterior: 25-foot minimum except l5-foot minimum for single-family and duplex dwellings. 
6.  Rear setback: 
A.  Single-family and duplex dwelling: Five feet minimum from common lot line or one foot minimum from alley. (See section 6500 for accessory structure setbacks and section 6210 for setback requirements for rear vehicular access.) 
B.  All other uses: five feet, minimum. However, in no case shall the roof overhang extend over the property line. 
7.  Height: 35 feet, maximum. For school and religious assembly uses, the maximum height shall be 45 feet. 
8.  Building coverage: 55 percent of lot area, maximum, except 50 percent of the lot area, maximum, for single-family and duplex dwellings. 
9.  Open space: 20 percent of lot area, minimum, for multifamily dwellings containing 25 units or more. 
Note- See section 4600 for buffering requirements. 
(Ord. No. 83-85, § 1, 8-6-1985; Ord. No. 28-86, 4-1-1986; Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 27-90, § 4, 5-1-1990; Ord. No. 81-90, §§ 2, 3, 6, 12-6-1990; Ord. No. 39-2003, § 1, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 92-2007, § 4, 10-2-2007) 
3320. - MHR-MANUFACTURED HOUSING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

[Sec.] 3330. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the MHR Manufactured Housing Residential District is to accommodate mobile home parks and subdivisions with standards that assure adequate spacing and other site standards. 
(Ord. No. 71-2000, § 9, 7-5-2000) 
[Sec.] 3340. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the MHR Manufactured Housing Residential District subject to the site plan review provisions of section 7100: 
    Manufactured housing parks and manufactured housing subdivisions subject to provisions of section 5600. 
(Ord. No. 71-2000, § 10, 7-5-2000) 
Sec. 3350. - Conditional uses 
    The following uses are permitted in the MHR Manufactured Housing Residential District subject to the approval process provided in section 7200: 
    Recreational vehicle park. 
[Sec. 3355. - ] Development regulations. 
    The development regulations for the MHR Manufactured Housing Residential District shall be subject to the provisions of section 5600 and other applicable provisions of this ordinance, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 71-2000, § 11, 7-5-2000) 
3360. - LO-LIMITED OFFICE DISTRICT 

[Sec.] 3361. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the LO Limited Office District is to encourage small office development of high character in a generally noncommercial environment. The offices allowed in the limited office district have relatively low traffic generation characteristics, require limited identification by signs, and are intended to buffer residential uses from more intensive nonresidential uses and nonresidential streets. 
(Ord. No. 64-88, § 1, 5-31-1988) 
[Sec.] 3363. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in an LO Limited Office District, subject to the site plan review provisions of section 7100: 
Commercial uses: 
Bed and breakfast inn. (Refer to section 5700, Bed and Breakfast Regulations, for signage requirements.) 
Medical offices, 1,200 square feet or less in gross floor area. 
Offices, 1,200 square feet or less in gross floor area. 
Residential uses: 
Bed and breakfast homestay. (Refer to section 5700, Bed and Breakfast Regulations, for signage requirements.) 
Dwelling, duplex or two-family. 
Dwelling, single-family detached. 
Dwelling, zero lot line, single-family, subject to the provisions of section 5200. 
(Ord. No. 64-88, § 1, 5-31-1988; Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 81-90, § 1, 12-6-1990; Ord. No. 31-91, § 3, 4-2-1991) 
[Sec.] 3364. - Conditional uses. 
    The following [uses are] permitted in the LO Limited Office District subject to the approval process provided in section 7200: 
Civic uses: 
Religious assembly. 
Commercial [uses]: 
Medical offices, more than 1,200 square feet in gross floor area. 
Offices, more than 1,200 square feet in gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. 64-88, § 1, 5-31-1988; Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989) 
[Sec.] 3365. - Development regulations. 
    Each site in an LO Limited Office District shall be subject to the following development regulations, except for zero lot line dwellings: 
1.  Lot area: 5,000 square feet minimum. 
2.  Lot width: 50-foot minimum. 
3.  Front Setback: 25-foot minimum, except for rear access subdivision where reduced setback as per section 4240 shall apply. 
4.  Side setback interior: Five-foot minimum. 
5.  Side setback exterior: 25-foot minimum, except 15-foot minimum for single-family and duplex dwellings. 
6.  Rear setback: 
A.  Single-family and duplex dwelling: Five-foot minimum from common lot line or one foot minimum from alley. (See section 6500 for Accessory Structure setbacks and section 6210 for setback requirements for rear vehicular access.) 
B.  All other uses: Five-foot minimum. 
7.  Height: 
A.  Residential uses: 35 feet, maximum 
B.  For religious assembly uses: the maximum height shall be 45 feet. [For] all other nonresidential uses, one story maximum not exceeding 25 feet. 
8.  Building coverage: 50 percent of lot area, maximum. 
Note- See section 4600 for buffering requirements. 
(Ord. No. 64-88, § 1, 5-31-1988; Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 81-90, §§ 1, 2, 12-6-1990; Ord. No. 39-2003, § 1, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 92-2007, § 5, 10-2-2007) 
[Sec.] 3366. - Special conditions. 
    [The following special conditions are applicable to the LO Limited Office District:] 
1.  Hours of operation shall be limited to no earlier than 6:00 a.m. and no later than 11:00 p.m. 
2.  Lighting. All outdoor lighting is limited to a maximum of 12 feet in height and must be directed away from residential areas. 
(Ord. No. 64-88, § 1, 5-31-1988) 
[Sec.] 3367. - Sign regulations. 
A.  On-premises ground signs. On-premises ground signs shall be permitted in accordance with the following regulations: 
1.  Maximum area: [30] square feet. 
2.  Maximum height: Three feet. 
3.  Maximum number: One per lot. 
Note- Signs shall not obstruct view to motorists and pedestrians and [shall meet] the requirements of section 102-40, Visibility Sight Triangle, of the Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
B.  On-premises wall signs. On-premises wall signs shall be permitted in accordance with the following regulations: 
1.  Maximum area: 30 square feet. 
2.  Maximum number: One per business. 
C.  Miscellaneous signs. Construction, directional, nameplate, and real estate signs shall be allowed as per the provisions of Table 6741. 
(Ord. No. 64-88, 5-31-1988) 
3370. - LC-LIMITED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

[Sec.] 3380. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the LC Limited Commercial District is to accommodate small offices and limited commercial activities. These districts are intended to be adjacent to residential areas and act as a buffer between residential and more intense uses. 
[Sec.] 3390. - Permitted uses. 
A.  The following uses are permitted in the LC Limited Commercial District: 
Residential uses: 
Dwelling, duplex two-family. 
Dwelling, single-family detached. 
Group homes. 
Civic uses: 
Day care centers, limited. 
Private recreational areas, limited. 
B.  The following uses are permitted in the LC Limited Commercial District subject to the site plan review provisions of section 7100 and to the provisions of section 3420, "special conditions": 
Residential uses: 
Bed and breakfast homestay. 
Boardinghouse. 
Condominium, residential. 
Dwelling, multifamily, up to 25 units per acre. 
Dwelling, zero lot line, single-family, subject to the provisions of section 5200. 
Fraternity and sorority houses. 
Townhouse, residential, subject to the provisions of section 5300. 
Civic uses: 
Day care centers, commercial, 1,200 square feet or less in gross floor area. 
Library, public. 
Parks. 
Public safety services. 
Religious assembly. 
School, primary and secondary. 
Utility service. 
Commercial uses: 
Bed and breakfast inn. 
Medical offices, 1,200 square feet or less in gross floor area. 
Offices, 1,200 square feet or less in gross floor area. 
Oil drilling, subject to the provisions of appendix A, Subdivision and Development Regulations, section 6.4 Oil and Gas Well, as amended. 
Services, 1,200 square feet or less in gross floor area, excluding automotive repair services and restaurants 
(Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 31-91, § 3, 4-2-1991; Ord. No. 75-96, § 2, 6-4-1996) 
[Sec.] 3400. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the LC Limited Commercial District subject to the approval process provided in section 7200 and to the provisions of section 3420, Special Conditions: 
Residential uses: 
Dwelling, multifamily, exceeding 25 units per acre. 
Manufactured homes, subject to the provisions of section 5600. 
Personal care home. 
Civic uses: 
Day care centers, commercial, more than 1,200 square feet in gross floor area. 
Residential care facility. 
Commercial uses: 
Alcoholic beverage sales, subject to the provisions of section 5400. 
Art gallery/museum. 
Clinic. 
Club. 
Convenience stores. 
Donation box. 
Medical offices, more than 1,200 square feet in gross floor area. 
Offices, more than 1,200 square feet in gross floor area. 
Restaurant, limited. 
Retail trade, excluding automobile sales and supermarkets. 
Services, more than 1,200 square feet in gross floor area, excluding automotive repair services and restaurants. 
Self-storage facility/mini-warehouse. 
(Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 67-91, § 1, 7-2-1991; Ord. No. 74-94, § 1, 5-17-1994; Ord. No. 81-94, § 1, 6-21-1994; Ord. No. 75-96, § 2, 6-4-1996; Ord. No. 116-2003, § 1, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 43-2016, 11-1-2016) 
[Sec.] 3410. - Development regulations. 
    Each site in an LC Limited Commercial District shall be subject to the following development regulations, except for zero lot line residential and townhouses. 
l.  Lot area: 5,000 square feet, minimum. 
2.  Lot width: 50 feet, minimum. 
3.  Front setback: 25 ft. minimum, except for rear access subdivision where reduced setback as per section 4240 shall apply. 
4.  Side setback, interior: Five-foot minimum. 
5.  Side setback, exterior: 25-foot minimum, except l5 ft. minimum for single family and duplex dwellings. 
6.  Rear setback: 
A.  Single-family and duplex dwelling: Five-foot minimum from common lot line or one-foot minimum from alley. (See section 6500 for accessory structure setbacks and section 6210 for setback requirements for rear vehicular access.) 
B.  All other uses: Five feet, minimum. However, in no case shall the roof overhang extend over the property line. 
7.  Height: 35-foot maximum. For school and religious assembly uses, the maximum height shall be 45 feet. 
8.  Building coverage: 55 percent of lot area, maximum, except 50 percent of the lot area, maximum, for single-family and duplex dwellings. 
9.  Open space: 20 percent of lot area, minimum, for multifamily dwellings use containing 25 units or more. 
Note- See section 4600 for buffering requirements. 
(Ord. No. 83-85, § 1, 8-6-1985; Ord. No. 28-86, 4-1-1986; Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 27-90, § 4, 5-1-1990; Ord. No. 81-90, §§ 2, 3, 6, 12-6-1990; Ord. No. 39-2003, § 1, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 92-2007, § 6, 10-2-2007) 
[Sec.] 3420. - Special conditions. 
A.  No drive-through/drive-in use or repair service of any kind shall be allowed. Additionally, outdoor storage or display of any kind shall be prohibited. 
B.  Hours of operation shall be limited to no earlier than 6:00 a.m. and no later than 12:00 midnight. 
(Ord. No. 92-91, 10-1-1991) 
3450. - GC-GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

[Sec.] 3460. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the GC General Commercial District is to accommodate commercial activities of a retail and service nature. These areas would be located along major streets and encouraged to use site designs which have mutual benefits with other businesses in the area. 
(Ord. No. 51-2018, § 3, 10-2-2018) 
[Sec.] 3470. - Permitted uses. 
A.  The following uses are permitted in the GC General Commercial District: 
Residential uses: 
Dwelling, duplex two-family. 
Dwelling, single-family detached. 
Group homes. 
Personal care homes. 
B.  The following uses are permitted in the GC General Commercial District subject to the site plan review provisions of section 7100. 
Residential uses: 
Bed and breakfast homestay. 
Boardinghouse. 
Condominium, residential. 
Dwelling, multifamily. 
Dwelling, zero lot line, single-family, subject to the provisions of section 5200. 
Fraternity and sorority house. 
Townhouse, residential, subject to the provisions of section 5300. 
Civic uses: 
Cemetery. 
College and university. 
Day care centers, limited and commercial. 
Library, public. 
Parks. 
Public. 
Safety services. 
Religious assembly. 
Residential care facility. 
School, primary and secondary. 
Utility service. 
Commercial uses: 
Alcoholic beverage sales, subject to the provisions of section 5400. 
Art gallery/museum. 
Automotive sales and service. 
Automotive service station. 
Bed and breakfast inn. 
Boat sales and service. 
Business and trade schools. 
Car wash. 
Clinic. 
Club. 
Coin-operated amusement machines establishment, as regulated by section 5905. 
Convenience store. 
Donation box. 
Exterminating services, without chemical storage. 
Funeral home. 
Hospital. 
Hotel. 
Indoor sports and recreation. 
Medical office. 
Motel. 
Movie theater. 
Nursery. 
Offices. 
Oil drilling, subject to the provisions of appendix A, Subdivision and Development Regulations, section 6.4, Oil and Gas Well, as amended. 
Repair services. 
Restaurants. 
Retail trade. 
Self-storage facilities/mini-warehouse. 
Services. 
Shopping center. 
Veterinary services. 
(Ord. No. 28-86, § 13, 4-1-1986; Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 31-91, § 3, 4-2-1991; Ord. No. 75-96, § 2, 6-4-1996; Ord. No. 35-98, § 1, 4-21-1998; Ord. No. 03-2000, § 1, 1-4-2000; Ord. No. 95-2001, § 4, 10-2-2001; Ord. No. 43-2016, 11-1-2016; Ord. No. 51-2018, § 3, 10-2-2018) 
[Sec.] 3480. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the GC General Commercial District subject to the approval process provided in section 7200: 
Alcoholic beverage sales, subject to the provisions of section 5400. 
Automotive repair service. 
Bus station. 
Community residential center. 
Contractor's yard. 
Flea market. 
Halfway house. 
Kennel. 
Light manufacturing. 
Manufacturing homes, subject to the provisions of section 5600. 
Outdoor entertainment and recreation. 
Outdoor food court. 
Outdoor storage. 
Parking facility. 
Recreational vehicle park. 
Shooting range (indoor). 
Warehousing facility. 
(Ord. No. 23-88, § 2, 3-1-1988; Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 75-96, § 2, 6-4-1996; Ord. No. 86-96, § 1, 6-18-1996; Ord. No. 03-2000, § 2, 1-4-2000; Ord. No. 103-2000, § 6, 10-3-2000; Ord. No. 45-2001, § 2, 5-1-2001; Ord. No. 95-2001, § 5, 10-2-2001; Ord. No. 12-2017, § 1, 4-4-2017; Ord. No. 51-2018, § 3, 10-2-2018) 
[Sec.] 3490. - Development regulations. 
    Each site in the GC General Commercial District shall be subject to the following development regulations except for townhouse and zero lot line residential use: 
l.  Lot area: 5,000 square feet, minimum. 
2.  Lot width: 50 feet, minimum. 
3.  Front setback: 25 feet minimum, except for rear access subdivision where reduced setback as per section 4240 shall apply. 
4.  Side setback, interior: 
A.  Single-family and duplex dwellings: Five feet, minimum. 
B.  All other uses: No minimum; in accordance with adopted Building Code requirements. 
5.  Side setback, exterior: 25-foot minimum, except 15-foot minimum for single-family and duplex dwellings. 
6.  Rear setback: 
A.  Single-family and duplex dwelling: Five feet minimum from common lot line or one-foot minimum from alley. (See section 6500 for accessory structure setbacks and section 6210 for setback requirements for rear vehicular access.) 
B.  All other uses: No minimum. However, in no case shall the roof overhang extend over the property line, and shall be in accordance with adopted Building Code requirements. 
7.  Height: No maximum. 
8.  Building coverage: No maximum, except 50 percent of lot area maximum, for single-family and duplex dwellings. 
9.  Open space: 20 percent of lot area, minimum, for multifamily dwellings containing 25 units or more. 
(Ord. No. 83-85, § 1, 8-6-1985; Ord. No. 28-86, 4-1-1986; Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 27-90, § 4, 5-1-1990; Ord. No. 81-90, §§ 2, 3, 6, 12-6-1990; Ord. No. 39-2003, § 1, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 51-2018, § 3, 10-2-2018) 
[Sec.] 3495. - Special conditions-Shooting range (indoor). 
A.  Any noise emanating from discharge of firearms shall not be audible beyond the boundaries of the lot or tract of land where the indoor shooting range is located. 
B.  Owner/operators shall be responsible for providing noise surveys/studies, indicating compliance with noise requirements prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
C.  The design and operation of the facility shall conform to all other provisions as outlined in the City's Code of Ordinances. 
D.  Hours of operation shall be limited to no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and no later than 10:00 p.m. 
Note- See section 4600 for buffering requirements. 
(Ord. No. 51-2018, § 3, 10-2-2018) 
3510. - LI-LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

[Sec.] 3520. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the LI Light Industrial District is to accommodate wholesale, trucking and warehousing type activities along with light fabrication and processing. 
(Ord. No. 72-99, § 1, 8-3-1999; Ord. No. 51-2018, § 3, 10-2-2018) 
[Sec.] 3530. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the LI Light Industrial District subject to the site plan review provisions of section 7100: 
Residential uses: 
Existing residential units may be rebuilt or replaced if destroyed, however the number of dwelling units on a parcel shall not be increased. New dwelling units shall not be permitted unless replacing an existing unit of the same square footage. 
Civic uses: 
Public safety services. 
Religious assembly. 
Utility service. 
Commercial uses: 
Adult entertainment and sexually oriented commercial establishments, subject to the provisions of section 5500. 
Alcoholic beverage sales, subject to the provisions of section 5400. 
Automotive repairs. 
Automotive service station. 
Automotive sales and service. 
Boat sales and service. 
Bus station. 
Business and trade schools. 
Car wash. 
Clinic. 
Club. 
Coin-operated amusement machines establishment. 
Contractor's yard. 
Convenience store. 
Donation box. 
Exterminating services, without chemical storage. 
Flea market. 
Funeral home. 
Hospital. 
Hotels. 
Indoor sports and recreation. 
Kennel. 
Light manufacturing. 
Medical office. 
Motels. 
Movie theater. 
Nursery. 
Offices. 
Outdoor entertainment and recreation. 
Outdoor storage. 
Parking facilities. 
Repair services. 
Restaurants. 
Retail trade. 
Self-storage facilities/mini-warehouse. 
Services. 
Shopping center. 
Veterinary services. 
Light industrial uses: 
Agriculture equipment sales and services. 
Fabrication and assembly. 
Freight hauling. 
Heavy machinery sales and service. 
Lumberyards. 
Manufactured housing, individual accessory use. 
Manufactured housing sales. 
Oil drilling, subject to the provisions of appendix A, Subdivision and Development Regulations, section 6.4, Oil and Gas Well, as amended. 
Trucking facility. 
Warehousing facility. 
(Ord. No. 28-86, § 13, 4-1-1986; Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 35-98, § 1, 4-21-1998; Ord. No. 72-99, § 1, 8-3-1999; Ord. No. 71-2000, § 5, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 45-2001, § 3, 5-1-2001; Ord. No. 95-2001, § 4, 10-2-2001; Ord. No. 61-2006, § 1, 8-1-2006; Ord. No. 43-2016, 11-1-2016; Ord. No. 51-2018, § 3, 10-2-2018) 
[Sec.] 3540. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the LI Light Industrial District subject to the approval process in section 7200. 
Airport. 
Communications towers and antennas as regulated by section 5910. 
Community residential center. 
Expansion of an existing residence. 
Exterminating services, with on-site chemical storage. 
Fuel and chemical storage. 
Landfill. 
Mining and excavation. 
Motor vehicle salvage yard, subject to chapter 46, Environment, article V, Outdoor Storage, Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
Outdoor food court. 
Shooting range (indoor). 
Shooting range (outdoor). 
Slaughterhouse and meat packing. 
Stockyards. 
Halfway house. 
(Ord. No. 23-88, § 2, 3-1-1988; Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 75-96, § 2, 6-4-1996; Ord. No. 86-96, § 1, 6-18-1996; Ord. No. 35-98, § 2, 4-21-1998; Ord. No. 72-99, § 1, 8-3-1999; Ord. No. 103-2000, § 7, 10-3-2000; Ord. No. 45-2001, § 4, 5-1-2001; Ord. No. 95-2001, § 5, 10-2-2001; Ord. No. 61-2006, § 1, 8-1-2006; Ord. No. 78-2006, § 4, 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 51-2018, § 3, 10-2-2018) 
[Sec.] 3550. - Development regulations. 
    Each site in the LI Light Industrial District shall be subject to the following development regulations: 
1.  Lot area: 5,000 square feet, minimum. 
2.  Lot width: 50 feet, minimum. 
3.  Front setback: 25 feet, minimum. 
4.  Side setback, interior: No minimum; in accordance with adopted Building Code requirements. 
5.  Side setback, exterior: 25 feet, minimum. 
6.  Rear setback: No minimum; in accordance with adopted Building Code requirements. 
7.  Height: No maximum. 
8.  Building coverage: No maximum. 
(Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 72-99, § 1, 8-3-1999; Ord. No. 39-2003, § 1, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 51-2018, § 3, 10-2-2018) 
[Sec.] 3555. - Special conditions-Shooting range (indoor). 
A.  Any noise emanating from discharge of firearms shall not be audible beyond the boundaries of the lot or tract of land where the indoor shooting range is located. 
B.  Owner/operators shall be responsible for providing noise surveys/studies, indicating compliance with noise requirements prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
C.  The design and operation of the facility shall conform to all other provisions as outlined in the City's Code of Ordinances. 
D.  Hours of operation shall be limited to no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and no later than 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 51-2018, § 3, 10-2-2018) 
[Sec.] 3560. - Special conditions-Shooting range (outdoor). 
A.  The design of all shotgun trap and skeet shooting ranges shall conform, as reasonably possible, to National Rifle Association (NRA), Amateur Trapshooting Association (ATA), or National Skeet Shooting Association (NSSA) standards. 
B.  The range and downrange safety area design specifications shall be in accordance with the 2012 U.S. Department of Energy - Range Design Criteria or as amended and updated by the U.S. Department of Energy. 
C.  The range and uninhabited downrange safety area shall be under same ownership and control so as to maintain its permanency. 
D.  Operators of the range shall be covered by a minimum $250,000.00 general liability insurance; verification of current insurance shall be filed annually with the City Clerk. 
E.  Hours of operation shall be limited to no earlier than 8:00 a.m. and no later than 9:00 p.m. 
Note- See section 4600 for buffering requirements. 
(Ord. No. 51-2018, § 3, 10-2-2018) 
3580. - HI-HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

[Sec.] 3590. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the HI Heavy Industrial District is to accommodate major industrial developments that are typically located on large sites. These areas generate heavy traffic and are typically located near freeways and railroad facilities. 
(Ord. No. 51-2018, § 3, 10-2-2018) 
[Sec.] 3600. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the HI Heavy Industrial District subject to the site plan review provisions of section 7100: 
Civic uses: 
Halfway house. 
Public safety services. 
Utility service. 
Community residential centers. 
Commercial uses: 
Alcoholic beverage sales, subject to the provisions of section 5400. 
Coin-operated amusement machines establishment, as regulated by section 5905. 
Convenience stores. 
Donation box. 
Outdoor storage. 
Restaurants. 
Shooting range (indoor). 
Heavy commercial uses: 
Agriculture sales and services. 
Airports. 
Fabrication and assembly. 
Freight hauling. 
Fuel and chemical storage. 
Heavy machinery sales and storage. 
Light manufacturing. 
Lumberyards. 
Mining and excavation. 
Manufactured housing, individual accessory use. 
Manufactured housing sales. 
Motor vehicle salvage yard, subject to chapter 46, Environment, article V, Outdoor Storage, Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
Oil drilling, subject to the provisions of appendix A, Subdivision and Development Regulations, section 6.4, Oil and Gas Well, as amended. 
Trucking facilities. 
Warehousing facilities. 
Industrial uses: 
Basic industry and manufacturing. 
Industrial park. 
Power generation. 
Refineries. 
(Ord. No. 28-86, § 15, 4-1-1986; Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 50-94, § 1, 4-19-1994; Ord. No. 84-94, § 1, 6-21-1994; Ord. No. 86-96, § 1, 6-18-1996; Ord. No. 35-98, § 2, 4-21-1998; Ord. No. 71-2000, § 6, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 45-2001, § 5, 5-1-2001; Ord. No. 95-2001, § 4, 10-2-2001; Ord. No. 43-2016, 11-1-2016; Ord. No. 51-2018, § 3, 10-2-2018) 
[Sec.] 3605. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the HI Heavy Industrial District subject to the approval process in section 7200: 
Communications towers and antennas as regulated by section 5910. 
Landfill. 
Shooting range (outdoor). 
(Ord. No. 45-2001, § 6, 5-1-2001; Ord. No. 51-2018, § 3, 10-2-2018) 
[Sec.] 3610. - Development regulations. 
    The development regulations for the HI Heavy Industrial District shall be the same as in section 3550, 3555 and 3560 of the LI District. 
(Ord. No. 72-99, § 1, 8-3-1999; Ord. No. 51-2018, § 3, 10-2-2018) 
Exhibit A: Donation Boxes-Zoning Districts Map

(Ord. No. 43-2016, Exh. A, 11-1-2016) 
3640. - PUD-PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

[Sec.] 3650. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the PUD Planned Unit Development District is to provide flexibility in site planning and allow the departure from the strict development regulations. The site must be planned and developed as a unit with a high quality of design. Industrial parks, shopping centers, residential development of multiple or mixed housing, or appropriate combinations thereof for specialized purposes would be suitable. 
[Sec.] 3660. - Approval process. 
    The approval process for a PUD Planned Unit Development District shall be the same as the amendment procedures in section 7500. The city council's approval of a PUD district shall be by amendment to this zoning ordinance. Such amendment shall designate the boundaries of the district and include such conditions which in the judgment of the city council are necessary to secure the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. 
[Sec.] 3670. - Submission requirements. 
A.  Project description. The applicant for a PUD Planned Unit Development District shall submit a clear and concise report containing the following information: 
1.  A general description of the project. 
2.  A statement of design objectives of the PUD district. 
3.  Total project acreage, the acreage associated with each use, the number of residential units, the square footage of nonresidential uses, projected number of employees and projected peak customer visits, if applicable. 
4.  A proposed timetable or phasing of the project. 
B.  Site plan. The applicant shall submit a site plan which shall include the following information: 
1.  The location of all proposed uses including buffer areas. 
2.  The outlines and square footage of all structures. 
3.  The locations of all driveways. 
4.  The use of all properties adjacent to or directly affected by the PUD district. 
5.  Alternate designs proposed by the developer. 
6.  Any adjacent or nearby property which the developer owns or holds a purchase option. 
[Sec.] 3680. - Approval criteria. 
    The following criteria shall be used to review a PUD Planned Unit Development District, or to establish any special condition of approval: 
1.  The proposal shall be in conformance with the land use plan and all other plans and policies adopted by the city. 
2.  The proposed PUD district should be compared against probable development patterns which would occur under existing zoning districts. 
3.  The PUD district shall have a minimum site area of three acres. Larger areas may be required if necessary to meet the stated design objectives. 
4.  The proposed project should not overburden utilities, drainage, transportation, schools, fire protection capabilities, parks or other public services. 
(Ord. No. 15-2018, 4-3-2018) 
[Sec.] 3690. - Amendments and changes. 
    At the time of approval of a PUD Planned Unit Development District, the city council may approve or conditionally approve alternative designs identified in the project description and site plan. 
A.  The staff may approve the following minor changes to the site plan subject to the specific conditions approved by the city council: 
1.  Minor relocation of utility lines and easements, or minor changes in drainage facilities. 
2.  The location, area, or outline of buildings if the changes do not significantly increase or redistribute the intensity of uses or decrease amenities of the project. 
3.  Minor changes in lot lines which do not significantly alter the project. 
B.  The Commission may approve the following types of changes subject to specific conditions approved by the city council: 
1.  Any of the above changes appealed by the developer. 
2.  The location of any street or drainageway. 
All other amendments shall be referred to the city council using the same procedure as the original designation. 
3700. - RDD-RIVER DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

[Sec.] 3710. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of a RDD River Development District is to provide a facility for recreation and leisure and to enhance tourism. The district shall incorporate uses that will upgrade the river environment into a permanent recreational and commercial facility. 
(Ord. No. 85-2009, 11-3-2009) 
[Sec.] 3720. - Permitted uses. 
A.  The following uses are permitted in the RDD River Development District: 
Residential uses: 
Dwelling, duplex two-family. 
Dwelling, single-family detached. 
B.  The following uses are permitted in the RDD River Development District subject to the Site Plan Review provisions of section 7100: 
Residential uses: 
Condominium residential. 
Dwelling, multifamily. 
Dwelling, zero lot line single-family, subject to the provisions of section 5200. 
Group homes. 
Townhouse residential, subject to the provisions of section 5300. 
Civic uses: 
Cemetery. 
Convention center. 
Daycare, limited and commercial. 
Library, public. 
Nature center. 
Park. 
Public safety services. 
Religious assembly. 
Schools, primary and secondary. 
Utility service. 
Commercial uses: 
Alcoholic beverage sales, subject to the provisions of section 5400. 
Art gallery/museum. 
Bed and breakfast inn. 
Clinic. 
Club. 
Convenience store. 
Hotels. 
Indoor sports and recreation. 
Medical office. 
Motels. 
Movie theater. 
Nursery. 
Offices. 
Recreation vehicle park. 
Restaurants. 
Retail trade. 
Services, except repair services. 
Shopping center. 
(Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 31-91, § 3, 4-2-1991; Ord. No. 75-96, § 2, 6-4-1996; Ord. No. 85-2009, 11-3-2009) 
[Sec.] 3730. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the RDD River Development District subject to the approval process provided in section 7200: 
Outdoor entertainment and recreation. 
Outdoor food court. 
Personal care home. 
(Ord. No. 75-96, § 2, 6-4-1996; Ord. No. 103-2000, § 8, 10-3-2000; Ord. No. 95-2001, § 5, 10-2-2001; Ord. No. 85-2009, 11-3-2009; Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, 1-6-2015) 
[Sec.] 3740. - Development regulations. 
    Each site in the RDD River Development District shall be subject to the same development regulations as provided for in section 3490 [for] the general commercial district. 
(Ord. No. 85-2009, 11-3-2009) 
[Sec.] 3750. - Special conditions. 
1.  Each site in the RDD River Development District, except residential uses not subject to site plan review, within the RDD district must meet substantial landscaping requirements to meet the purpose of a linear park system. 
2.  Conservation of existing trees and natural areas shall be given consideration. 
3.  Dedication of open-space easements may be required to install a linear trail system. 
4.  To the greatest extent possible, businesses and other public facilities must orient the buildings to face the river. 
5.  Signs must be approved through the site plan review process. 
6.  No repair services or outdoor storage/display shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 85-2009, 11-3-2009) 
3780. - CBD-CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

[Sec.] 3790. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the CBD Central Business District is to provide a commercial core area with wide variety of office, commercial, residential, and civic activities. This district consists primarily of older business structures which predate the modern shopping center concepts, and special provisions are made for off-street parking, height, and area regulations. There shall be only one contiguous central business district in the city. 
[Sec.] 3800. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the CBD Central Business District subject to the site plan review provisions of section 7100: 
All uses permitted in section 3470 of the GC General Commercial District. 
Flea market. 
Light manufacturing. 
Outdoor display. 
Outdoor food court. 
Personal care home. 
Warehousing. 
(Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 75-96, § 2, 6-4-1996; Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 44-2016, 11-1-2016) 
[Sec.] 3805. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the CBD Central Business District subject to the approval process in section 7200. 
Community residential center. 
Group homes. 
Halfway homes. 
Outdoor storage. 
(Ord. No. 23-88, § 3, 3-1-1988; Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 75-96, § 2, 6-4-1996; Ord. No. 86-96, § 1, 6-18-1996; Ord. No. 103-2000, § 9, 10-3-2000; Ord. No. 95-2001, § 5, 10-2-2001) 
[Sec.] 3810. - Development regulations. 
    Each site in a CBD Central Business District shall be subject to the following development regulations: 
1.  Lot area [and] width: No minimum. 
2.  Setbacks: As required by chapter 22, Buildings and Building Regulations, of the Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
3.  Height: No maximum. 
4.  Building coverage: No maximum. 
Note- See section 4600 for buffering requirements. See sections 5980-5986 for outdoor display requirements. 
(Ord. No. 30-89, § II, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 44-2016, 11-1-2016) 
[Sec.] 3811. - Special conditions. 
    The following special conditions are applicable to the CBD Central Business District: 
1.  Commercial uses shall not be open to the public from the hours of 2:15 a.m. through 5:30 a.m., with the exception of the following: 
a.  Lodging establishments, as defined by section 58-201 of this Code of Ordinances; and 
b.  Businesses that engage primarily in retail trade, as defined by section 2030 [of this ordinance]. 
(Ord. No. 42-2009, § 1, 7-7-2009) 
3840. - BA-BROOK AVENUE DISTRICT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 53-2002, § 1, adopted July 16, 2002, amended subch. 3840 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said subchapter to read as herein set out. The former subch. 3840, §§ 3841-3846, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 38-85, adopted April 23, 1985; Ord. No. 30-89, § II, adopted May 2, 1989; Ord. No. 81-90, § 6, adopted Dec. 6, 1990; and Ord. No. 57-91, adopted June 4, 1991. 

[Sec.] 3841. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the BA Brook Avenue District regulations is to provide for limited office use along Brook Avenue by recognizing the unique characteristics of an older residential area, the conflicting uses which existed in the area prior to the adoption of this ordinance, and the need to limit any nonresidential development to the lots abutting Brook Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 53-2002, § 1, 7-16-2002) 
[Sec.] 3842. - Permitted uses. 
A.  The following uses are permitted in the BA Brook Avenue District: 
Residential uses: 
Dwelling, duplex two-family. 
Dwelling, single-family detached. 
Civic uses: 
Day care centers, limited. 
B.  The following uses are permitted in the BA Brook Avenue District subject to the site plan review provisions of section 7100: 
Residential uses: 
Condominiums, residential. 
Dwelling, zero lot line, single-family, subject to provisions of section 5200. 
Dwelling, multifamily, up to 25 units per acre. 
Civic uses: 
Parks. 
Religious assembly. 
Commercial uses: 
Clinic. 
Medical office. 
Offices. 
(Ord. No. 53-2002, § 1, 7-16-2002) 
[Sec.] 3845. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the BA Brook Avenue District subject to the approval process provided in section 7200: Therapy and rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. 53-2002, § 1, 7-16-2002) 
[Sec.] 3847. - Development regulations. 
    Each site in a BA Brook Avenue District shall be subject to the following development regulations, except for zero lot line dwellings and townhouses. 
1.  Lot area: 5,000 square feet, minimum. 
2.  Lot width: 50 feet, minimum. 
3.  Front setback: 25 feet, minimum, except five feet, minimum, along Brook Avenue. 
4.  Side setback, interior: Five feet, minimum. 
5.  Side setback, exterior: 25 feet, minimum, except 15 feet minimum for single-family and duplex dwellings, and five feet, minimum, along Brook Avenue. 
6.  Rear setback: Five feet, minimum, except one foot, minimum, when abutting an alley. 
7.  Height: One story, maximum, not exceeding 25 feet. The pitch of the main roof shall not be less than two [feet] of rise for each 12 feet of horizontal run. 
8.  Building coverage: 50 percent of lot area, maximum. 
9.  Brook Avenue lot frontage: Uses other than single-family and duplex dwellings shall have a minimum 145 feet lot frontage on Brook Avenue. 
10.  Parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with section 6200 with the following exceptions: 
When additions or enlargements are made to an existing building or use, or any change of occupancy or manner of operation is made that would result in additional parking spaces being required, off-street parking shall be provided on-site for the entire building or use. 
Furthermore, there shall be no parking of vehicles in the setback area abutting any street except for Brook Avenue. Additionally, there shall be no parking of vehicles on the street curb in this district, unless the curb abuts a single-family or duplex residential use. 
11.  Access: Parking facilities for non-single-family and duplex dwellings may have no more than one curb cut per lot, and may also be allowed ingress and egress from an alley. 
12.  Landscaping: Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with sections 6800 through 6845 of this ordinance. Furthermore, the setback area abutting any street except for Brook Avenue shall be landscaped with grass or any other similar ground cover, and shall not be paved with any impervious material except for required driveway. 
(Ord. No. 53-2002, § 1, 7-16-2002) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 53-2002, § 1, adopted July 16, 2002, amended subch. 3840 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said subchapter to read as herein set out. The former subch. 3840, §§ 3841-3846, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 38-85, adopted Apr. 23, 1985; Ord. No. 30-89, § II, adopted May 2, 1989; Ord. No. 81-90, § 6, adopted Dec. 6, 1990; and Ord. No. 57-91, adopted June 4, 1991. 
[Sec.] 3849. - Buffering requirements. 
    Due to the special character of the BA Brook Avenue District, the following buffering requirements shall apply in lieu of the requirements of section 4600: 
Additional setback: When uses other than single-family and duplex dwellings abut an SF-2-Single-Family Residential (standard lot) District, no portion of the structure shall be closer to the SF-2-Single-Family Residential (standard lot) District than 30 feet. This requirement shall not apply if an existing structure is utilized for non-single-family or duplex dwellings. 
Screening: Uses other than single-family and duplex dwellings abutting an SF-2-Single-Family Residential (standard lot) Zoning District shall provide and maintain screening in the following manner: A six-foot-high solid double-sided wooden fence placed on a concrete foundation with brick columns placed no more than 20 feet apart, measured center line to center line, shall extend from the rear property line to the intersecting building setback line; and, a four-foot-high solid brick fence tapering to two feet in height shall extend from the building setback line to the property line. 
Lighting. All outdoor lighting must be directed away from residential areas. 
(Ord. No. 53-2002, § 1, 7-16-2002) 
[Sec.] 3851. - Sign regulations. 
    Due to the special character of the BA Brook Avenue District, only the following types of signs shall be permitted: 
A.  On-premises ground signs. On-premises ground signs shall be permitted in accordance with the following regulations: 
1.  Maximum area: 60 square feet. 
2.  Maximum height: Three feet. 
3.  Setback: None, provided it does not obstruct view to motorists and pedestrians and meets the requirements of section 102-40, Visibility Sight Triangle, of the Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
4.  Maximum number: One per lot. 
B.  On-premises wall signs. On-premises wall signs shall be permitted in accordance with the following regulations: 
1.  Maximum area: 60 square feet. 
2.  Maximum number: One per business. 
C.  Miscellaneous signs. Construction, directional, nameplate, and real estate signs shall be allowed as per the provisions of table 6741. 
(Ord. No. 53-2002, § 1, 7-16-2002) 
[Sec.] 3853. - Nonconforming uses. 
    Due to the special character of the BA Brook Avenue District, the following nonconforming regulations shall apply in lieu of the requirements of section 6100 of this ordinance. A nonconforming use in a BA district shall not be resumed if discontinued for a period exceeding two years; expanded; converted to a different nonconforming use; or reconstructed if destroyed. Existing office uses may be converted to another office if minimum parking requirements are met. A nonconforming sign shall be removed after discontinuance of a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 53-2002, § 1, 7-16-2002) 
3900. - CC-COMMERCIAL CORRIDOR DISTRICT 

[Sec.] 3905. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the CC Commercial Corridor District is to accommodate small offices, neighborhood commercial activities and residential uses to promote a traditional neighborhood district. These districts are intended to be adjacent to residential areas and act as a buffer between residential and more intense uses. 
(Ord. No. 32-2010, § 2, 6-1-2010) 
[Sec.] 3910. - Permitted uses. 
A.  The following uses are permitted in the CC Commercial Corridor District: 
Residential uses: 
Dwelling, duplex two-family. 
Dwelling, single-family detached. 
Group home. 
B.  The following uses are permitted in the CC Commercial Corridor District subject to the site plan review provisions of section 7100 and to the provisions of section 3940, Special conditions. 
Residential uses: 
Bed and breakfast homestay. 
Bed and breakfast inn. 
Boardinghouse. 
Condominium. 
Dwelling, multifamily, up to 25 units per acre. 
Dwelling, zero lot line single-family, subject to the provisions of section 5200. 
Townhouse, subject to the provisions of section 5300. 
Civic uses: 
Day care centers, limited and commercial. 
Library, public. 
Parks. 
Private recreational areas, limited. 
Public safety services. 
Religious assembly. 
School, primary and secondary. 
Utility service. 
Commercial uses: 
Art gallery/museum. 
Clinic. 
Exterminating services, without chemical storage. 
Medical office. 
Nursery. 
Offices. 
Oil drilling, subject to the provisions of appendix A, Subdivision and Development Regulations, section 6.4 Oil and Gas Well, as amended. 
Restaurants. 
Restaurants, limited. 
Retail trade, excluding automotive sales. 
Services. 
(Ord. No. 32-2010, § 2, 6-1-2010) 
[Sec.] 3915. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the CC Commercial Corridor District subject to the approval process provided in section 7200 and to the provisions of section 3940, Special Conditions. 
Residential uses: 
Dwelling, multifamily, exceeding 25 units per acre. 
Personal care home. 
Civic uses: 
Residential care facility. 
Commercial uses: 
Alcoholic beverage sales, subject to the provisions of section 5400. 
Automotive service station. 
Business and trade schools. 
Club. 
Convenience store. 
Indoor sports and recreation. 
Movie theatre. 
Repair services. 
Self-storage facility/mini-warehouse. 
Shopping center. 
(Ord. No. 32-2010, § 2, 6-1-2010) 
[Sec.] 3920. - Development regulations. 
    Each site in a CC Commercial Corridor District shall be subject to the following development regulations, except for zero lot line dwellings and townhouses: 
1.  Lot area: 5,000 square feet minimum. 
2.  Lot width: 50 feet, minimum. 
3.  Front setback: 25 feet, minimum. 
4.  Side setback, interior: Five feet minimum. 
5.  Side setback exterior: 25 feet minimum, except 15 feet minimum for single-family and duplex dwellings. 
6.  Rear setback: Five feet minimum. 
7.  Height: 35 feet maximum. For school and religious assembly uses, the maximum height shall be 45 feet. 
8.  Building coverage: 55 percent of lot area, maximum, except 50 percent of the lot area, maximum, for single-family and duplex dwellings. 
9.  [Lighting:] All outdoor lighting shall be directed away from residential areas. 
10.  Speakers: All audio devices, including, but not limited to, speakers, for restaurant drive-in and other like facilities, shall be located near and directed toward a public street. The primary building shall be situated between the location of the speaker and any adjacent residential district or use. 
(Ord. No. 32-2010, § 2, 6-1-2010) 
[Sec.] 3925. - Sign regulations. 
    Due to the special character of the CC Commercial Corridor District, only the following types of signs are permitted: 
A.  Ground signs. Ground signs are permitted in accordance with the following regulations: 
1.  Maximum area: 60 square feet. 
2.  Maximum height: Four feet above top of sign base. 
3.  Setback: Ten feet, if taller than three feet. Signs are subject to the requirements of section 102-40, Visibility Sight Triangle, of the Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
4.  Maximum number: One per business, per street frontage. 
5.  Sign base: All ground signs shall be mounted on a masonry base consistent with the principal building material usage. The base maximum height shall not exceed 1.5 feet, with the width and depth not to exceed nine inches beyond the perimeter of the sign. 
6.  Sign base landscaping: All commercial ground signs shall be landscaped, with landscaping height not to exceed the base of the sign. Use of low-bearing dwarf shrubs, per section 6800, is required to screen the base and complement site landscaping. Shrubs shall be planted in a staggered double row along the base of all sign faces such that at least 75 percent of the base is screened. 
7.  Sign lighting: Signs may be internally or externally illuminated. Message center signs, however, are prohibited. 
B.  On-premise wall signs. On-premise wall signs shall be permitted in accordance with the following regulations: 
1.  Maximum area: 60 square feet. 
2.  Maximum number: One per business, per street frontage. 
C.  Miscellaneous signs. All other signs permitted as per the provisions of Table 6741. 
(Ord. No. 32-2010, § 2, 6-1-2010) 
[Sec.] 3930. - Building material requirements. 
    Buildings in the CC Commercial Corridor District shall incorporate the following exterior building materials to create and complement the building's architectural design. 
A.  Primary exterior building materials shall consist of material comparable in grade and quality, to include the following: face brick, natural stone, rock face or specially designed pre-cast concrete units with a decorative material or texture. Smooth faced concrete block is not permitted as a primary exterior building material. 
B.  Cement stucco may be used as an acceptable exterior primary building material. 
C.  The following exterior building materials are not permitted as the primary material but may be used as a secondary treatment to complement the primary exterior building materials: 
1.  Synthetic stucco materials such as EIFS (Exterior Insulation Finishing System), cast sprayed textures, and trowel knock down textured finishes; 
2.  Metal siding or metal panels; 
3.  Smooth faced concrete block; 
4.  Glass, glass block, and glazed curtain-walls; and 
5.  Plastic, vinyl or wood siding. 
D.  All principal and accessory buildings shall meet the following minimum percentage requirements for primary exterior building materials: 
1.  Minimum: 60 percent for all nonresidential building exterior walls. 
2.  Minimum: 60 percent for all residential building exterior walls. Accessory buildings accessory to a residential use less than 150 square feet shall be exempt from this provision. 
E.  Architectural plans shall be prepared by a design professional, to include: 
1.  Elevations of all sides of the principal and accessory buildings; 
2.  Type, color and percentage of all exterior primary and secondary building materials, excluding all door and window openings; and 
3.  Location and screening of trash receptacles, heating, air conditioning and ventilation systems. 
F.  All accessory buildings, at minimum, shall be consistent in design and usage of material as the principal building, except as permitted per section 3930D.2 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 32-2010, § 2, 6-1-2010) 
[Sec.] 3935. - Nonconforming building materials. 
    Existing buildings in the CC Commercial Corridor District not in conformance with the provisions set forth in section 3930 shall comply with said provisions in the event of either of the following: 
A.  There is an increase in area or height of the principal building of a nonresidential use. 
B.  The principal building is demolished or destroyed beyond 50 percent of the replacement cost of its current material status on the date of the damage. 
(Ord. No. 32-2010, § 2, 6-1-2010) 
[Sec.] 3940. - Special conditions. 
    The following special conditions are applicable to the CC Commercial Corridor District: 
A.  No outdoor repair service of any kind shall be permitted. 
B.  Commercial uses shall not be open to the public from the hours of 12:00 midnight through 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 32-2010, § 2, 6-1-2010) 
[Sec.] 3945. - Lighting. 
A.  In the CC Commercial Corridor District, all means of outdoor lighting shall be shown on all building elevations and site plans for ground locations. 
B.  An outdoor light plan shall be submitted with the site plan and building elevation plan. 
C.  All outdoor building, parking, and decorative lighting shall be directed away from residential uses and shall be shielded at all times so as to substantially reduce light being shown upon adjacent residential uses and so as to prevent public nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 32-2010, § 2, 6-1-2010) 
4000. - SUPPLEMENTAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 

[Sec.] 4010. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the supplemental development regulations is to provide interpretation of site development regulations and to establish regulations and exceptions. Sections 4000 through 4999 shall be known as the supplemental development regulations. 
4100. - LOT AREA AND DIMENSIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 39-2003, §§ 2, 3, repealed §§ 4100-4320 which pertained to lot area and dimensions, setback and height and derived from Ord. No. 28-86, § 5, adopted April 1, 1986; Ord. No. 76-87, § 2, adopted Aug. 18, 1987; Ord. No. 19-88, adopted Feb. 16, 1988; Ord. No. 64-88, § 4, adopted May 31, 1988; Ord. No. 92-88, § 2, 3, adopted Aug. 2, 1988; Ord. No. 30-89, § III, adopted May 2, 1989; Ord. No. 81-90, § 2, adopted Dec. 6, 1990; Ord. No. 90-91, adopted Oct. 1, 1991; Ord. No. 64-93, § 1, adopted June 1, 1993; and Ord. No. 68-2001, § 1, adopted July 17, 2001. 

[Sec.] 4110. - Measurement of lot area. 
    The area of a lot for the purposes of compliance with this zoning ordinance shall be the net horizontal area within the lot boundary lines and shall exclude any street or alley rights-of-way. 
[Sec.] 4130. - Measurement of lot width. 
    Lot width shall be measured between the side lot lines along the minimum required front setback line, or the front lot line if no front setback is required. 
4200. - SETBACK 

[Sec.] 4210. - Measurement of setback requirements. 
    A required setback shall be measured parallel to and for the entire length of the lot line on the side of the lot for which the setback is being measured. No building or structure shall be located, erected, or altered so as to have a smaller setback than the minimum setback required by this zoning ordinance. The area between the setback and the lot line on the side of the lot for which the setback is being measured shall be known as the setback area. 
[Sec.] 4220. - Projections and structures allowed in setback areas. 
A  required setback area shall be kept free of any building or structure higher than two feet, except that buildings, structures or projections shall be allowed as provided below: 
A.  Cornices, window sills, flues and chimneys, and eaves may project two feet into the required setback area. 
B.  Fences may project into the front, side and rear setback areas on all properties except those with single-family and duplex residential uses. In properties with single-family and duplex residential uses, fences may project into the side and rear setback areas; fences may project into the front setback areas if they meet all of the following criteria: 
1.  The fence shall have at least 50 percent of the face area open and free of opaque materials; 
2.  The fence shall be no more than four feet tall; 
3.  The fence shall not totally enclose all or a part of the front setback area if the front door of the residence opens into the enclosed area, unless a Postal Service approved mailbox is provided outside the enclosure; 
4.  If the fence is located near a street intersection, it shall conform to section 102-40, Visibility Sight Triangle, of the Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances, as amended, concerning view obstruction. 
C.  Uncovered steps, porches, or patios which are no more than two feet above the adjacent grade may be placed within the required setback area. 
D.  Uncovered in-ground swimming pools may be placed in the rear or side setback areas. Above-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and satellite dish antennas may be placed in the rear or interior side setback areas. 
E.  Accessory buildings not exceeding 150 square feet in floor area may be placed within the rear setback area, but no closer than one foot from the rear lot line. 
F.  Gasoline pump islands may be placed in the front and exterior side setback area, provided that they are placed no closer than 12 feet from the property line. Canopies attached to the pump islands shall provide at least 14 feet of clearance from the ground to the bottom of the canopy, and may be placed no closer than one foot from the property line. 
G.  Signs may be placed within the required setback areas as provided for in section 6700, Sign Regulations. 
H.  Awnings may project into the front or exterior side setback area of a lot, or a rear setback area of a through lot, to a maximum distance of six feet; provided no supporting structure for such extension is located on the ground within such setback areas. However, awnings shall not extend more than three feet into such setback areas of single-family and duplex residential uses. 
I.  Carports may be permitted within setback areas in the following manner: 
Interior side setback area. Carports constructed out of non-combustible materials with drains and gutters may be placed in an interior side setback area provided that the supporting columns are no closer than three feet, and the overhang is no closer than two feet from the side property line. 
Front setback and exterior side setback areas. Carports may be placed in the front setback and exterior side setback areas subject to the approval of a conditional use permit, as provided for in section 7200. Carports authorized under this section must meet the following construction standards: 
Number of supporting columns: Six, maximum. 
Column height: Eight feet maximum from highest grade. 
Roof height shall not exceed height of primary structure. 
Vertical plane from ground to seven feet in the front and sides of the carport shall be left clear of walls or sheathing. 
J.  Americans with Disability Act ("ADA") accessibility ramps may be permitted within setback areas in the following manner: 
1.  The applicant shall provide the following: 
a.  Name and address of the person or entity requesting the ADA ramp. 
b.  A description of whether the ramp requested by the applicant is necessary for the person(s) with the disability to use and enjoy the property, or is necessary to make the provision of housing for a person with disabilities feasible. 
c.  A site plan submitted to the Planning Department, as provided in section 7100. 
2.  The ADA accessibility ramp shall not cause a visibility sight issue. 
3.  The ADA accessibility ramp shall not discharge directly onto any public right-of-way. 
4.  The Director of Community Development or designee shall issue a written decision on the request within 30 calendar days of the date of the application and may either grant, grant with alterations or conditions, or deny the request for an ADA accessibility ramp in accordance with section J.1. 
5.  An applicant may appeal in writing the denial of the Director of Community Development or designee by submitting such appeal within ten calendar days of notice of the denial. 
6.  The Board of Adjustment shall have final authority on any such appeal. 
(Ord. No. 51-2018, § 2, 10-2-2018) 
[Sec.] 4230. - Rear setback of through lot. 
    The minimum rear setback on a through lot shall be the same as the exterior side setback on the lot. No accessory buildings shall be allowed within a rear setback area of a through lot. 
[Sec.] 4240. - Front setback for rear access subdivisions. 
    In single-family, duplex, or zero lot line residential lots, where the only vehicular access is taken from a rear alley or private access easement, which is at least 20 feet wide, the front setback may be reduced to [five] feet, provided: 
A.  The lots abut only a residential street and not any larger street sections. 
B.  The sidewalk is constructed abutting the curb and has at least [four] feet of unobstructed width. 
C.  All utilities located in the front yard or the street right-of-way are placed underground. 
D.  No vehicular street access or curb cut is permitted. 
E.  The entire block on both sides of the street between intersecting streets is platted at one time with a statement on the plat that front vehicular access and curb cuts are prohibited. 
4300. - HEIGHT 

[Sec.] 4310. - Measurement of height. 
    The height of a building shall be measured from the average of the highest and lowest grade adjacent to the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable on a pitched or hipped roof. The height of a structure other than a building shall be measured to the highest point of the structure. 
[Sec.] 4320. - Exceptions to height limitations. 
    The following structures may exceed the maximum height limitations subject to the limitations of section 6400, Airport Zoning Regulations, and the following conditions: 
A.  Church spires or steeples, flagpoles, and amateur radio transmitting antennas may project beyond the maximum allowable height. However, flagpole heights shall not exceed 35 feet in SF-1, SF-2, MFR, LO, LC, [and] BA zones and 80 feet in all other zones, measured from the ground. Additionally, any lighting must be from the base of the flagpole and directed away from all residences. 
B.  Chimneys, vent-stacks, radio and television receiving antennas, elevator penthouses, mechanical equipment rooms, cooling towers, fire escapes, tanks, and ornamental cupolas and domes erected on the top of buildings may project beyond the maximum allowable height by no more than 12 feet. 
4400. - BUILDING COVERAGE REGULATIONS 

[Sec.] 4401. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the building coverage limitations is to ensure that the building coverage of each site is compatible with the types of uses allowed in each district and to avoid overcrowding of sites with buildings. 
[Sec.] 4402. - Measurement of building coverage. 
    Building coverage shall be measured as the total horizontal area of all buildings and roofed or covered spaces expressed as a percent of total lot area. The outer two feet of roof overhangs will not be counted as building coverage. 
4450. - OPEN SPACE 

[Sec.] 4451. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the open space requirements is to ensure the provision of outdoor areas for landscaping and open space. 
[Sec.] 4452. - Measurement of open space. 
    Open space shall be measured at ground level as a percent of the total lot area. Open spaces must meet the following standards: 
A.  Off-street parking and loading areas, driveways and service areas shall not be counted as open space. 
B.  Any setback area requirements on a street side shall not be counted as open space. 
C.  Open spaces shall have no dimension less than 15 feet. 
4500. - FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS 

[Sec. 4510. - Compliance required.] 
    All developments within the City of Wichita Falls shall have to comply with chapter 54, Flood Damage Prevention, of the Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
4600. - SCREENING REGULATIONS 

[Sec]. 4605. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this regulation is to provide protection against negative impacts of certain land uses upon other land uses or public rights-of-way through the installation and maintenance of visual or other sensory barriers and to improve the aesthetic appearance of land as viewed from a public right-of-way for those persons living, working or otherwise traveling in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2-2002, § 2, 1-3-2002; Ord. No. 32-2008, § 1, 5-20-2008) 
[Sec]. 4610. - Screening required to separate certain land uses. 
A.  Should a single-family detached or duplex residential use be proposed adjacent to an existing residential or nonresidential land use, no additional screening by the existing residential or nonresidential land use shall be required. 
B.  Should a use other than a single-family detached or duplex residential use be proposed adjacent to a single-family detached or duplex residential use, or a residential zoning district, a screening device shall be required to form a barrier between the uses. 
C.  The minimum required screening shall be a privacy fence. Required screening by a nonresidential use adjacent to a residential use or residential zoning district shall be wood or masonry unless otherwise allowed herein. In all situations, the Department of Community Development shall approve screening material, screening location and screening height by considering compatibility with adjacent land uses and existing screening devices. 
D.  The Department of Community Development may authorize the phasing of required screening where it is demonstrated that the proposal maintains the intent of this regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2-2002, § 2, 1-3-2002; Ord. No. 32-2008, § 1, 5-20-2008) 
[Sec.] 4615. - Exceptions. 
    The Department of Community Development may grant an exception to the required screening by lessening or removing the screening requirement as required herein. One or more of the following conditions must be present or apply for consideration of an exception: 
A.  Should a single-family detached or duplex residential use be proposed adjacent to an existing residential or nonresidential land use, no additional screening by the existing residential or nonresidential land use shall be required. 
B.  There is an existing privacy fence on an adjacent property that is determined as sufficient to accomplish the intent of this ordinance and structurally adequate. 
C.  When such uses are separated from a residential use, residential zoning district or more restrictive zoning district, as defined in section 3030, by a public right-of-way 70 feet wide or greater. 
D.  Where conditions exist which include, but are not limited to such elements as a drainage facility, easement, river, creek or other body of water, a topographic variation, distance separation, or similar situation or elements which are determined as sufficient to accomplish the intent of this provision, and that no more than minimal effects in the aesthetics of the site will result, nor will the use pose a negative impact upon adjacent or neighboring land uses. Such conditions shall be shown on a site plan and evaluated for effectiveness in accomplishing the overall intent of this provision and approved by the Department of Community Development. 
E.  Receipt of written objection to the construction of a screening device from a majority of the affected property owners. 
F.  Upon determination by the Department of Community Development that the screening device could be more objectionable than the proposed land use. Such evaluation will consider the proposed land use location and the relationship of the proposal with adjacent properties. The proposal shall be reflected in a site plan that also depicts building elevations, material type and other such information needed to make an informed decision. 
G.  When such uses are part of a public park, or private uses that contain an area that is dedicated for use as a playground or park and is available to the public during nonbusiness hours. 
(Ord. No. 2-2002, § 2, 1-3-2002; Ord. No. 32-2008, § 1, 5-20-2008) 
[Sec.] 4620. - Screening location. 
    In general, a screening device shall be provided and maintained at the property line unless an alternate location is approved where such alternate location will meet the intent of this provision. Such location requirement shall also be contingent upon other requirements of this ordinance, as may be amended. 
    No fence or wall may be placed within the front or exterior side setback area if abutting a public street unless it is determined that placing the fence or wall within these areas will maintain the intent of this provision, conform to adjacent fences or walls in height and location, and conform to other provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2-2002, § 2, 1-3-2002) 
[Sec.] 4625. - Alternate screening methods. 
    An alternate to a required screening fence shall be allowed where the overall effect and reason for requiring the screening fence is met, and the height of a required screening device is consistent with what is identified herein. Such alternates may include, but are not limited to, the following conditions: 
A.  Approved combinations of landscaped earthen berms and/or fences and/or walls. 
B.  Construction material and methods which are industry standards or typically used as fencing or screening devices. 
Alternative screening devices shall be approved by the Department of Community Development. 
(Ord. No. 2-2002, § 2, 1-3-2002) 
[Sec.] 4630. - Construction standards for screening fences and walls. 
    A site plan showing fence or wall location and building material must be submitted for approval. The site plan will be reviewed having due regard for the aesthetic character of the fence or wall in relationship to surrounding property as viewed from a public right-of-way. Such review shall also consider public safety in construction elements as it relates to public and private streets and alleys, and as it relates to on-site and off-site traffic circulation and visibility. 
    Construction standards included in this section are intended for commercial application. 
A.  Minimum standards for screening fences or walls. 
1.  Fences should not be so close to the ground as to impede normal stormwater run-off. 
2.  The side of the fence opposite the pole side shall face the public right-of-way or adjacent property. 
3.  Coatings such as stains and paints should be consistent with adjacent fences or walls and/or general aesthetic character of the fence or wall with the neighborhood or as viewed from a public right-of-way. 
4.  Pickets shall be of lumber designed and intended as fence material, and securely fastened. 
5.  No barbed wire, broken glass or other products attached to a fence or wall designed or intended to injure shall be placed within six feet of grade. 
6.  A fence or wall shall be of a height that will accomplish the intent for providing screening. The maximum required height shall be ten feet. 
7.  Fences and walls in excess of six feet in height shall be required to demonstrate the required wind loading capacity as determined by the building official. 
B.  Chainlink fence. A chainlink fence with or without slats or other inserts shall not be allowed as a screening device to accomplish the intent and purpose of this provision. 
C.  Traffic visibility. 
1.  Fences or walls shall not hamper traffic visibility and shall conform to provisions contained in the Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances, section 102-40, Visibility Sight Triangle, as to sight distance. 
2.  Where property lines intersect a public right-of-way, the height may be required to be reduced to a maximum height of three feet for that portion of the fence located within ten feet of the street right-of-way. 
D.  Signage. 
1.  With the exception of a company sign subject to requirements of section 6700, fence installer's sign, or signs posted to inform the general public of security precautions which exist within the screened area, no fence or wall as described herein, or permitted or required by other article(s), shall be used for the placement of signs, handbills, posters or other advertisement or to hang, mount or otherwise display items, products or merchandise if such can be viewed from a public right-of-way or a residential use or vacant land zoned for residential use or viewed by a land use of a more restrictive zoning classification as defined in section 3030. 
2.  Installer or security signs, where used, may be placed at intervals not less than 100 feet apart, and shall only be readable by those wishing to inquire as to the installer or to warn those seeking immediate access to the property, and shall not exceed one square foot in size. 
3.  This provision shall not apply to signs denoting a subdivision such as subdivision name, nor shall it apply to directional signs or informational signs placed by a neighborhood, which may include such signs as neighborhood crime watch, safe place or other signs necessary to inform the general public of such public safety programs or activities within the neighborhood or subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2-2002, § 2, 1-3-2002) 
[Sec.] 4635. - Maintenance requirement. 
A.  After complying with the requirements of this regulation, the owner and each successive owner of the property to which this regulation applies shall maintain the screening device(s) in good condition which includes such elements as a screening fence or wall, landscaped earthen berms, and landscaping used to accomplish the intent and purpose of this regulation, and shall otherwise maintain the property so as to comply with any other requirement of this regulation. 
B.  Where any owner of property to which this regulation applies, fails to reasonably maintain the required screening devices as required by this subsection, the city may issue a written notice and order the owner to repair or replace any man-made screening fence required by this provision which is destroyed, removed, or becomes dilapidated or in disrepair, and require any dead or dying trees or landscape plant materials to be replaced; or require any other action otherwise necessary to abate or correct any condition to meet the requirements of this provision. 
C.  If an existing screening device is not in conformance with the provisions herein, and is replaced due to damage, expansion or for other reason to the extent that 50 percent of the area or greater of the existing screen is to be or required to be replaced, the replaced screening device shall conform to provisions established herein as to height, location, construction standards and any other provisions as may be required and consistent with the provisions herein. 
(Ord. No. 2-2002, § 2, 1-3-2002) 
[Sec.] 4640. - Penalties for violation. 
    Any person, firm, association of persons, company or corporation or their agents, servants or employees who fail to provide the necessary screening as defined herein or fail to properly maintain the fence or wall as required herein shall upon conviction of such violations be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense, and each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2-2002, § 2, 1-3-2002) 
[Sec.] 4650. - Lighting requirement. 
    All outdoor lighting must be directed away from residential areas. 
(Ord. No. 2-2002, § 2, 1-3-2002) 
[Sec.] 4670. - Additional setback. 
    Additional setback shall be provided by non-single-family or non-duplex residential uses in the manner prescribed in this section where any one of the following conditions occur: 
A.  When these uses are located within a SF-1 Single-Family Residential (large lot) or SF-2 Single-family Residential (standard lot) Zoning District and abut a single-family or duplex residential use, or abut an alley which is adjacent to a single-family or duplex use, no portion of the structure shall be closer to single-family or duplex property line than the height of that portion, except that the minimum setbacks stated in [subsection] C shall apply. 
B.  [When these uses are:] 
1.  Located outside of a SF-1 Single-Family Residential (large lot) or SF-2 Single-Family Residential (standard lot) Zoning District, but abut an SF-1 Single-Family Residential (large lot) or SF-2 Single-Family Residential (standard lot) District boundary line, no portion of the structure shall be closer to a SF-1-Single-Family Residential (large lot) or SF-2 Single-Family Residential (standard lot) boundary line than the height of that portion, except that the minimum setback stated in subsection C shall apply. However, when the zoning district boundary line abuts an alley or street right-of-way, the city aqueduct, or a body of water such as Sikes Lake or Wichita River, the additional setback shall be computed by including their width. 
2.  Located outside of a SF-1 Single-Family Residential (large lot) or SF-2 Single-Family Residential (standard lot) Zoning District, but abut a single-family or duplex use, no portion of the structure shall be closer to the nearest property line of the single-family or duplex use than the height of that portion, except that the minimum setback stated in subsection C shall apply. In these cases a lesser setback that does not violate building code requirements or minimum setbacks as established in appendix A, Comprehensive Subdivision Ordinance, may be granted by the Commission through the conditional use process as outlined in section 7200. 
C.  Minimum setbacks: 
1.  Multifamily dwelling units, townhouses, condominiums, mobile home parks and subdivisions, civic uses, and commercial uses shall be set back at least 30 feet. 
2.  Light industrial uses shall set back at least 50 feet. 
3.  Heavy industrial uses shall set back at least 100 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2-2002, § 2, 1-3-2002; Ord. No. 88-2005, § 1, 11-1-2005) 
[Sec.] 4700. - Fire hazard regulation. 
    Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or explosive materials must meet the requirements of the adopted fire code, as amended. 
5000. - SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS 
5100. - HOME OCCUPATIONS 

[Sec.] 5105. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the home occupation provisions is to allow for the use of a portion of a residential structure for a nonresidential use which is clearly an accessory use to the existing residential use and does not change the residential character of the site and/or neighborhood. Sections 5100 through 5199 will be known as the home occupation provision of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 101-94, § 1, 8-2-1994) 
[Sec.] 5110. - Applicability. 
    The home occupation provision shall be applicable only to single-family and multifamily zoning districts, and single-family residences or units originally designed as single-family dwellings in the residential mixed use district. 
    The director of community development or his designee shall have the responsibility of enforcement of the provisions shown herein. 
(Ord. No. 101-94, § 1, 8-2-1994) 
[Sec.] 5115. - Home occupation as accessory use only. 
    The home occupations shall be an accessory use to the residential use, and shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling unit which is the bona fide residence of the practitioner. A detached building may be used for the home occupation as long as the use of the structure maintains the same residential character as found with other structures in the same neighborhood and conforms with other requirements found herein. 
    If the practitioner has two or more residences on a single lot, a home occupation shall be limited to only one residence which is the bona fide residence of the practitioner. 
(Ord. No. 101-94, § 1, 8-2-1994) 
[Sec.] 5120. - Residential character to be maintained. 
    The residential character of the lot and dwelling shall be maintained by the following: 
1.  The exterior of the dwelling shall not be altered in any manner so as to accommodate a home occupation. 
2.  An accessory building may be added on the property to accommodate the home occupation if the accessory building maintains the same residential character as the primary structure. 
3.  No more than 25 percent of the total gross floor area, not to exceed 500 square feet, of the residential building may be used for the home occupation or associated storage not contrary to the regulations provided herein. 
4.  No equipment, material or merchandise associated with the home occupation shall be displayed or stored where visible from anywhere off the premises. 
5.  No signs advertising the home occupation shall be placed on the premises. 
6.  The home occupation shall not require or utilize pick-ups or deliveries by vehicles exceeding 19,000 pounds gross vehicle weight (GVW) to support the home occupation. 
7.  No chemicals, fuels or hazardous materials of any type will be stored on premises other than the amount normally associated with a typical residential use. 
8.  No outdoor lighting, intended for security or other reasons, shall be permitted to produce glare onto adjacent residential properties, or light onto adjacent residential properties greater than 0.3 footcandles as measured at the property line. For the purpose of this provision, glare is defined as the viewing of a light source to include the bulb and any associated reflector as part of a light fixture, or the reflected viewing of a light source from an object not associated with the light source. 
9.  No commercial vehicle exceeding 9,000 pounds gross vehicle weight (GVW) shall be permitted to park overnight on the premise of a home occupation or within the residential neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 101-94, § 1, 8-2-1994) 
[Sec.] 5125. - Employment or participation limitations. 
    No person other than a family member who resides in the dwelling unit shall participate in the home occupation on the premises. The dwelling unit shall not be used as a place of congregation for work off the premises. 
(Ord. No. 101-94, § 1, 8-2-1994) 
[Sec.] 5130. - Use limitations. 
    Home occupations shall be subject to the following use limitations: 
1.  No direct selling of merchandise shall be allowed. However, storage of merchandise for delivery may be permitted subject to the following limitations: 
A.  Stored merchandise shall not be visible from anywhere off the premise. 
B.  Method of delivery or pick-up shall not be made by carriers exceeding 19,000 pounds gross vehicle weight (GVW). 
2.  No outdoor lighting, intended for security or other reasons, shall be permitted to produce glare or light onto adjacent residential properties. 
3.  The home occupation, structure used for the home occupation, or any situation as a result of the home occupation, shall not generate any noise, glare, odor, light, vibration, or like sensory impacts, not normally associated with a typical residential use, and for a length of time or frequency normally associated with a typical residential use, onto an adjacent residential property. 
4.  Garage sales shall be permitted no more than four times per calendar year, with such garage sales lasting no more than three consecutive days each time. 
5.  The amount of refuse generated by the home occupation, or the consumption of water, electricity or natural gas shall not be in excess of amounts typical of households in the same neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 101-94, § 1, 8-2-1994) 
[Sec.] 5135. - Hours of operation. 
    The hours of operation shall be limited to no earlier than 8:00 a.m. and no later than 9:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 101-94, § 1, 8-2-1994) 
5200. - ZERO LOT LINE REGULATIONS 

[Sec.] 5210. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the zero lot line regulations is to provide for single-family attached or detached residential structures with one zero side setback area. The intent is to allow a single-family structure to be placed on a side lot line in order to provide a more usable side yard on the other side. Sections 5200 through 5270 shall be known as the zero lot line regulations. 
[Sec.] 5215. - Lot area. 
    The minimum lot area shall be 4,000 square feet. 
[Sec.] 5220. - Lot width. 
    The minimum lot width shall be 40 feet. 
[Sec.] 5225. - Building coverage. 
    The maximum building coverage shall be 60 percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. No. 103-86, § 1, 12-16-1986) 
[Sec.] 5230. - Height. 
    The maximum height of a structure shall be 35 feet. 
[Sec.] 5235. - Common open space. 
    When the average lot area is less than 5,000 square feet, at least 15 percent of the net site area shall be provided for common open space. The area for such space shall be measured in accordance with the provisions of section 4452. 
[Sec.] 5240. - Side setback. 
    Structures shall be constructed on the side lot line on one side of the lot and a side setback shall be provided on the other side of the said lot subject to the following conditions: 
A.  The minimum width of the side setback shall be ten feet. The same side setback requirements shall be observed by accessory buildings. 
B.  A zero setback shall not be permitted when such lot abuts a non-zero lot line development, in which case, a minimum side setback of five feet shall be required. 
C.  An exterior side setback of at least 15 feet shall be required for corner lots. 
D.  No openings for access, light or air shall be permitted in the wall on the zero setback side. 
E.  The side setback shall be shown by building limit lines on the subdivision plat. Easements for maintenance, drainage and roof overhangs shall be established by notation on the plat. 
(Ord. No. 81-90, § 5, 12-6-1990) 
[Sec.] 5245. - Front setback. 
    The minimum front setback requirements shall be 25 feet, except for rear access subdivision where reduced setback as per section 4240 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 81-90, § 2, 12-6-1990) 
[Sec.] 5250. - Rear setback. 
    [The minimum rear setback for] single-family and duplex dwellings [shall be] five feet minimum from common lot line or one foot minimum from an alley. (See section 6500 for accessory structure setbacks and section 6210 for setback requirements for rear vehicular access.) 
(Ord. No. 28-86, § 3, 4-1-1986; Ord. No. 27-90, § 4, 5-1-1990; Ord. No. 81-90, § 3, 12-6-1990) 
[Sec.] 5255. - Parking requirements. 
    The minimum off-street parking requirements for the site shall be determined at the rate of two off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit, of which at least one space per dwelling unit must be provided on each lot. The remaining parking spaces must be provided in off-street parking lots. The areas required for such lots shall be in addition to the common open space requirements. 
[Sec.] 5260. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 5 of Ord. No. 81-90, adopted Dec. 6, 1990, deleted § 5260, which pertained to the site plan. 
[Sec.] 5265. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 5 of Ord. No. 81-90, adopted Dec. 6, 1990, deleted § 5265, which pertained to covenants. 
5300. - TOWNHOUSE REGULATIONS 

[Sec.] 5310. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of the townhouse regulations is to permit a greater intensity of land use while at the same time provide for areas of open space and degrees of privacy comparable to those qualities inherent in conventional single-family detached housing. 
[Sec.] 5315. - Lot area. 
    The minimum lot area shall be 2,000 square feet. 
[Sec.] 5320. - Lot width. 
    The minimum lot width shall be 20 feet. 
[Sec.] 5325. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 4 of Ord. No. 81-90, adopted Dec. 6, 1990, deleted § 5325, which pertained to common open space as amended by Ord. No. 83-85, § 2, adopted Aug. 6, 1985. 
[Sec.] 5330. - Structure separation. 
    The minimum separation of structures shall be ten feet. 
[Sec.] 5335. - Dwelling units per structure. 
    There shall be at least three dwelling units and not more than ten dwelling units per structure. 
[Sec.] 5340. - Height. 
    The maximum height of a structure shall be 35 feet. 
[Sec.] 5345. - Front setback. 
    A minimum front setback shall be required and based on the following: 
A.  Front or rear lot access. 
B.  On-street parking capabilities. 
C.  Number of parking spaces on each lot. 
D.  Number of overflow off-street parking spaces. 
E.  Where townhouse lots and dwelling units are designed to face upon a common open space courtyard rather than a public street, a rear setback will be required. 
[Sec.] 5350. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 27-90, § 5, adopted May 1, 1990, deleted § 5350, which pertained to side and rear setbacks. 
5400. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES AND SERVICE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverage establishments location, Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33. 

[Sec.] 5410. - Definitions and terms. 
    All definitions and terms used in this section shall be the same as the definitions and terms of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 84-85, 8-6-1985) 
State Law reference- Definitions, Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.04. 
[Sec.] 5430. - Sales near churches, hospitals and schools. 
A.  The sale of alcoholic beverages within the city by any dealer whose place of business is within 300 feet of a church or public hospital, the measurements to be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections, is hereby prohibited. 
B.  The sale of alcoholic beverages within the city by any dealer whose place of business is within 300 feet of a public or private school is hereby prohibited. The measurements of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public or private school shall be in a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, and in direct line across intersections. If the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold is located on or above the fifth floor of a multistory building, the method of measurement shall be in a direct line from the property line of a public or private school to the property line of the place of business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located. 
C.  Exceptions when locating within 300 feet from a private school. Subsection B does not apply to the sale of alcoholic beverages if the business holds a food and beverage certificate and is located within 300 feet of a private school, or the business is a premise where minors are prohibited from entering under Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.53, as amended, and is located within 300 feet of a private school. In this section, "private school" means a private school, including a parochial school that offers a course of instruction for students in one or more grades from kindergarten through grade 12, and has more than 100 students enrolled and attending courses at a single location. 
(Ord. No. 84-85, 8-6-1985; Ord. No. 30-89, § V, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 54-2003, § 2, 3-18-2003) 
5500. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Sexually oriented businesses, Texas Local Government Code § 243.001 et seq. 

[Sec.] 5510. - Distance separation required. 
    A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated within 1,000 feet of a church, a public or private elementary or secondary school, a United States military installation which contains a training school for armed forces members, a residential dwelling unit in which one or more persons maintain a residence, a public park, or another business of a type hereinafter enumerated in this section, a business of one of the following types: 
A.  An adult bookstore as hereinafter defined. 
B.  An adult motion picture theater as hereinafter defined. 
C.  A business or enterprise which offers for a consideration nude human modeling. 
D.  A business or enterprise that offers for a consideration physical contact between persons when one or more of such persons are nude or semi-nude. 
E.  A bar, nightclub or other similar commercial establishment that offers as entertainment, for the purpose of providing sexual stimulation to the customers of such establishment, live performances by a person or persons who expose specified anatomical areas or who perform specified sexual activities. 
F.  An adult arcade as hereinafter defined. 
G.  An adult motel as hereinafter defined. 
H.  An adult theater as hereinafter defined. 
I.  An escort agency as hereinafter defined. 
    For the purposes of this section, distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building used as a business or enterprise enumerated in this section to the nearest portion of the building used by another business or enterprise so enumerated or to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, a public or private elementary or secondary school, a United States military installation on which is located a school for training armed forces members, or public park, or to the nearest portion of a building used as a residential dwelling unit in which one or more persons maintain a residence. 
(Ord. No. 20-94, § 2, 3-1-1994) 
[Sec.] 5520. - Exception to 5510C. 
    It shall be a defense to prosecution under subsection C above that the business or enterprise is one of the following: 
1.  A proprietary school licensed by the state. 
2.  A college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. 
3.  A private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. 
(Ord. No. 20-94, § 2, 3-1-1994) 
[Sec.] 5530. - Sexually oriented commercial establishment defined. 
    When used in this section, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
A.  Adult bookstore. An establishment which as one of its primary business purposes offers for sale, rental or trade for any form of consideration books, magazines, periodicals or other printed materials, photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or related to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activity" or which depict "specified anatomical areas". 
B.  Adult motion picture theater. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activity" or the exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
C.  Specified sexual activities. 
1.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
2.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, masturbation, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
3.  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts; 
4.  Excretory functions as part of or in conjunction with any of the activities set forth in [subsections C.]1 through 3 [of this section.]. 
D.  Specified anatomical areas. 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
(a)  Human genitals, pubic region; 
(b)  Buttocks; and 
(c)  Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of areola; and 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
E.  Semi-nude. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breasts, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
F.  Adult arcades. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devises are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
G.  Adult motels. A motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment which: 
1.  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and which has a sign visible from a public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this type of photographics; or 
2.  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
3.  Allows a tenant or an occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
H.  Adult theaters. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
I.  Escort. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who, for consideration, agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
J.  Escort agency. A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
(Ord. No. 20-94, § 2, 3-1-1994) 
[Sec.] 5560. - Conditional use permit required. 
    No person shall operate a business of the type described in section 5510 without a conditional use permit authorizing such operation. The director of community development shall provide the necessary forms, and shall establish the procedures for the application for and issuance of such permits. Such permits shall be issued by the director of community development, for which a fee as approved by the city council shall be charged. 
(Ord. No. 20-94, § 2, 3-1-1994) 
5600. - MANUFACTURED HOUSING AND TEMPORARY USE VEHICLE REGULATIONS 

[Sec.] 5605. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of manufactured housing and temporary use vehicle regulations is to determine the applicability of a proposal for siting of mobile homes, manufactured housing and temporary use vehicles; to establish regulations related to their placement; to provide increased opportunities for home ownership; to recognize that manufactured housing and mobile homes have limitations on portability; that a mobile home or manufactured housing unit may experience consequences to the integrity of the structure by the displacement of the structure following initial placement; to provide standards relevant to appearance and compatibility; to associate the housing units with traditional site-built housing through aesthetic detailing, performance and permanence; to recognize effects upon adjacent properties in value and/or appearance; and to address public health, safety, morals and general welfare in the short and long term. 
(Ord. No. 71-2000, § 1(5605), 7-5-2000) 
[Sec.] 5610. - General regulations. 
A.  No mobile home, as defined herein, shall be placed, replaced or relocated within the city limits. 
B.  An existing mobile home as defined herein may remain on an existing site if it is habitable and meets minimum housing standards of the city, but may not be expanded or replaced with another mobile home or a manufactured home not permitted herein. Any proposed attendant structure shall require a conditional use permit using procedures under section 7200. The home shall be allowed to receive repairs to comply with building or health codes. 
C.  Remodeling or reconstruction, following a natural disaster or a calamity that makes a mobile home uninhabitable, may occur if the cost for remodeling or reconstruction does not exceed 50 percent of the value of the structure immediately prior to the remodel or reconstruction according to the latest tax rolls. Permitted remodeling or reconstruction of a mobile home shall be in accordance with city codes. Permitted remodeling or reconstruction of a manufactured housing unit shall require inspection and approval by a HUD-certified inspector. No replacement mobile home as defined herein or manufactured housing unit prohibited herein shall be used to fulfill the intent of this provision. 
D.  With the exception of manufactured housing proposed for locating within mobile home/manufactured housing parks, no mobile home or manufactured housing unit may be relocated from one site to another site within the city limits. This provision does not include the location or placement of new manufactured housing. For the purpose of this definition, new manufactured housing is housing that has never been occupied for any reason including as a sales office unless approved by the Department of Community Development, used as a temporary residence or for commercial use, has never been involved in an accident, nor has received weather-related damage that at any time has affected its structural integrity nor has visible signs of damage. 
E.  A person may not perform any installation functions unless the person possesses a valid certificate of registration for installation of manufactured homes as required by Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5221. 
F.  No existing mobile home, existing or proposed manufactured housing unit, existing or proposed temporary use vehicle, within or outside of a park, shall be used for any purpose other than for permanent or temporary residential habitation as may be determined by the nature of the unit or vehicle. This provision does not include those situations where such units are used for temporary use as approved by the Department of Community Development. 
G.  Any existing or proposed mobile home or manufactured housing unit must at all times be habitable. 
(Ord. No. 71-2000, § 1(5610), 7-5-2000) 
[Sec.] 5615. - Manufactured housing as in-fill development. 
    Manufactured housing as new or in-fill development shall be subject to a conditional use permit process by the Commission. The Commission shall evaluate the compatibility of the proposal based upon the following criteria: 
A.  Compatibility with neighborhood. 
1.  The square footage contained in the housing is comparable to those of existing housing units in the immediate residential neighborhood or subdivision. 
2.  The unit shall not be less than 22 feet wide. 
3.  The pitch of the main roof of the housing shall not be less than a 3:12 pitch, with eaves projecting not less than six inches. 
4.  The housing unit shall have a covered entry or dormer on any entry visible from a public street or right-of-way. 
5.  The unit shall be permanently attached or affixed to a permanent foundation system. All portions of the transportation system including wheels, axles, towing apparatus, lighting or other such conditions which are not an integral part of the structure shall be removed before the housing is permanently attached or affixed. The permanent foundation system shall be as follows: 
a.  A continuous concrete slab with a minimum thickness of four inches. 
b.  A below grade continuous concrete beam shall be an integral part of the slab placed under the perimeter of the unit, and under those portions of the chassis that bear the structural load of the unit. The minimum beam dimension shall be 10 inches wide by 12 inches high or as designed and sealed by a registered professional engineer. Concrete support piers from the slab foundation to the chassis shall be installed according to the installation manual for the unit or as required by the state. 
c.  State-approved tie-down anchors shall be installed in the slab. 
6.  The distance between finished grade and the bottom of the exterior walls shall not exceed 30 inches. 
7.  The foundation fascia shall form a complete brick or stone enclosure under exterior walls except where needed for normal ventilation or ingress/egress as approved by the city. 
8.  The driveway, sidewalks, and other such site elements shall conform to adjacent housing units in similar or approximate location and construction materials. 
9.  The facing of the unit shall be in relationship to a public street, or private street where allowed, and shall be located where the apparent entrance or front of the home faces or parallels the street frontage, except where the lot size exceeds one acre, is setback a minimum of 100 feet, or is in the same facing as adjacent or neighboring structures, except as provided herein or as approved by the Commission. 
10.  The unit shall conform to the minimum front, side, and rear yard setbacks, and height of the district where permitted or as required by the Commission. 
B.  Application and site plan. 
1.  The request for a conditional use permit for the siting of manufactured housing shall be accompanied by a site plan to address the following: 
a.  The location of the housing on the lot with dimensioning of housing unit, accessory buildings or additions, and setbacks; 
b.  The location of driveways, front entrance sidewalks, vehicle entrance points, how the unit will face and the front entrance point; 
c.  The location of adjacent or neighboring housing with their setbacks, driveway locations, sidewalks, facing of the structure(s) in relation to a public street and other site elements; 
d.  A description of the housing's exterior materials including siding, roofing, awnings or canopies, door and window details, chimney(s), and other elements; 
e.  A description as to how [subsection] 5615A is to be addressed; 
f.  Other elements or features determined by the city needed to ensure compatibility; and 
g.  Description of the installation maneuvering area describing how the installation and maneuvering will not encroach on adjacent properties. 
2.  A request for a conditional use permit for the siting of manufactured housing shall be accompanied by a detailed description of the proposed manufactured housing. At a minimum, the description shall include the following: 
a.  A picture of exterior elevations and floor plans of the proposed manufactured housing unit with necessary descriptions or comments intended to provide further information addressing compatibility; and 
b.  A statement from the dealer attesting that the structure has not been used for commercial purposes or installed, placed or inhabited as prohibited herein, nor has it been modified in any way that has not been approved by a HUD-certified inspector. 
C.  Inspection. The city shall verify adjacent or neighboring site conditions as shown on the site plan to ensure compatibility with the proposed use, and shall issue a report of findings to the Commission as may be required. The Commission shall include the findings into its consideration of a conditional use permit, and may require conditions on the placement of the manufactured housing to ensure compatibility with the neighborhood or subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 71-2000, § 1(5615), 7-5-2000) 
[Sec.] 5620. - Mobile home/manufactured housing parks. 
A.  Intent. Mobile home/manufactured housing parks are recognized as alternatives to traditional neighborhood environments due to the transient nature of the dwelling without association to the land by the property user. The intent of regulations involving mobile home/manufactured housing parks is to ensure that mobile home/manufactured housing parks are created and maintained so as to provide a healthy, safe and clean environment conducive to the enjoyment of families, provide a positive image of the city through appearance and function, require responsibility in operation and use and which provides a method for ensuring that such parks maintain the intent of the purpose and intent of the regulations. 
B.  Park license. For the purpose of section 5620, [the term] "park" shall be a mobile home/manufactured housing park. 
1.  No person, firm or corporation shall operate or maintain a park within the city limits without first having secured a park license from the city. 
2.  The application for license shall be made on forms provided by the city. Licenses shall be granted only after inspection and approval of the park by the city. 
3.  The application for license shall be accompanied by a fee of $500.00 for each park or portion thereof. 
4.  No license may be issued or reissued for a park unless the plans for such park have been approved according to the requirements under this provision. 
5.  No license may be issued or reissued for a park if the park owner is delinquent in payment of city taxes or has a recorded lien by the city on the property. 
6.  A license shall be valid for the period of park operation, unless such is revoked or otherwise suspended as provided or required herein. 
7.  Every park shall have an office in which a copy of the park permit (license) shall be posted and the park register shall be in such office. It shall be the duty of the licensee to keep a register of park occupancy, which shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and address of the occupants; 
b.  The make, model, serial number, year and dimensions of all housing units or description of temporary use vehicles; 
c.  The date of arrival and departure of each home or temporary use vehicle; and 
d.  Other information as may be required under these regulations. 
8.  It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to ensure that all requirements of this section are met and maintained. Any park that is found to be in violation of any provision of this section shall be notified in writing to cease such violation within ten days of notification. If after ten days the violation has not ceased, the city shall forward a notice of license revocation to the owner of the park. 
9.  Revocation of the license shall mean that no future licenses or permits may be issued to the park, no additional housing units or temporary use vehicles shall be installed until said violation(s) have ceased, all fines issued as a result of violation(s) or liens have been paid, and that any taxes owed have been paid. The revocation of a license shall be for a period of up to 90 days. Should said violation persist without any reasonable action taken by [the] park owner to correct deficiencies within the 90-day period, the city may thereafter impound, confiscate or take other such action to preserve or protect the health, safety and general welfare and integrity of the park, its users and the city to ensure compliance with the intent and purpose of the regulations at the expense of park owners. Reissuance of a park license may be subject to the same terms and conditions as a new license. 
10.  Where the Commission was required at any time to provide the necessary authority for an action required under this regulation, the Commission may revoke such authorization. The Commission may order the removal of housing unit(s) and/or temporary use vehicles following processes established or deemed appropriate by the city. The Commission may order discontinuance of a park found not in compliance with the terms of these regulations, following procedures established herein. 
11.  No park shall be subdivided for the sale of individual lots, pads or spaces. The subdivision of any park shall require the submission and approval of a revised site plan and a plat or replat. 
C.  Site plan. A site plan addressing all requirements herein shall be submitted prior to park approval, or submission to the Commission where required. No license may be issued to a park unless a site plan as been submitted and approved by the city, and the Commission where required. The site plan shall be scaled and dimensioned at [one] inch [equals] 100 feet with the following information: 
1.  Name, address, fee owner and record owner of the park. 
2.  Name of subdivision where the park is located. 
3.  Names and widths of existing or planned adjacent public streets and roads. 
4.  Contour lines at two-foot intervals as may be required. 
5.  Locations and dimensions of all pads or spaces, utility easements, drives, recreation areas, streets and sidewalks in conformance with requirements herein. 
6.  Building setback lines from public streets and adjacent property. 
7.  Distinct number or address for each pad or space. 
8.  Area of site. 
9.  Areas defined for solid waste containers as required by the city. 
10.  Boundary description of park property. 
11.  Location of stormwater detention facility(ies) as required by the city. 
12.  A fire hydrant within 500 feet hose lay distance of each pad or space. 
13.  The following plans approved by the city: 
a.  Water and wastewater plan as required by the city. 
b.  Drainage plans showing the directions and calculated quantities of runoff. Drainage improvements shall comply with applicable city regulations. 
14.  Other information as required by the city, Commission, or city council, as applicable, to ensure compliance with requirements herein, and to review the function of the proposal, with the intent of requiring modifications to the plan to address city policies and regulations intended to protect the public's health, safety, morals and general welfare. 
15.  After approval by the Commission, two copies of the approved site plan with changes or modifications required prior to such approval, and one copy of all approved construction and utility plans showing all required changes shall be submitted to the city. Both copies of the site plan shall be signed by the chair[person] of the Commission and the secretary of the Commission. The site plan shall contain the following statement: 
This site plan has been submitted to and considered by the Commission of the City of Wichita Falls, Texas, and is hereby approved by such Commission. 
Dated this _____ day of _______, 20___. 
By:___________ 
    Chairman 
By:___________ 
    Secretary 
16.  A final plat must be recorded by the county clerk before final approval of the site. 
17.  The city may issue a license after approval of a final plat and site plan; however, no home may be placed on an individual home space which does not comply with requirements herein. 
D.  Park development standards. 
1.  Setbacks. 
a.  Front: Ten feet from back of curb measured to outside wall or from any attachment which may exist, whichever is greater. 
b.  Exterior side setback: 15 feet. 
c.  Interior side setback: 15 feet between units. 
d.  Rear setback: Ten feet minimum measured from outside wall to the rear lot line. 
e.  From service building: 15 feet minimum. 
f.  Exterior from public right-of-way: 25 feet minimum for units and fence or wall. 
g.  Storage buildings up to and including 150 square feet: Three feet from any other structure; five feet from an adjacent pad or property line. 
h.  Storage buildings more than 150 square feet: Ten feet from any other structure; five feet from an adjacent pad or property line. 
i.  Uncovered porches, patio decks, steps, landings, or ramps: Five feet from adjacent pad or property line. 
j.  Covered, unenclosed porches, patio decks, steps, landings, or ramps (other than awnings): Ten feet from any other structure; five feet from adjacent pad or property line. 
k.  Awnings: Three feet from any other structure, adjacent pad or property line. 
For the purpose of separation or setback requirements, any structure that is enclosed or covered by construction on any side, other than primary building side, shall be considered as part of the home or building. 
2.  Interior streets. 
a.  Street width: 30 feet minimum. 
b.  Street paving: Hard surface paved. 
c.  Street name: Not accepted by city, but approved by the city. 
3.  Solid waste disposal. As required by the city. 
4.  Off-street parking. 
a.  Two paved off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each designated, pad or space, and shall meet the following requirements: 
Parking 
Angle 
(degrees) Curb 
Length 
Per Car 
(feet) Minimum 
Bay Depth 
(feet) 90 9 18 60 10.4 20.1 45 12.7 19.1  
b.  Off-street parking or fences shall not obstruct sidewalks. 
c.  No parking on unpaved or grassy surfaces. 
5.  Utilities and drainage. 
a.  An approved public water supply for domestic use and fire protection purposes shall be supplied to meet the requirements of the park as may be required by the city. 
b.  All exterior plumbing shall comply with city codes. 
c.  The electrical distribution system shall comply with applicable electrical codes. Individual electric meters may be used. A fire clearance inspection must be made by the city before power connections are resumed after power has been disconnected. 
d.  All electrical installations in the park must be done by city-licensed electrical contractors. Inspections for electrical and plumbing installations must be called for by the person or licensee installing such service. 
e.  No electrical clearance will be given to a home until the unit has been installed in accordance with the applicable requirements of this section. 
f.  Installation and maintenance of electrical wiring and service equipment in the park shall be in accordance with city codes. 
g.  The installation of electrical service from the service disconnect to the manufactured home shall not require a separate electrical permit other than the installation permit. 
h.  A service disconnect of the proper amperage for each home must be furnished. 
i.  Installation and maintenance of plumbing service in the park shall be in accordance with city codes. The installation of plumbing service from the park-supplied connections to the home shall not require a separate plumbing permit other than the home installation permit. 
j.  Stormwater detention facility(ies) shall be provided as required by the city. 
6.  A privacy fence or wall not less than eight feet in height shall be erected and maintained in good condition along the property line. A park expansion shall require that this privacy fence or wall be installed according to these provisions for the expansion area. 
7.  Hard-surfaced paved access roadways shall be provided to each pad or space. 
8.  Streets and roadways shall provide a minimum clear access width of 30 feet. The city shall approve all streets and roads to ensure acceptable maneuvering area and surface materials for emergency vehicles. 
9.  Streets and lots shall be marked by clearly visible signs and numbers. Lot numbers shall be a minimum of two inches in width and three inches in height. Lot numbers may be placed upon the manufactured home if located so as to be visible from each direction of street approach. 
10.  Pads, spaces and dwelling units contained therein shall be subject to city codes and ordinances. 
11.  Unit installation, foundation, blocking and tie-down requirements shall be in conformance with city and state requirements as applicable. 
12.  Installations and use of liquefied petroleum gas shall be consistent with the rules and regulations of the state and city codes. 
13.  Construction of buildings or other structures in the park shall conform to city codes and shall be separately permitted by the city. 
14.  The proposal to site a housing unit shall require that the owner of the unit provide a statement of condition for the unit. Such statement shall be retained with park records. A sample of such is attached herein for informational purposes only [see section 5622]. Park owners/operators shall be responsible for verifying conditions therein and maintaining such record as part of the park records. 
15.  Where an area has been designated for storage of travel trailers, recreational vehicles, boats, trailers or similar such vehicles, where habitation or use is not intended or allowed, such an area shall be totally paved according to standards included under [section] 6200, and not visible from a public street. A paved access road from a public or private street may be provided. Such an area shall be used solely for the storage of vehicles and shall not be used for storing any vehicle in an inoperable condition. An inoperable condition exists if the vehicle does not carry current registration or license or is not complete in its assembly to operate upon public streets or roads. 
E.  Building permits, installation and inspection. 
1.  Placement and tie-down of the home must be done by state-licensed installers in accordance with rules and regulations of the state. Plumbing installation from the park-supplied connections to the home shall be done by a licensed plumber. The names of each person or licensee making the installations must be provided to the city upon application for the installation permit. 
2.  No building permits will be issued to increase the floor area of a home within a park; except, however, an additional room may be added if the finish and appearance are the same as the home and the construction is equal to or better than that in the home. Any modification to an existing manufactured home which was not subject to the original inspection will thereafter require a permit from the city for any change, modification or alteration which is under the purview of the city for similar such work. 
3.  The installation of a manufactured home shall require a permit from the city. 
4.  An inspection fee of $30.00 shall be charged for each home installation permit. An inspection fee of $15.00 will be charged for any reinspection. 
5.  Housing units shall be subject to inspection by the city to ensure safe, sanitary conditions. The city may order the repair of a unit in accordance with city codes or as required for approval by a HUD-certified inspector, or order the demolition or removal of any unit not found habitable or in compliance with minimum housing standards regardless of permitting statute or federal approval status where such was initially applied. The city may, following established procedures, perform such demolition or removal as may be required to maintain safe, healthful conditions within the park where, in the determination of the city, such structure possesses conditions that pose a hazard to the health, safety, morals and general welfare to the occupants, park residents or to the community. 
F.  Conditions of park. Park owners shall at all times be held liable for compliance with regulations herein, and shall ensure that: 
1.  Parks remain free of inoperable vehicles; outside appliances; broken, discarded, salvaged or other such conditions of materials, goods or parts where such may be viewed by adjacent housing units or along private drives or public rights-of-way, or where such may be otherwise accessed by other than the park owner, operator or tenant. 
2.  Parks remain free of the accumulation of trash, garbage or other such conditions not permitted within the city. 
3.  All housing units shall be fully skirted with a material intended for or customarily used for skirting material. 
4.  Only manufactured housing units and temporary use vehicles as permitted herein, and approved ancillary structures or facilities may be placed in parks. No structural modifications to manufactured housing units shall have occurred that has not been approved by a HUD-certified inspector. Only structural modifications to manufactured housing units that have received approval from a HUD-certified inspector shall be allowed. The city shall be required to approve modifications to other housing units according to procedures established by the city. 
5.  No objects shall be placed on the roof of a home to include, but not [be] limited to, tires, rims and other such items unless intended for such placement and use. There shall be allowed concrete weights not to exceed 11/2 inches in height. 
6.  Streets and roadways shall be maintained free of obstruction and potholes. 
(Ord. No. 71-2000, § 1(5600), 7-5-2000) 
[Sec. 5622.] - Sample statement of condition. 
    The following shall be completed prior to the installation of manufactured housing or a temporary use vehicle. No housing unit manufactured before June 15, 1976, shall be allowed. Separate sheets may be used to provide further details. 
Name of owner and number of people that will reside in the housing unit? 
What is the make, age and dimensions of the housing unit? 
Where is the unit moving from and anticipated length of stay? 
To the best of your knowledge, how many times has the unit been moved? 
Are all windows and doors installed? 
Is the siding and roofing material in good shape in function and appearance? 
Does the electrical system remain properly grounded, and is the plumbing system in good repair and working order? 
In your opinion, what is the overall condition of the unit? 
Has the unit received any modifications that has not been reviewed and approved by an inspector certified for the inspection of such units by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development? 
Have you received a copy of the park regulations, and have you agreed to conditions therein? 
Upon arrival at the park, an inspection of the unit will be performed by the park operator to ascertain that the unit is in compliance with park standards and city regulations. 
(Ord. No. 71-2000, § 1, 7-5-2000) 
[Sec.] 5625. - Manufactured housing subdivisions. 
A.  Generally. 
1.  Manufactured housing subdivisions may be created for the purpose of subdividing land into residential lots to be sold for the use of manufactured homes. Such subdivision shall be of a size of not less than four acres. If a preliminary plat containing more than four acres is approved by the city, the subdivision may be platted in sections. The first section shall contain not less than four acres. Subsequent platted areas shall be a minimum of four acres. 
2.  Manufactured housing shall be placed on individually platted lots in manufactured housing subdivisions under the conditions set forth herein and in appendix A of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Wichita Falls, Texas. 
3.  A legible note shall appear on the plat below the subdivision name that indicates that the subdivision was platted as a manufactured housing subdivision. Property owners shall be given notice that the subdivision is platted as a manufactured housing subdivision. 
Housing subject to the city's building codes may be included in the subdivision if the subdivision is at least 50 percent occupied or intended for occupation by manufactured housing within the development or within that phase of development as may exist. The intent of such provision will be the creation of mixed use residential development. Such proposal shall be approved by the Commission with a conditional use permit, and shall require the participation of the Commission in each such action to fulfill the intent of this provision. 
B.  Development standards. 
1.  All utilities shall be located underground. 
2.  Under-spaces shall be completely enclosed with brick or stone, except where needed for normal ventilation and ingress/egress as approved by the city. 
3.  Modification of a housing unit shall be subject to city building codes unless inspected and approved by persons authorized under applicable state and federal statutes certifying that the unit remains in compliance with applicable regulations. 
4.  When lots have double frontage, a 25-foot building setback line shall be established for each street. 
5.  A solid masonry wall not less than eight feet in height shall be erected and maintained along the property line dividing a manufactured housing subdivision from adjacent non-manufactured housing subdivisions, manufactured or mobile housing parks, and other residential or commercial uses. 
6.  A masonry wall may be subject to approval by the city which may evaluate appearance and appropriateness of the construction proposed. No fence, wall or landscaping shall be erected or planted so as to obstruct the vision of motorists at alley, street or drive intersections. 
7.  The unit shall not be less than 22 feet wide. 
8.  The pitch of the main roof of the housing shall not be less than a 3:12 pitch with eaves projecting not less than six inches. 
9.  The housing unit shall have a covered entry or dormer on any entry visible from a public street or right-of-way. 
10.  The unit shall be permanently attached or affixed to a permanent foundation system. All portions of the chassis or transportation system including wheels, axles, towing apparatus, lighting or other such conditions which are not an integral part of the structure shall be removed before the housing is permanently attached or affixed. The permanent foundation system shall be as follows: 
a.  A continuous concrete slab with a minimum thickness of four inches. 
b.  A below grade continuous concrete beam shall be an integral part of the slab placed under the perimeter of the unit, and under those portions of the chassis that bear the structural load of the unit. The minimum beam dimension shall be ten inches wide by 12 inches deep by 12 inches high or as designed and sealed by a registered profession engineer. Concrete support piers from the slab foundation to the chassis shall be installed according to the installation manual for the unit or as required by the state. 
c.  State-approved tie-down anchors installed in the slab. 
11.  The distance between finished grade and the bottom of the exterior walls shall not exceed 30 inches. 
12.  The foundation fascia shall form a complete brick or stone enclosure under exterior walls except where needed for normal ventilation or ingress/egress as approved by the city. 
13.  The facing of the unit shall be in relationship to a public street, or private street where allowed; located where the apparent entrance or front of the home faces or parallels the street frontage, except where the lot size exceeds one acre; is setback a minimum of 100 feet; or is in the same facing as adjacent or neighboring structures, except as provided herein. 
14.  The unit shall conform to the minimum front, side, and rear yard setbacks and heights. 
15.  Two paved off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each lot. 
16.  Only one home shall be placed on an individual lot within a manufactured housing subdivision. 
17.  Minimum lot standards. 
a.  Lot area: [5,000] square feet. 
b.  Lot width: [50] feet, minimum for single-family dwelling. 
c.  Height: [35] feet, maximum. 
d.  Front setback: [25] feet minimum, except for rear access subdivision where reduced setback as per section 4240 shall apply. 
e.  Side setback, interior: Five feet, minimum. 
f.  Side setback, exterior: [15] feet, minimum except 25 feet minimum for permitted nonresidential uses, and where involving double frontages, or where abutting a street at the entrance to the subdivision. 
g.  Rear setback: 
1)  Single-family dwelling: Five feet minimum from common lot line or one ft. minimum from alley. (See section 6500 for accessory structure setbacks and section 6210 for setback requirements for rear vehicular access.) 
2)  All other uses: Five feet, minimum. 
h.  Building coverage: 50 percent of lot area, maximum. 
(Ord. No. 71-2000, § 1(5625), 7-5-2000) 
[Sec.] 5630. - Temporary use vehicles within mobile home/manufactured housing parks. 
1.  Temporary use vehicles shall at all times be ready for immediate highway use. These vehicles shall be deemed to be ready for highway use if wheels are mounted; they are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices; they are currently licensed to operate on streets, roads and highways; have a current inspection sticker if required; and have no attached additions. No temporary use vehicle shall be placed on a designated space or pad for a period exceeding 180 consecutive days. Following the removal of the unit, the unit shall thereafter not locate within the same park for a period of not less than 14 days. The city may authorize an extension of time due to extenuating circumstances that include, but are not limited to, employment for temporary local construction and other such situations. 
2.  Uses in violation of requirements herein shall be subject to immediate impoundment at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 71-2000, § 1(5630), 7-5-2000) 
[Sec.] 5640. - Recreational vehicle parks. 
A.  Purpose. The intent of these regulations is to recognize the need for uniform minimum standards for recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds. Standards contained herein have been developed by the industry based on nationally recognized standards for fire, health, and life safety, obtained through the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), and modified according to city policies and standards. Regulations herein are intended to: 
1.  Provide minimum construction requirements to ensure a reasonable degree of safety and health for occupants using the facilities. 
2.  Offer a temporary area for use by recreational vehicles. 
3.  Provide an environment encouraging use by tourist and others visiting or traveling through the city. 
B.  General. 
1.  As used in this section, a "unit" shall refer to an allowed recreational vehicle as defined herein. A "park" shall refer to the total site shown on a site plan for the siting of a facility for the exclusive use of parking and temporary use of recreational vehicles and ancillary facilities therein and as permitted herein. 
2.  Parks shall be for the temporary use of recreational vehicles as defined herein. The maximum length of stay within a park shall be 180 days. Once a unit has met this length of stay and moves from the park, the unit shall not thereafter be moved back into the park for a minimum of 14 days. 
3.  The minimum site area for a park shall be two acres. There shall be a minimum of four stands developed per park. Prior to beginning operations, a park shall have completed all roads, utilities and other facilities as required. 
4.  The park owner/operator shall be required to maintain a park register that contains the following information: 
a.  Unit owner's name and address, and user's name and address if different. 
b.  Date the unit was moved into the park, intended length of stay and destination after leaving the park. 
c.  License and/or registration numbers of the unit and tow vehicle as applicable. 
5.  Units and tow vehicles shall carry current licensing and registration. 
6.  Park facilities and structures shall comply with all city and state regulations. 
7.  Recreational vehicle parks shall be allowed as a permitted use within the RDD River Development Zoning District and with a conditional use permit within GC General Commercial and MHR Manufactured Housing Residential Zoning Districts. 
C.  Site plan requirements. A site plan shall be submitted to the city for approval. The following information shall be included on the site plan: 
1.  Name, address and boundary description of the park. 
2.  Name, relationship with and right-of-way width of boundary streets. 
3.  Property owners names, addresses and phone numbers. 
4.  Location of stormwater detention facilities, if required. 
5.  Sidewalk locations and widths. 
6.  Landscaping as required under section 6800. 
7.  Location and dimensions of all signs. 
8.  Location, angle and dimension of each stand indicating off-road parking for vehicles as required herein. 
9.  Location, use and dimensions of all structures or other facilities intended or required on or for the site. 
10.  Location, dimensions and material type of all private and public streets proposed within the park. 
11.  Location and description of water supplies for fire protection purposes. 
12.  Description of source for all potable water supplies. 
13.  Description and location of dump stations and individual connections. 
14.  Indication of approval for the use and location of all sanitary and water facilities if not provided by the city. 
15.  Other information as may be required by the city. 
D.  Other plans required. Prior to approval of a site plan and/or issuance of a building permit, the following shall be provided: 
1.  A source of potable water supply approved by the city. 
2.  A water source and design approved by the city for fire protection. 
3.  Other plans as may be required by the city. 
E.  Park design in general. 
1.  Minimum widths of roads shall be ten feet per traffic lane and eight feet per parallel parking lane. All streets and roads shall be hard-surfaced paved with either HMAC - hot mix asphalt concrete or concrete. 
2.  Road curves shall have a minimum internal radius of 25 feet. 
3.  Turnarounds shall be provided for all dead-end roads over 100 feet in length and shall have a minimum internal radius of 50 feet. 
4.  Every structure that does not meet the definition of a stand shall be designed and constructed in accordance with city codes. 
5.  Swimming and bathing facilities, if provided, shall be constructed and operated in accordance with city and state regulations. 
6.  A structure shall not be located closer than ten feet from a stand or other structure. 
7.  Each camping unit stand shall be marked for identification. Such markers shall be readable from the road and approved by the city for emergency identification. 
8.  Each stand should be designed and constructed at such elevation, distance, and angle with respect to its access to provide for safe and efficient placement and removal of units. 
9.  Each stand should be constructed to minimize the development of ruts or low spots by the vehicle tires, and shall be graded to provide drainage. 
10.  Each stand shall be a minimum of eight feet wide. 
11.  Each unit installed on a stand shall be installed using a method to accommodate the unit set-up and minimize the settling of the unit in its set-up mode. 
12.  Each stand shall have a designated parking space for a full-sized car or truck. This parking space shall be permitted to be part of a stand or in a common parking area. All parking spaces or parking areas shall be hard-surfaced paved with either HMAC - hot mix asphalt concrete or concrete. 
F.  Utilities in general. 
1.  Each stand shall have a potable water supply connection, sewer inlet connection, and electrical power supply. 
2.  Utility connections are permitted to be grouped together in one assembly under the following conditions: 
a.  The assembly shall be located on the left rear half of the stand (left side of the unit) within six feet of the stand. 
b.  For the purpose of providing utility connections to individual units, the assembly shall be listed for recreational vehicle or recreational park trailer use. 
c.  Utility connections shall be protected from damage by vehicles. 
3.  All electrical installations, systems, and equipment shall comply with Article 551, Part (G) and other applicable sections of the NFPA 70, National Electrical Code. 
G.  Water utilities. 
1.  A potable water supply shall not be connected to any nonpotable or unapproved water supplies or subject to any backflow or back siphonage. 
2.  The water supply system shall be designed and constructed to provide a minimum of 50 gallons per day per stand and a minimum of 50 gallons per day per restroom. 
3.  Where water is distributed under pressure, the water supply system shall be designed to provide a minimum flow pressure of 20 psi with a minimum flow of two gpm at any outlet. The maximum pressure at any stand shall not exceed 80 psi. 
4.  Water storage tanks, where permitted, shall be constructed of impervious materials, protected against contamination, and provided with locked watertight covers. Any overflow or ventilation openings shall be down facing and provided with corrosion-resistant screening of not less than No. 24 mesh to prevent the entrance of insects and vermin. Water storage tanks shall not have direct connections to sewers. 
5.  Wells, springs, and similar sources of water intended for potable purposes, and equipment or facilities required for connecting to or operation, distribution and maintenance thereof shall be approved, constructed, and maintained according to city and state requirements. 
6.  All potable water connections shall consist of a water riser pipe that shall be equipped with a threaded male spigot located at least 12 inches, but not more than 24 inches, above grade level for the attachment of a standard water hose. This connection shall be equipped with an atmospheric vacuum-breaker. 
7.  All supplies of water shall be in compliance with potable water requirements of the state. In absence thereof, they shall meet the intent of the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974 (Public Law 93-523), dated December 16, 1974, the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations, and federal and state regulations pursuant thereto, as may be amended. 
8.  The park may be required to extend public utilities in accordance with the Code of Ordinances, City of Wichita Falls, Texas, as may be amended. 
H.  Fire, life safety and environmental health. 
1.  Fire detection and alarm systems shall be installed in structures open to the public and in accordance with NFPA 72, National Fire Alarm Code (H). 
2.  Installation of firefighting equipment shall be in accordance with city codes. Exception may exist where portable fire extinguishers are used with a minimum rating of 2a-20-B:C and when approved by the city. Extinguishers shall be located within 75 feet of any stand. 
3.  Designated outdoor campfire locations, if provided, shall be in safe and convenient areas where they will not constitute a fire hazard to vegetation, undergrowth, trees, vehicles, units, and structures. Campfire locations shall be shown on the site plan. Use of outdoor fires of any type shall be in accordance with city policies and standards and subject to conditions on their prohibition. 
4.  Fire safety rules and regulations shall be conspicuously posted by park management. These regulations shall contain the following information and any additional information as required by the city: 
a.  The telephone number of the Fire Department or other information needed for summoning the Fire Department, such as the location of the nearest fire alarm box. 
b.  The telephone number of the Police Department. 
c.  The telephone number of any agency that would provide emergency services. 
d.  The location of the nearest public telephone. 
I.  Sanitary facilities. Sanitary facilities shall be in accordance with city codes. Where elements are not addressed, or are considered inadequately addressed according to ANSI requirements, the following shall apply: 
1.  One toilet room for each sex shall be provided for each 50 stands. For each additional 25 stands, or portion thereof, an additional toilet for each sex shall be provided. 
2.  Where required, toilet rooms shall be located within a 500-foot radius of any stand. 
3.  Every toilet room shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven feet. 
4.  Facilities for males and for females shall be appropriately marked. 
5.  Unless artificial light is provided, the total window or skylight area shall be equal to at least ten percent of the floor area. 
6.  Unless provided with a listed mechanical ventilation system, every toilet room shall have a permanent, nonclosable, screened opening(s) having a total area not less than five percent of the floor area that opens directly to the exterior in order to provide proper ventilation. Listed exhaust fan(s), vented to the exterior and having a rating in cubic feet per minute of at least 25 percent of the total volume of the toilet room (s) served, shall be considered as meeting the requirements of this subsection. 
7.  All operable windows and vents to the outside shall be provided with fly-proof screens of not less than No. 16 mesh. 
8.  All doors to the exterior shall open outward, be self-closing, and be visually screened by means of a vestibule or wall to prevent direct view of the interior when the exterior doors are open. Such screening shall not be required on single toilet units. 
9.  The interior finish of walls shall be moisture resistant to a height of four feet to facilitate washing and cleaning. 
10.  The floors shall be resistant to water. Any structure having flush toilets shall be provided with a floor drain in the toilet room. 
11.  Chemical and recirculating toilets shall not be allowed in facilities intended to serve park residents or users. 
12.  Privies shall not be allowed. 
13.  An equal number of lavatories shall be provided for up to six toilets. One additional lavatory shall be provided for each two toilets when more than six toilets are required. Each lavatory basin shall have a piped supply of potable water and shall drain into an approved sewage system. 
14.  Floor urinals shall not be allowed. 
15.  Toilets shall be of an approved or listed type and shall be provided with seats with open fronts. 
16.  Each toilet shall be in a separate compartment and shall be provided with a door with a latch for privacy and a holder or dispenser for toilet paper. Dividing walls or partitions shall be at least five feet high and, if separated from the floor, shall be by a space not greater than 12 inches. 
17.  Each female toilet room shall be provided with a receptacle for sanitary napkins. The receptacle shall be of durable, nonpervious, and readily cleanable material and shall be provided with a lid. 
18.  Showers, where provided, shall be of the individual type, and each shower area shall be visually screened from view. All shower compartments shall be capable of encompassing a 30-inch circle. The minimum required area and dimensions shall be measured at a height equal to the top of the threshold and at a point tangent to its centerline. The minimum area and dimensions shall be maintained to a point 70 inches above the shower drain outlet with no protrusions other than the fixture valve or valves, showerhead, and safety grab bars or nails. Each shower area shall be designed to minimize the flow of water into the dressing area and shall be properly connected to the sewage system by means of a trapped inlet. 
19.  If showers are provided, an individual dressing area visually screened from view shall be provided with minimum floor area of three feet by three feet per shower. The dressing areas shall be equipped with a minimum of one clothing hook and stool (or equivalent bench area). 
20.  The floors of showers and dressing areas shall have an impervious skid-resistant surface. Wooden racks (duckboards) over shower floors shall be prohibited. 
21.  Open showers provided exclusively for the removal of sand, etc., following beach activities, and when swimming suits are not removed, need not comply with the provisions of this subsection. 
22.  All restrooms and shower facilities shall comply with [the] Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA). 
23.  Facilities for the storage, collection, and disposal of solid waste refuse shall be provided as required by the city. 
24.  The Wichita Falls-Wichita County Public Health District shall approve each sewage disposal system. Stormwater sewers shall be separate and apart from any sewers intended for the conveyance of sewage. 
25.  Cleanouts should be provided at the upper terminal of each sewer main or branch and at intervals not exceeding 200 feet along any straight run or portion thereof. 
26.  Every change in alignment or grade in excess of 22 degrees should be served by a cleanout. 
27.  Manholes may be used in lieu of cleanouts and should not be spaced more than 400 feet apart. 
28.  Horizontal-to-horizontal changes in direction should be made with 45-degree "Y" branches, combination "Y" and one-eighth bend branches, or other approved fittings of equivalent sweep. 
29.  A sewer inlet to an individual stand shall consist of a sewer riser extending vertically to grade. The minimum diameter of the sewer riser pipe should be three inches and should be provided with a four-inch inlet or a minimum three-inch female fitting. 
30.  Sewer riser pipes shall be firmly imbedded in the ground and be protected against damage from heaving or shifting and the entrance of surface water. It should be provided with a tight-fitting plug or cap that shall be secured by a durable chain (or equivalent) to prevent loss. 
31.  A sewer riser pipe is not required to be individually vented. 
32.  All units and ancillary facilities shall discharge all waste from sinks, dishwashers, drains, and any other fixture through which grease may be discharged into an adequately sized, properly maintained and functioning grease trap before the discharge enters the publicly-owned treatment works (POTW). Such traps shall provide an inlet flow control devise inspection port, a grease trap inspection port, and an effluent monitoring port for said trap. 
J.  Sanitary disposal stations. 
1.  One sanitary disposal station shall be provided for each 100 stands. 
2.  Each station shall be level, easily accessible from the road, and shall provide easy entry and exit for units. 
3.  Sanitary disposal stations shall be approved by the city in accordance with the following: 
a.  Unless other approved means are used, each station shall have a concrete slab with a center drain inlet located so as to be on the roadside (left) of the recreational vehicle or recreational park trailer. 
b.  The slab shall be not less than three feet by three feet, at least 31/2 inches thick, properly reinforced, and trowelled to a smooth finish and sloped from each side inward to a sewer inlet. 
c.  The sewer inlet shall consist of a four-inch self-closing foot-operated hatch of approved material with a tight-fitting cover. The hatch body shall be set in the concrete of the slab with the lip of the opening flush with its surface to facilitate the cleansing of the slab with water. The hatch shall be property connected to a sewer inlet that shall discharge to an approved sanitary sewage disposal facility. 
d.  Parking areas for sewage disposal shall not block any park ingress or egress point. 
4.  Sanitary discharge stations shall discharge all waste into an adequately sized, properly maintained and functioning grease trap before the discharge enters the publicly-owned treatment works (POTW). Such traps shall provide an inlet flow control devise inspection port, a grease trap inspection port, and an effluent monitoring port for said trap. 
K.  Flushing facilities. 
1.  Parks provided with a piped water supply system shall have means for flushing recreational vehicle and recreational park trailer holding tanks. The flushing system shall consist of a piped supply of water under pressure, terminating in a valved outlet located and installed to minimize damage by automobiles and tow vehicles. The flushing device shall consist of a properly supported riser terminating at least 24 inches above the ground surface with a one-quarter inch valved outlet to which is screwed a flexible hose. 
2.  The water supply to the flushing device shall be protected from backflow by means of an approved vacuum breaker located downstream from the shutoff valve. 
3.  Adjacent to the flushing arrangement there shall be posted a sign of durable material, not less than 24 inches by 24 inches in size, and inscribed thereon in clearly legible letters on a contrasting background: "DANGER-NOT TO BE USED FOR DRINKING OR DOMESTIC PURPOSES." 
4.  A potable water supply station for filling potable water tanks, if provided, shall be located at least 50 feet from a waste disposal station. When such is provided, adjacent to the potable water outlet there shall be posted a sign of durable material, not less than 24 inches by 24 inches in size, and inscribed thereon in clearly legible letters on a contrasting background: "POTABLE WATER. NOT TO BE USED FOR FLUSHING WASTE TANKS." 
(Ord. No. 96-2001, § 2, 10-2-2001) 
[Sec.] 5650. - Penalties. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this [section 5600] and/or any person continuing to operate a mobile home or manufactured housing park under an expired or revoked license shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense. Each offense shall be deemed to be a separate violation and punishable as a separate offense. Each day for which the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 71-2000, § 1(5650), 7-5-2000) 
[Sec.] 5651. - Park register; site plan. 
    Prior to the further installation of any housing unit or temporary use vehicle within a park from the date of passage of this ordinance from which this appendix is derived, a park owner shall demonstrate responsible ownership by providing an up-to-date park register. This register shall be complete in its detail according to the ordinance existing at the time of passage of this ordinance amendment from which this section is derived. Unless a site plan is on file with the city that accurately reflects current park conditions, a site plan shall be required prior to the installation of any housing unit within a park. 
(Ord. No. 71-2000, § 14, 7-5-2000) 
[Sec.] 5652. - Temporary use vehicles, time for compliance. 
    Temporary use vehicles, as that term is defined in this [ordinance], currently in parks shall be required to move out of such park within 180 days and shall thereafter be subject to provisions under section [5630]. 
(Ord. No. 71-2000, § 15, 7-5-2000) 
5700. - BED AND BREAKFAST REGULATIONS 

[Sec.] 5705. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of bed and breakfast regulations is to provide for an alternative type of lodging for visitors, and to provide for the preservation and adaptive reuse of older structures and historic landmarks. 
(Ord. No. 31-91, § 2, 4-2-1991) 
[Sec.] 5710. - Definitions. 
    Bed and breakfast homestay means an owner-occupied dwelling unit that is at least 50 years old or is a designated city historic landmark, and contains no more than five guest rooms, where short-term lodging, with or without meals, is provided for compensation. 
    Bed and breakfast inn means a structure that is at least 50 years old or is a designated city historic landmark, and contains no more than ten guest rooms, where short-term lodging, with or without meals, is provided for compensation. Limited social functions such as receptions and private parties, with or without food service, may also be provided. However, this definition shall not permit the operation of a restaurant for customers other than the occupants of the guest rooms and their guests, or the invitees to the reception or private parties. The operator of the inn shall reside on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 31-91, § 2, 4-2-1991) 
[Sec.] 5715. - Spacing requirements. 
    In SF-1 Single-Family Residential (large lot) and SF-2 Single-Family Residential (standard lot) Zones, a bed and breakfast homestay or a bed and breakfast inn shall be limited to one per block face. Block face shall mean properties which front on one side of a street, and lie between two intersecting streets. 
(Ord. No. 31-91, § 2, 4-2-1991; Ord. No. 29-2007, § 3, 3-20-2007) 
[Sec.] 5720. - Length of stay and rates. 
    Length of stay of guest shall not exceed 14 consecutive days. Room rental rates shall be based on daily rental rates only. 
(Ord. No. 31-91, § 2, 4-2-1991) 
[Sec.] 5725. - Parking requirements. 
    Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of two spaces plus one space per guest room. Tandem or stacked parking will be permitted. Additionally, the following requirements shall apply: 
(i)  In SF-1 Single-Family Residential (large lot) and SF-2 Single-Family Residential (standard lot) Zones, the front setback area shall not be used for parking, except on existing driveways. 
(ii)  Bed and breakfast inns which provide for limited social functions must provide at least 15 off-street parking spaces. The entire parking requirement, except for handicapped parking spaces, may be provided offsite, subject to written agreement of the owner of the offsite parking area assuring continued availability of the required parking. 
(Ord. No. 31-91, § 2, 4-2-1991) 
[Sec.] 5730. - Signage. 
    Signage shall identify, rather than advertise, the establishment. In SF-1 Single-Family Residential (large lot), SF-2 Single-Family Residential (standard lot), and MFR Multifamily Residential Zones, signs shall be limited to one per establishment per street frontage and be limited to: 
a.  A ground sign not exceeding two square feet in area and three feet in height; or 
b.  A wall sign not exceeding two square feet in area. 
In all other zones, signs shall be regulated by section 6700. 
(Ord. No. 31-91, § 2, 4-2-1991) 
[Sec.] 5735. - Health requirements. 
    Food service and other health requirements shall have to meet all state and city-county Health Department regulations, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 31-91, § 2, 4-2-1991) 
[Sec.] 5740. - Fire safety. 
    The facility must meet fire safety requirements of the city, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 31-91, § 2, 4-2-1991) 
5800. - ALTERNATIVE ENERGY REGULATIONS 
5801. - WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS 

[Sec.] 5802. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this regulation to allow the safe, effective and efficient use of wind energy systems. 
(Ord. No. 29-2009, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
[Sec.] 5803. - Definitions. 
    F.A.A. means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    Primary structure means a structure that is designed and used as a residential dwelling unit, or a non-residential structure that is regularly occupied to conduct business or commerce including agricultural use. 
    Structure height means the height of the entire wind energy system, as measured from the bottom of the base to the highest vertical point of the system, including the base and tower and the highest reach of the turbines and/or blades. 
    Tower means the monopole, freestanding, or guyed structure that supports a wind energy system. 
    Utility company means the company which owns and/or maintains the power lines and/or electrical grid structure to which a property is or may be connected. 
    Utility grid wind energy system means a wind energy system designed and built with a primary purpose to provide electricity to the electric grid. 
    Wind energy system means a wind energy conversion system that converts wind energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine, a tower or attached apparatus, and associated control or conversion electronics, and is intended for on-site production and consumption of electricity to serve the needs of the consumer on site. 
(Ord. No. 29-2009, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
[Sec.] 5804. - Conditional use permit required. 
    A wind energy system as defined herein shall be subject to the conditional use procedure as outlined in section 7200. 
(Ord. No. 29-2009, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
[Sec.] 5805. - Primary structure required on lot. 
    A wind energy system may be erected only: 
1.  After a primary structure has been erected on the lot; or 
2.  As part of PUD Planned Unit Development District. 
(Ord. No. 29-2009, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
[Sec.] 5810. - Location and setback. 
1.  The tower shall be set back from any property line at least the distance equal to the structure height. 
2.  Under no circumstances will a wind energy system be permitted to operate inside a building setback. 
3.  Associated equipment enclosures or other buildings and structures located on the same property are subject to the otherwise applicable building setback requirements of the district in which the facility is located. 
4.  No portion of a wind energy system, or the required setback, shall encroach upon an easement unless authorized to do so in writing by the easement holder. 
5.  A lot on which a wind energy system is constructed shall not be subdivided, unless such subdivision maintains the required structure height setback of the wind energy system from any property lines. 
(Ord. No. 29-2009, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
[Sec.] 5815. - Maximum height. 
1.  A wind energy system may exceed the height of a zoning district. 
2.  No tower height shall exceed the height recommended by the manufacturer or the distributor of the wind energy system. 
3.  Tower height is subject to FAA regulations and restrictions. 
4.  No wind energy system shall be constructed, altered, or maintained so as to project above any of the imaginary airspace surfaces described in 14 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 77, or as restricted by the latest SAFB AICUZ (Air Installation Compatible Use Zone) Study and section 6400, (Airport Zoning Regulations), of this [ordinance]. 
5.  The minimum distance from the ground to the lowest reach of the blade or turbine shall be 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 29-2009, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
[Sec.] 5820. - Lighting. 
    Wind energy systems and towers specifically must comply with the requirements of the FAA with regard to lighting. When obstruction lighting is required by the FAA, such lighting shall not exceed the requirements of said agency. Upward lighting, flood lights or other lighting not strictly required by the FAA is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 29-2009, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
[Sec.] 5825. - Sound. 
    Sound produced by the turbine or blades under normal operating conditions shall not exceed a decibel level of 35 measured at the ground at any property line. Sound levels, however, may be exceeded during short-term events caused by weather or environmental conditions such as severe wind storms. A determination regarding the unacceptable duration of excessive sound from a turbine or blades shall be within the discretion of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 29-2009, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
[Sec.] 5830. - Access. 
    Every effort shall be made to prevent unauthorized climbing of the tower. Any foot pegs or rungs below 12 feet of a freestanding tower shall be removed to prevent unauthorized climbing. For lattice or guyed towers, sheets of metal or wood shall be fastened to the bottom tower section such that it cannot be readily climbed. 
(Ord. No. 29-2009, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
[Sec.] 5835. - Utility notification. 
    No wind energy system shall be installed until the utility company has been informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator. Wind energy systems which are not interconnected to the utility grid shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 29-2009, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
[Sec.] 5840. - Building permit. 
1.  A building permit must be obtained prior to the construction or installation of a wind energy system. An application for a building permit must be accompanied by the following: 
i.  The appropriate fee as established in the city's fee schedule; 
ii.  A site plan of the proposed wind energy system which clearly shows: 
a.  The location of the system; 
b.  All components of the system; 
c.  Distances to property lines; 
d.  Required setbacks; 
e.  Existing structures on the site; 
f.  Existing easements and authorization documentation if required; and 
g.  Natural features such as watercourses and trees; 
iii.  Elevation drawings showing the design and structure height of the proposed wind energy system; 
iv.  A line drawing of the electrical components of the system in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the latest adopted version of the National Electrical Code; and 
v.  Standard installation drawings of the structure, including the tower, base, and footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with current laws and certified by a licensed professional engineer registered in the state shall also be submitted. 
2.  For the purposes of necessary inspections and permits and all other applications of the Building Code, a wind energy system shall be considered a structure. 
(Ord. No. 29-2009, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
[Sec.] 5845. - Maintenance. 
1.  A wind energy system shall be maintained at all times, including, but not limited to, painting and maintaining structural integrity. 
2.  Wind energy systems that have become unstable, apparently lean significantly out of plumb, or pose a danger of collapse shall immediately cease operating and be removed or brought into repair within 30 days following notification by the city. 
3.  If the wind energy system is not made safe or removed within 30 days following notification by the city, the city may remove the wind energy system and place a lien on the property for the costs of the removal. However, the building official may order immediate action to prevent an imminent threat to public safety or property. 
4.  Failure of a property owner to make safe or remove a wind energy system as required by subsection 2 of this section within 30 days following notification by the city shall constitute a violation punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-14 of the City of Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances, and each day any violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 29-2009, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
[Sec.] 5850. - Removal. 
    A demolition permit must be obtained prior to the demolition or removal of a wind energy system. 
(Ord. No. 29-2009, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
[Sec.] 5855. - Utility grid energy systems. 
    Utility grid energy systems are prohibited within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 29-2009, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
5900. - MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS 

[Sec.] 5905. - Coin-operated amusement machines establishment regulations. 
a.  A coin-operated amusement machine shall not be operated within 300 feet of a church, school, or hospital. The method of measurement shall be in a straight line from a point from the nearest machine or machines, to the nearest point of the property line of a church, school, or hospital. 
b.  Exceptions. 
1.  Coin-operated amusement machines within establishments or game rooms on the premises of religious, charitable, educational, fraternal, or social organizations for the use of members and their guests and not for private profit, although a charge is made for playing. 
2.  Temporary festivals, carnivals, and/or transient shows as regulated by chapter 10, article III [of the] City of Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances. 
3.  Establishments containing coin-operated amusement machines that are sexually oriented in nature shall comply with section 5500. 
(Ord. No. 103-2000, § 3, 10-3-2000; Ord. No. 95-2001, § 1, 10-2-2001) 
[Sec.] 5910. - Communication towers, antennas and structures. 
    The intent of regulations involving communications towers and antennas is to minimize adverse visual, aesthetic and physical effects of towers; to accommodate the growing need for wireless communications; to encourage and require co-location to reduce the proliferation of towers and to concentrate towers in areas of existing towers; to avoid or minimize potential damage to properties, from the perspective of public safety, from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures; to protect the current and future economic viability of Sheppard Air Force Base/Wichita Falls Regional Airport and Kickapoo Downtown Airport; to provide for the proper use of land through regulating placement; and to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
    A conditional use permit shall be required for all communications towers unless exempted herein. The need for a conditional use permit for antennas and structures shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Regulations related to communication towers, antennas and structures shall include the following as applicable, and shall be subject to other terms as may apply under section 7200, Conditional Use Procedure. 
A.  A communications tower should be setback from rights-of-way and adjacent properties equivalent to the height of the tower. Consideration toward reducing the setback may require specifications as to the engineered "fall" characteristics of a tower and the nature of neighboring land uses. The following may be considered minimum setback requirements: 
1.  For ground-mounted tower proposals where the allowed zoning district is adjacent to a residentially-zoned district or residential use, such tower shall not be located closer than 300 feet from the residential use or residential zoning boundary and not be higher than 100 feet at that distance. For every additional foot of height proposed, the tower shall be setback an additional one foot. 
2.  Towers shall be setback a minimum of 100 feet from a public right-of-way classified as a major collector or of a larger classification. For a public right-of-way classified smaller than a major collector, the minimum setback shall be 50 feet. The classification of streets, roads and highways shall be in accordance with the thoroughfare plan, as amended. 
B.  Prior to consideration by the Commission, the following shall be included in the application for a conditional use permit: 
1.  A site plan with the following: 
a.  A detail of all required site elements addressed herein. 
b.  Topographic contours of the site. 
c.  An indication of adjacent land uses, zoning district and distance to the nearest structure or use. 
d.  Elevation drawings and dimensions of the tower, or structure as may be required, associated appurtenances and accessory uses. 
e.  A notarized statement attesting that the tower is designed to co-locate additional antennas or share with at least two future service providers per 100 feet of height. 
f.  A landscaping plan according to requirements herein. 
2.  Signed and sealed engineering specifications. Engineering of the tower shall meet an 80-mile per hour wind load with one-half inch radial ice over the entire tower. 
3.  A copy of a Notice of Proposed Construction or Alteration filed with the Federal Aviation Communication (FAA) or a statement of why such filing is not required pursuant to FAA regulations. 
4.  An indication of fee-simple title or a leasehold of the property. 
5.  The name, address and phone number of the owner of the tower or structure, and if different, the name, address and phone number of the property owner. 
6.  As determined by the city, an evaluation of and comments from Sheppard Air Force Base/Wichita Falls Regional Airport and the appropriate city departments regarding Kickapoo Downtown Airport. The city shall provide this information for inclusion into the application. 
7.  The installation of antennas and/or towers shall take advantage of existing structures in the area and shall co-locate or share towers to the greatest extent possible so as not to interfere with minimum altitudes or operational safety of aircraft, and to limit the proliferation of towers to the greatest extent possible. 
Should a tower provider deem that it is not possible to share a tower with more than one antenna or that a new tower is required to accommodate service providers, the tower provider shall be required to provide documentation to that effect. In addition, should a tower provider determine that it was not possible to locate a tower in the area of other towers or structures of similar heights, or atop existing structures, the tower provider shall be required to provide documentation to that effect. Such documentation shall be included with the application. 
8.  A fee for a communications tower conditional use permit application as provided by separate ordinance. 
C.  Guy wires and equipment buildings shall be located on the same lot as the tower. 
D.  Towers shall be located on a platted lot. 
E.  A lot upon which a tower is located shall comply with section 6200 regarding parking and paved access, and provisions addressing stormwater detention. If no building is constructed for human occupation, no parking shall be required. 
F.  If a tower is proposed within 100 feet of a public rights-of-way, or within 300 feet of an adjacent land use, there shall be provided canopy trees, understory trees and shrubs, of a type and size defined under section 6800, of a sufficient number and spacing that will screen the ground-level visual effects of the tower and associated appurtenances from adjacent properties and rights-of-way. Such requirements shall be in addition to and in compliance with provisions of section 6800 regarding landscaping. This provision shall also apply to those situations where ground-level equipment or buildings are being placed. A landscape plan shall be required. The city shall have sole discretion as to the adequacy of a proposal to accomplish the intent of this provision for screening the ground-level visual effects of the tower. 
G.  A lot used to locate a tower upon shall be subject to a conditional use permit for all-subsequent activities or land uses proposed. 
H.  No signs, banners, logos or similar such advertising, notice or graphics shall be attached or applied to a tower or antenna or mounted, applied or attached to ground-level equipment buildings associated with the tower. This provision shall not apply to warning signs or other signs as required by governmental agencies. 
I.  Towers, antennas and structures shall be equipped with and maintain aircraft warning lights if required by the FAA or the city. 
J.  The tower provider shall be responsible for periodic or routine inspections according to acceptable industry standards. The building official may order an inspection following any event that would question the continued integrity of construction. 
K.  The building official: 
1.  Shall require a building permit for the installation of any tower, and shall determine the need for a building permit regarding any attachment to a tower, or the installation of any building, cabinets or other accessory or ancillary facilities. Where attachments are being made to a tower, signed and sealed engineering specifications may be required which certifies that the tower with attachments will continue to maintain structural integrity as required herein. 
2.  Shall ascertain that conditions addressed herein, and others as may be required by the Commission, are in place prior to beginning operations or the installation of any antenna. 
L.  Nonconforming communication towers. Existing towers, not in conformance with regulations herein, shall be determined as nonconforming and subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Communication towers in existence at passage of this regulation shall be allowed to continue to be used as they presently exist. Modifications to accommodate the co-location of an additional user or users shall be permitted on existing towers subject to provisions under [subsection] K herein. 
An exception to this provision exists if there is provided comprehensive general liability coverage listing the city as additional named insured in the following amounts: 
a.  For towers 300 feet or less, a minimum insured amount of $500,000.00. 
b.  For towers in excess of 300 feet in height, a minimum insured amount of $1,000,000.00. 
Should the tower owner have more than one tower within the city limits, the insurance total shall be determined by the aggregate tower height of all towers owned by the company within the city limits. 
2.  Where ground-level equipment is proposed, the area shall be subject to subsection E of this section. 
3.  A tower may be replaced if the replacement does not exceed the height of the previous tower. The replacement of a tower will require compliance with subsection K of this section or may obtain an exception if comprehensive general liability insurance coverage is provided as per subsection L.1 of this section. This provision shall not apply to a tower that has been removed for a period of six months or longer. A proposal to replace a tower that has been removed for a period of six months shall be considered a new tower and subject to all requirements under this regulation. 
4.  No plat shall be required when locating equipment cabinets, or equipment buildings not intended for human occupation. 
M.  A conditional use permit shall not be required under the following situations: 
1.  Locating towers or antennas atop existing structures, subject to section 6400 as amended, within the CBD, LI, HI or GC zoning districts. 
2.  Installation of ground-level equipment and/or buildings used to house such equipment. 
3.  Installation of antennas on existing towers that does not increase the height of the tower. 
N.  If a communications tower is located in MFR, MHR, RMU, PUD, SF-1 or SF-2 zones, then it must be a stealth tower. If a communications tower is located in any other zone, with the exception of LI or HI, then it must be a monopole or stealth tower. 
O.  Towers and/or antennas intended for amateur radio stations: 
1.  Shall require a building permit, manufacturer's specifications and site plan. An exception to this provision exists for towers less than 70 feet in height. 
2.  Shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis for requiring a conditional use permit. The criteria used in making such determination shall include, but not be limited to, the location of the tower in relation to the height of the tower in relation to adjacent residential land uses. 
P.  Special procedures for communications tower permit applications. 
1.  If a communications tower will be co-located with a previously permitted communication tower, the Commission will consider a complete application within 60 days after it is filed. 
2.  If a communications tower will not be co-located with a previously permitted communications tower, the Commission will consider a complete application within 120 days after it is filed. 
3.  If the Commission denies an application for a communications tower conditional use permit, then the application shall be automatically appealed to the city council, and considered within the timeframe required by law. 
4.  If the Commission approves an application for a communications tower conditional use permit, then the city manager may file an appeal of the approval to the city council. Said appeal must be filed within ten days after the decision of the Commission. 
(Ord. No. 45-2001, § 7, 5-1-2001) 
[Sec.] 5915. - Weather shades. 
    There shall be allowed metal, cloth, canvas or similar such materials to be commercially installed for weather-related protection over vehicle sales lots, playgrounds and other approved situations under the following conditions: 
A.  All components associated with either the shade or supporting structure shall be new materials at time of installation. 
B.  A metal frame shall be used to support the shades. 
C.  The minimum height of shades shall be seven feet as measured from grade to the lowest point of the shade or supporting structure. The minimum height of shades within 25 feet of a property line shall be ten feet. The supporting structure shall remain open on all sides. 
D.  No advertisements, logos, flags, pennants, lights or other such items shall be attached or otherwise applied to either the shade or supporting structure. Lighting intended for illumination under the shade shall be allowed if the light source is not visible from a public street or adjacent property. 
E.  Individual shades shall be of a single color. 
F.  Faded, torn or otherwise damaged shades shall be immediately repaired or replaced. Repaired shades will resemble new shades. 
G.  Once the use has discontinued operation, the shade, supporting structure and associated appurtenances shall be removed. 
H.  The design of the mounting or installation of the shade shall meet all Building Code requirements which include, but are not limited to, foundation for supporting structures, flame retardance and/or resistance within applicable flame spread indices and electrical codes, wind loading, and other applicable codes. Prior to the installation of a shade or supporting structure, the Department of Community Development shall approve detailed engineering and site plans of the proposal with conditions herein addressed. 
I.  Shades shall be installed and maintained according to manufacturer specifications where such specifications are in accordance with conditions herein. 
J.  No part of a shade or supporting structure shall interfere with the health, growth or placement of landscaping. 
K.  Supporting structures and any shade overhang shall be placed a minimum of ten feet from a property line. 
L.  Should manufacturer's specifications or [the] building official require the installation of ground-mounted guy wires, the area of the ground around the guy wire shall be adequately marked or identified to prevent tripping or other injury. Guy wires shall only be allowed for temporary uses and subject to section 6600, and shall not be allowed around open permanent playgrounds. 
M.  A building permit shall be required. 
N.  With the exception of the general commercial zoning district, weather shades shall only be allowed within nonresidential zoning districts. An exception to this provision may exist for playgrounds and similar approved situations. 
(Ord. No. 89-2001, § 1, 9-18-2001) 
[Sec.] 5920. - Limited multifamily residential regulations. 
    Purpose. The purpose of the limited multifamily residential regulations is to provide for consideration of multiple duplex, triplex or fourplex structures on a single lot within a single-family zoning district. Limited multifamily structures shall be compatible in appearance with new single-family residences. 
1.  Number of units. Limited multifamily residential developments shall have no more than 12 dwelling units. 
2.  Separation requirement. Limited multifamily residential developments shall not be located within 200 feet of an existing limited multifamily residential development. The method of measurement shall be from property line to property line. 
3.  Number of stories. There shall be allowed with an approved site plan that considers adjacent or neighboring single-family dwellings, two-story units where there is a single family. There shall not be a separate dwelling unit above another dwelling unit. 
4.  Front setback: 25 feet minimum. 
5.  Side setback, interior: Five feet, minimum, except where the additional setback provisions of section 4670 apply. 
6.  Side setback, exterior: 15-foot minimum. 
7.  Rear setback. Five feet, except where the additional setback provisions of section 4670 apply. 
8.  Building coverage: 55 percent maximum. 
9.  Open space: 20 percent of lot area shall be open space. 
10.  Parking: Two spaces on-site per dwelling unit minimum. Parking areas shall be designed where vehicles do not back out into the street. 
11.  Fencing and screening: See section 4600. 
12.  Landscaping: See section 6800. 
(Ord. No. 10-2003, § 1, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 96-2007, § 1, 11-6-2007) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-2003, § 1, adopted Feb. 4, 2003, set out provisions intended for use as § 5915 of this appendix. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions of said ordinance have been included herein as § 5920 at the discretion of the editor. 
[Sec.] 5925. - Outdoor food courts. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of outdoor food court regulations is to establish basic parameters for the development of a unique amenity while facilitating mobile food vendor court(s) to operate on private property and fostering an aesthetically appealing streetscape. 
B.  Site plan. All outdoor food courts (CBD, GC, LI and RDD) shall require a site plan subject to provisions in section 7000 - Administrative Procedures. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 12-2017, § 1, 4-4-2017) 
[Sec.] 5930. - Applicability. 
    All outdoor food courts shall be subject to the site plan review provisions of section 7100 of the Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances as amended. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, 1-6-2015) 
[Sec.] 5935. - Setbacks. 
    Mobile food establishments for placement in an outdoor food court shall be setback at a minimum from the lot perimeter as follows: 
A.  CBD Central Business District: 
Rear setback - Five feet minimum 
Interior side setback - Five feet minimum 
Exterior side setback - 25 feet minimum (adjacent to a thoroughfare) 
Front setback - Five feet minimum 
B.  RDD River Development District and LI Light Industrial: 
Rear setback - Five feet minimum 
Interior side setback - Five feet minimum 
Exterior side setback - 25 feet minimum (adjacent to a thoroughfare) 
Front setback - 25 feet minimum 
C.  GC General Commercial: 
Rear setback - No minimum; in accordance with adopted Building Code requirements 
Interior side setback - No minimum; in accordance with adopted Building Code requirements 
Exterior side setback - 25 feet minimum (adjacent to a thoroughfare) 
Front setback - 25 feet minimum 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 12-2017, § 1, 4-4-2017) 
[Sec.] 5940. - Signs. 
A.  One on-premises sign is permitted at the entrance to identify the outdoor food court; it may be illuminated but shall be stationary and non-flashing. 
B.  Each mobile food establishment may have attached signage. One temporary sandwich board sign is permitted per mobile food establishment to be displayed within ten feet of the establishment and within the boundaries of the outdoor food court. 
C.  All signs shall comply with the provisions outlined in section 6700 - Sign Regulations of the Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances as amended. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 12-2017, § 1, 4-4-2017) 
[Sec.] 5945. - Restroom facilities. 
    These requirements shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 26 (Business Regulations), article VI, Food and Food Vendors and Establishments; division 4 - Mobile Food Vendors; section 26-575 - Operation Requirements and Restrictions for Outdoor Food Courts, of the Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances as amended. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 12-2017, § 1, 4-4-2017) 
[Sec.] 5950. - Water and electrical. 
    Requirements for access to water, electrical and other utilities shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 26 (Business Regulations), article VI. Food and Food Vendors and Establishments; division 4 - Mobile Food Vendors; section 26-575 - Operation Requirements and Restrictions for Outdoor Food Courts, of the Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances as amended. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 12-2017, § 1, 4-4-2017) 
[Sec.] 5955. - Hours of operation. 
A.  CBD Central Business District: All outdoor food courts established in the CBD shall be subject to the provisions of section 3811 - Special Conditions of the Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances as amended. The conditional use process may mandate specified hours of operation, as indicated in section 7240 Conditional Approval Process. 
B.  GC General Commercial; LI Light Industrial; RDD River Development District: All outdoor food courts established through the conditional use process in the GC, LI and RDD Zones shall be subject to the following hours of operation provisions based on distance setbacks from common property line from a single-family, duplex, zero lot line residential dwelling use or zoning district and boundary: 
1)  Maximum hours of operation within a 300 foot buffer area will be 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. 
2)  Maximum hours of operation within a 200 foot buffer area will be 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
3)  Maximum hours of operation within a 100 foot buffer area will be 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
The conditional use process may mandate specified hours of operation, as indicated in section 7240 Conditional Approval Process. 
C.  No mobile food truck shall operate in within 100 feet of a residential use single family, duplex, zero-lot line dwelling or Single Family 1 and 2 zoning district boundary. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 12-2017, § 1, 4-4-2017) 
[Sec.] 5960. - Parking. 
A.  All outdoor food courts established shall be subject to the provisions of section 6200 Off-Street Parking, Loading and Curb-Cut Regulations of the Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances as amended. 
B.  The conditional use process may include conditions of approval for additional parking requirements. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 12-2017, § 1, 4-4-2017) 
[Sec.] 5965. - Ground surfaces supporting mobile food establishments. 
    Surfaces shall support mobile food establishment vehicles, and shall be hard-surfaced with HMAC or concrete or alternative surface as approved by the director of community development. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 12-2017, § 1, 4-4-2017) 
[Sec.] 5970. - Outdoor seating. 
A.  Outdoor seating areas shall provide surfaces that meet ADA guidelines and be stable and slip-resistant. Surfaces shall remain unchanged by contaminants or applied force, so that when the contaminant or force is removed, the surface returns to its original condition. A firm surface resists deformation by either indentations or particles moving on its surface. A slip-resistant surface provides sufficient frictional counterforce to the forces exerted in walking to permit safe ambulation. 
B.  Requirements for outdoor seating shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 26 (Business Regulations), Article VI, Food and Food Vendors and Establishments; division 4 - Mobile Food Vendors; section 26-575 - Operation Requirements and Restrictions for Outdoor Food Courts, of the Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances as amended. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 12-2017, § 1, 4-4-2017) 
[Sec.] 5975. - Outdoor lighting. 
A.  All lighting shall be subject to section 4650 - Lighting Requirement. 
B.  No outdoor lighting, intended for security or other reasons, shall be permitted to produce glare or light onto adjacent residentially zoned properties greater than 0.3 foot candles as measured at the outdoor food court property line. 
C.  For the purpose of this provision, glare is defined as the viewing of a light source to include the bulb and any associated reflector as part of a light fixture, or the reflected viewing of a light source from an object not associated with the light source. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 12-2017, § 1, 4-4-2017) 
[Sec.] 5977. - Miscellaneous regulations. 
    The following miscellaneous regulations are applicable to all zones outdoor food courts are allowed - CBD, GC, LI, and RDD: 
A.  Platting: Outdoor food courts shall be platted in accordance with the City's appendix A - Subdivision and Development Regulations. 
B.  Fire Access: a minimum 26 foot wide fire apparatus access route shall be provided around the periphery of any outdoor food court for life, health and safety. 
C.  All mobile food establishments in an approved outdoor food court that cannot comply with the requirements of chapter 26 - article VI: section 26-572 - Sanitation requirements for all mobile food establishments relating to central preparation facility requirements shall be removed from the property overnight and serviced by an approved central preparation facility prior to the next day of operation. 
D.  All mobile food establishments that remain overnight in an approved outdoor food court shall have connections compliant with current codes for electricity, potable water and sewage disposal, or a system to adequately provide these services to each mobile food establishment. 
E.  Use of generators shall not be allowed in an outdoor food court, unless for emergency. 
(Ord. No. 12-2017, § 1, 4-4-2017) 
[Sec]. 5980. - Outdoor display. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose is to allow economic opportunities for a business to sell merchandise and/or have hardscape items in designated outdoor display areas on public sidewalks while maintaining safe, attractive, and clear public pedestrian access in the Central Business District (CBD). 
B.  Applicability. Outdoor display shall be limited to public sidewalks in the Central Business District (CBD) zoning district. 
C.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Encroachment agreement. An agreement between a property tenant and the City of Wichita Falls allowing outdoor display on public sidewalks. Written permission from the property owner to the city allowing leasing or use of tenant space of buildings along public sidewalks for outdoor display is required. 
    Hardscape. A non-living component of a streetscape such as benches, or planters in the outdoor display area. Any benches used must be in good condition, and be functional for the purpose that is intended. All planters must contain real or artificial plants at all times. 
    Off-premise sign. A sign on sidewalks displaying advertisement for a business and in an outdoor display area. An off-premise sign is an "A" frame (or sandwich board) sign with a maximum height of four feet. The off-premise sign in this section only applies to outdoor display. 
    Outdoor display. An area on public sidewalks used for display incidental and accessory to a primary use on the same lot and in close proximity of the primary use building or lease space. Outdoor display areas shall abut and be contiguous or align in front of the primary use selling such merchandise. An encroachment agreement is required for outdoor display on public sidewalks. 
    Primary use. As defined in appendix B Zoning, section 2030, Terms Defined. 
D.  Encroachment agreement. 
1.  An encroachment agreement between the property tenant/owner and city shall be required for any outdoor display areas on public sidewalks in the Central Business District (CBD) zoning district. The encroachment agreement and fee shall be set by the City of Wichita Falls adopted Fee Schedule, and as amended and as regulated in appendix A, section 6.13. 
2.  Hardscape (non-merchandise) encroaching into public sidewalks in the Central Business District (CBD) zoning district are only required to pay a document filing fee and enter into an encroachment agreement. 
E.  Minimum requirements for outdoor display areas. Outdoor display areas and pedestrian access areas: 
1.  Outdoor display areas shall be limited to sidewalks in the Central Business District (CBD) zoning district. 
2.  All outdoor displays shall be an accessory use to the primary use of a store or business. 
3.  A continuous pedestrian access clearance of not less than five feet shall be maintained on sidewalks between the primary use building and back of curb (see Figure A). No outdoor display areas shall block nor impair pedestrians from using or accessing sidewalks. 
4.  No articles, merchandise, displays, hardscape, signs, wires or cords shall locate in the designated five-foot pedestrian access clearance area. 
5.  All articles, merchandise, displays, hardscape, and signs shall be removed by the owner or tenant should there be any public improvements or maintenance needed to infrastructure in the outdoor display area. 
6.  No permanent lighting shall be utilized as part of the outdoor display. 
7.  No fencing is allowed in outdoor display areas or sidewalks. 
8.  No coverings including carpet or other flooring are allowed on sidewalks. 
9.  Raised decks, platforms, or other such surfaces are not permitted on sidewalks. 
10.  Outdoor merchandise and display fixtures shall not be bolted or permanently fixed onto the ground or sidewalk, fastened to street lights, utility poles, or trees. 
11.  No outdoor display areas shall block any entrances or exits of buildings or fire connections. 
12.  All driveways, or fire lanes shall be free and clear of outdoor display. 
13.  There shall be no outdoor display in the visibility sight triangle. Sight visibility shall be maintained at intersections where there is pedestrian access and driveways or streets as required in section 102-39 of the Code of Ordinances. 
14.  All items in the outdoor display area, with the exception of hardscape, must be removed at the close of business. 
Figure A is an example for illustration purposes only.

(Ord. No. 44-2016, 11-1-2016; Ord. No. 51-2018, § 1, 10-2-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 51-2018, § 1, adopted Oct. 2, 2018 laid out provisions for § 5980 which duplicated the former §§ 5980-5986, which derived from Ord. No. 44-2016, 11-1-2016. To avoid duplication, and at the editor's discretion, §§ 5981-5986 have been reserved. 
[Secs.] 5981-5986. - Reserved. 
6000. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
6100. - NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 95-96 provided that § 6100 of this zoning ordinance be amended in its entirety and replaced by Attachment A. Formerly § 6100 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 77-86, adopted Sept. 16, 1988; Ord. No. 30-89, §§ VI, VII, adopted May 2, 1989; and Ord. No. 27-90, § 6, adopted May 1, 1990. For amendatory history regarding the former § 6100, the user's attention is directed to the Code Comparative Table at the back of this volume. 

[Sec.] 6110. - Purpose. 
    It is the declared purpose of this section [6100] that nonconforming development be controlled so that it is not a nuisance to the community, eventually eliminated, and that development be required to comply with the regulations of the Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances, having due regard for the property rights of the persons affected, public welfare, aesthetics and function of the neighborhood, and the character of the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 95-96, § 3, 7-2-1996) 
[Sec.] 6120. - Nonconforming parcels. 
    A nonconforming platted parcel which does not meet the minimum area or width requirement may continue to exist if the lot has a structure located thereon. A nonconforming parcel shall not be created, unless a variance to the Code of Ordinances has been granted by the Board of Adjustment. 
    If no structure exists, the nonconforming parcel may be developed if the proposed use is allowed in that zoning district, and if all other requirements of this zoning ordinance are met which include, but are not limited to setback requirements, parking, and landscaping. Such nonconforming parcel, if created since the adoption of this zoning ordinance, shall first be required to obtain a variance from the Board of Adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 95-96, § 3, 7-2-1996) 
[Sec.] 6125. - Nonconforming structures. 
    An occupied nonconforming structure which is not in conformity with the minimum requirements for the district in which it is located may continue to exist subject to the following: 
A.  Nonresidential structures. A structure which is in noncompliance with the height or setback requirements of this zoning ordinance, but in compliance as to use of the structure, may be altered in a manner that does not increase the degree of noncompliance of the height or setback requirement, as long as all other provisions of this zoning ordinance including, but not limited to, building coverage, landscaping, and parking requirements, are met. Such an addition shall be on the same lot as the original structure, and the addition shall not be greater in area than the size of the original structure before alteration. 
B.  Residential structures. 
1.  A nonconforming single-family or duplex residential structure, including garages or storage buildings, may be altered in the above manner as long as it is no closer than three feet to a property line which is common with the adjacent property. 
2.  Residential garages, carports and storage buildings may be reconstructed on their original foot print, as long as the size of the structure is not expanded or is not enlarged past what is permitted within that district for that type of structure as defined in the Code of Ordinances if all other requirements of this zoning ordinance, such as, but not limited to, setback requirements, parking, building coverage, etc., are fulfilled. 
    The wall height of the structure shall not exceed eight feet. The wall height may be increased if it can be proven that a greater wall height existed immediately prior to the destruction and/or removal of the garage. If it is proven that a wall height greater than eight feet existed prior to the destruction and/or removal of the structure, the proposed wall height shall not be greater than that which existed. The overall height shall not, regardless of past conditions, exceed the wall height of the primary dwelling unit. 
    The structure shall contain the same exterior materials as found in the primary residence or as existed prior to its removal. This provision shall not be interpreted to require the re-installation of materials which have been determined as hazardous which include, but are not limited to, materials containing lead or asbestos. 
    Structures shall be compatible with structures in the immediate vicinity in appearance and function. The burden of proof of previous conditions, such as wall height, exterior building materials and other past conditions, shall be the responsibility of the applicant. The director of community development or [his] designee shall be responsible for determination of compatibility of use, function and appearance. 
(Ord. No. 95-96, § 3, 7-2-1996; Ord. No. 64-97, § 1, 7-1-1997) 
[Sec.] 6127. - Nonconforming uses; expansion. 
    An existing nonconforming use may be expanded, extended or enlarged subject to the conditional use approval process provided in section 7200 as long as all other provisions of this zoning ordinance, including, but not limited to, building coverage, landscaping, and parking requirements, are met. The expansion must be on the same lot where the nonconforming use is located. However, additional property may be used as a parking area. 
(Ord. No. 95-96, § 3, 7-2-1996; Ord. No. 64-97, § 2, 7-1-1997; Ord. No. 42-2006, § 1, 6-6-2006) 
[Sec.] 6130. - Nonconforming use and structure-Reconstruction. 
    Subject to the conditional use approval process provided in section 7200, the Commission may authorize the reconstruction and occupancy of a nonconforming structure, or a structure containing a nonconforming use, subject to the following restrictions and limitations: 
1.  A right to operate and/or rebuild a nonconforming use terminates when the structure housing the use is destroyed by the intentional act of the owner or his agent. 
2.  When a structure has been damaged by fire or other causes to the extent of not more than 50 percent of the replacement cost of the structure on the date of the damage. 
3.  The structure must be restored or reconstructed so as to have the same approximate height and floor area that it had immediately prior to the damage or destruction. This provision shall not exempt the replacement of a structure of less height or floor area. The property owner has the burden of proof to establish the height and floor area of the structure immediately prior to the damage or destruction. 
4.  Reconstruction must be commenced within one year of the damaging event and substantially complete as determined by the director of community development within one year from the date of commencement. If the director of community development or his designee determines that the applicant has made a good faith effort but has failed to substantially complete such reconstruction within one year, due to unusual circumstances, the director of community development or his designee may grant a six-month extension. 
5.  A restoration or reconstruction in violation of this section, or in violation with other ordinances or building codes immediately terminates the right to operate the nonconforming structure. 
(Ord. No. 95-96, § 3, 7-2-1996) 
[Sec.] 6140. - Nonconforming use-Conversion. 
    The conversion of a nonconforming use to another nonconforming use, regardless of nature of the use, shall be subject to the conditional use approval process provided in section 7200. The Commission may authorize the conditional use permit subject to the following: 
1.  A nonconforming use may be converted to another nonconforming use provided the noise, odor, refuse, traffic volumes and patterns, hours of operation, parking requirements and other factors are similar or less intense. 
2.  Under no circumstance may a nonconforming use convert to a less restrictive use category. 
3.  When a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use. 
4.  If adjacent to a residential use or district, a use which previously was issued a permit by the city or state to sell alcohol in any form or by any method other than for off-premises consumption, shall not be allowed to continue to dispense or sell such alcohol in any form or by any method except if allowed in that district and subject to the conditions set forth in this ordinance. 
5.  The conversion of a nonconforming use shall be subject to requirements of this ordinance and other applicable codes and ordinances of the city. 
6.  Awnings, canopies and other structures ancillary to the preceding uses, not associated with the proposed use, and which are nonconforming, shall be demolished or otherwise removed. 
(Ord. No. 95-96, § 3, 7-2-1996; Ord. No. 64-97, § 3, 7-1-1997) 
[Sec.] 6145. - Same-Discontinuance. 
    The right to operate as a nonconforming use terminates if the nonconforming use has discontinued operations or remains vacant or unused for two years or more. The Commission may grant a conditional use permit for continuing the operation of a nonconforming use if the structure proposed for the nonconforming use is a commercial structure, and is in conformance with section 6100. 
(Ord. No. 95-96, § 3, 7-2-1996; Ord. No. 64-97, § 4, 7-1-1997) 
Editor's note- Section 4 of Ord. No. 64-97, adopted July 1, 1997, deleted § 6145 which pertained to discontinuance of nonconforming structures, and renumbered the former § 6150 as § 6145. 
[Sec.] 6150. - Nonconforming site elements. 
    Site elements as defined herein shall not be considered as "grandfathered," and shall be required to comply with existing policies and regulations when changing land uses, expanding an existing land use, structure or parcel, or re-occupation of a structure which has been vacant or unused for its originally intended purpose for two years or longer. 
1.  When changing land uses, expanding an existing land use, structure or parcel, or re-occupation of a structure which has been vacant or unused, the owner, tenant, developer or agent shall be responsible for removing all nonconforming canopies or awnings; removing all canopies or awnings not normally associated with the function of the proposed use; and removing nonconforming signage including support structures. 
2.  When changing land uses, expanding an existing land use, structure or parcel, or re-occupation of a structure which has been vacant or unused, the owner, tenant, developer or agent shall be responsible for providing landscaping, sidewalks, handicapped parking and parking paving, stripping or other elements as required under existing policies or regulations. 
3.  When changing land uses, expanding an existing land use, structure or parcel, or re-occupation of a structure which has been vacant or unused, the director of community development or [his] designee shall evaluate proposed site circulation for conflicts or potential for conflicts by uses proposed for the site, who may require modifications or re-design of such areas. 
4.  When changing land uses, expanding an existing land use, structure or parcel, or re-occupation of a structure which has been vacant or unused, the director of community development or [his] designee shall evaluate ingress and egress points with regard to current policies, practices and regulations for such, along with associated curb cut locations. The director may require the modification or relocation of curb cut locations to accommodate the proposed use by considering conflicts or potential for conflicts with existing or anticipated traffic characteristics of the thoroughfare involved. 
(Ord. No. 95-96, § 3, 7-2-1996; Ord. No. 64-97, § 4, 7-1-1997) 
Editor's note- Formerly numbered as § 6155. 
6200. - OFF-STREET PARKING, LOADING AND CURB CUT REGULATIONS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 66-99 provided that § 6200 of this zoning ordinance be amended in its entirety and replaced by Attachment A. Formerly § 6200 derived from Ord. No. 30-89, adopted May 2, 1989, and subsequently amended. For amendatory history regarding the former § 6200, the user's attention is directed to the Code Comparative Table at the back of this volume. 

[Sec.] 6205. - Purpose. 
    Section 6200 shall be known as the off-street parking, loading, and curb cut regulations. The regulations require provisions for off-street parking and loading facilities proportional to the need created by each use in order to ensure functionally adequate, secure off-street parking and loading facilities and to limit the number of curb cuts along major streets to an amount conducive to reasonable safety standards. Development regulations and design standards are intended to ensure the usefulness of the parking and loading facilities, to protect public safety, and to mitigate potentially adverse impacts on adjacent land uses and city rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 66-99, § 2, 7-20-1999) 
[Sec.] 6206. - Permit required. 
    A permit shall be required from the city prior to grading, excavation or placement of any parking facility. An application for a permit shall include a site plan which shall address all requirements under this section. At a minimum, the following shall be provided for review prior to approval by the Department of Community Development: 
A.  Name, address and telephone number of the property owner; 
B.  Property address; 
C.  Existing and/or proposed land uses; 
D.  Location of structures, easements and other site features or amenities as may be required for evaluation; 
E.  Location of parking spaces, circulation isles and ingress/egress points; 
F.  Description of on-site maneuvering, circulation and signage, as required; 
G.  Description of paved surfaces proposed, by vehicle purpose; 
H.  Location, type and size of existing and required landscaping; 
I.  Location of on-site and perimeter drainage structures; 
J.  Location of stormwater detention facilities and engineering plans for drainage and detention facilities as required; 
K.  A permit fee, as required; and 
L.  Other information as may be required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 66-99, § 2, 7-20-1999) 
[Sec.] 6210. - Basic provisions. 
1.  Off-street parking facilities and loading facilities shall be provided for any new building constructed, for any new use established, for any addition or enlargement of an existing building or use, any enlargement to or addition of on-site or off-site parking, or any change of occupancy or manner of operation that would result in additional parking spaces being required. The additional parking may be required only for such addition, enlargement, or change and not for the entire building or use unless it is determined that the conformity with parking as required herein is such that, based on historical function of the use or similar such uses, there is need for additional parking. The Department of Community Development shall evaluate the applicability for requiring additional parking spaces resulting from the addition, remodeling or expansion of a use. 
2.  All parking facilities shall be maintained as required herein. Such facilities shall be used exclusively for the temporary parking of motor vehicles. Parking facilities as required herein shall not be used for the sale, display, or storage of merchandise, for the storage or repair of vehicles or equipment or other such activity other than providing public and employee parking as required herein. 
3.  When vehicle access is taken directly from the alley, garages, carports or other form of covered parking shall be setback at least five feet from the edge of the property line. 
4.  Every parking space shall be striped or marked by a wheel stop. Safety barriers, wheel stops, protective bumpers or curbing shall be provided to prevent encroachment onto adjoining public or private property. 
5.  All drive surfaces shall be hard-surfaced with HMAC (hot mix asphalt concrete) or concrete suitable for continued use by vehicles of the type intended. The city may require details of paving sections, and modifications thereof, prior to plan or permit approval to ensure function and longevity for the intended use. Proposed alternatives to address the intent of this provision shall be considered on a case-by-case basis. 
6.  All new, additional or expanded parking shall be subject to landscaping requirements of section 6800. 
7.  Where screening is required to address the intent of this ordinance , no vehicular alley access for ingress and egress to off-street parking facilities shall be permitted to break or otherwise to provide openings in the required screen. 
8.  All parking and loading facilities shall be located on the same site as the use for which such facilities are required, except as authorized herein. 
9.  The Department of Community Development may approve locating a portion of the required parking on another site when both the primary use and parking facility are located in a zoning district which permits that use. 
10.  Off-site parking shall be located within 300 feet of the use which it serves, measured as the shortest practical walking distance from the nearest off-site parking space to the nearest entrance to the building or use which it serves. 
11.  Off-site parking proposed to share parking with an adjacent use shall require approval by the city. A written agreement with the owner of the off-site parking area, by a party authorized to enter such agreement, to assure the continued availability of the required parking area shall be required. Such agreement shall be on a form supplied by the city, filed for record at the county courthouse and a copy provided to the city. Authorized executors of the shared parking agreement shall each notify subsequent property owners and/or tenant of each affected property of the existence of the agreement which may affect the operations or allowed land uses on either property. 
12.  Parking proposed on a separate lot, tract or parcel from the facility or use it is intended to serve shall be considered as part of the total property of the facility or use regardless of any interruption by an easement, right-of-way or other separation. Such parking shall require compliance with provisions herein for the creation of a new use, the reconstruction or remodel of an existing use, or expanding parking facilities. 
13.  Off-site parking facilities shall not fulfill more than 50 percent of a use's parking requirement. 
14.  The Commission may authorize an adjustment in the total parking requirements where it is demonstrated that the application of the parking schedule is inappropriate to a proposed use due to the mix of existing or proposed uses. There shall be consideration toward calculating net floor area where it can be demonstrated and that special conditions exist which are unusual to the use or property. A request for adjustment may require the submission of a site plan, traffic study and floor plan which address the rationale for reducing parking requirements. Consideration and approval shall be contingent upon the continued operation of like or similar uses as identified under the parking schedule. A change to a use category of parking not included herein shall require separate consideration. 
15.  Minor variations of parking lot design or standards may be approved by the Department of Community Development as long as the purpose of this section is met. 
16.  The city may require the removal or relocation of curb cuts where it is found that an existing or proposed curb cut does, or has the potential to, cause conflicts with either on-site or off-site traffic and its circulation where other possibilities for curb cuts exists. The cost involved for closing and/or relocating curb cuts shall be borne by the property owner and/or tenant. 
17.  Visibility of and between pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists shall be ensured when entering individual parking spaces, when circulating within a parking facility, and when entering and exiting a parking facility. 
18.  Head-in parking from a public or private street or right-of-way is prohibited, except for single-family or duplex residential use on a local or collector-classed street. No parking or parking facility shall be designed to require vehicles to back into a public or private street except as approved by the Department of Community Development. For the purpose of this section, the term "private street" shall be a means of moving traffic between properties or provide internal circulation to a property, not to include circulation aisles, fire lanes, or other areas for maneuvering on-site traffic as determined by the city. 
19.  Each parking space shall have adequate drives, aisles, and turning and maneuvering areas for access and usability, as per the requirements of this ordinance, and shall at all times have access to a public street or alley. No off-street parking or loading facility shall be located either in whole or in part in a public street or alley right-of-way, or allow for the obstruction of any public sidewalk by a vehicle. 
20.  No loading area shall use a public right-of-way or adjacent property as part of a maneuvering area, nor shall a public right-of-way or adjacent property be used as part of a temporary or permanent parking area for loading or unloading. 
21.  Internal circulation patterns, and the location and traffic direction of all access drives, shall be designed and maintained in accordance with accepted principles of traffic engineering and traffic safety and clearly marked as required by the city. 
22.  Lights provided to illuminate any parking facility or paved area shall be designed to reflect away from any residential use and/or public street. 
23.  Areas used for primary circulation, for frequent idling of vehicle engines or for loading activities shall be designed with screening or sound reduction measures, and located so as to minimize impacts on adjoining properties. 
24.  All parking and loading facilities shall be maintained to ensure desirability and usefulness of the facility. Such facilities shall be maintained free of pot holes, refuse, debris, or other accumulated matter and shall at all times be available for the off-street parking or loading use for which they are required or intended. 
25.  All new, additional or expanded parking shall be subject to on-site stormwater detention in accordance with city requirements. 
26.  All parking facilities shall be graded and provided with permanent storm drainage facilities meeting the construction specifications set by the Public Works Department. Surfacing, curbing, and drainage improvements shall be sufficient to preclude the free flow of water onto adjacent properties or public streets or alleys, and to provide adequate drainage. 
[27.]  No parking will be permitted on unpaved or grassy surfaces within the area defined as the front yard or exterior side yard, unless recognized as the primary driveway serving a residence. 
[28.]  When due to the nature of operations, based on historic or similar operations, or where a use exceeds parking capacities required under this regulation, the Commission may review parking requirements of section 6220 and require additional parking. Such a review and decision shall constitute a conditional use subject to applicable provisions of section 7200. Additional parking shall also be subject to other provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 66-99, § 2, 7-20-1999) 
[Sec.] 6220. - Parking schedule. 
    Parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with the minimum requirements prescribed in this section except for in the central business district. The use of a building or lot shall determine the parking requirements, which shall also consider mixed uses as provided herein. 
    Where the application of this schedule results in a fractional requirement, a fraction of 0.5 or greater shall be resolved to the higher whole number. 
    All non-residential uses shall have four parking spaces minimum. 
Use Classification Minimum Off-Street 
Parking Requirements Residential: Bed and Breakfast Homestay See section 5700 Single-Family Detached Dwelling 2 spaces per dwelling unit, except for zero lot line residential (see section 5255) Duplex or Two-Family Dwelling 2 spaces separate from a garage per dwelling unit, except for zero lot line residential (see section 5255) Multifamily Dwelling 1 space per efficiency unit 1.5 spaces per 1 bedroom 2 spaces per 2 bedroom and over Boardinghouses, Fraternities, and Sororities 1 space per 2 occupants Civic: Religious Assembly 1 space per 4 seats Funeral Homes 1 space per 4 seats Day Care, Commercial 3 car holding bay, plus 1 space per employee Schools, Primary and Secondary (grades 1-8) 1 space per teacher and staff Schools, Secondary (grades 9-12) 1 space per 4 students Convalescent Services 1.25 spaces per 3 beds Libraries, Museums, and Art Galleries 10 spaces, plus 1 space per 500 s.f. g.f.a. Assisted Living Centers 1.25 spaces per 3 units plus 1 per employee Commercial: Bed and Breakfast Inn See section 5700 Offices, Banks, Personal Services, Business Services 1 space per 300 s.f. g.f.a. Clinic and Medical Office 1 space per 200 s.f. g.f.a. Coin-Operated Amusement Machines Establishment 1 space per 125 s.f. g.f.a. Hospital 1.5 spaces per bed Restaurant and Bars 1 space per 100 s.f. g.f.a. plus 1 space per employee Outdoor Seating 1 space per 300 s.f. gross seating area Hotels and Motels 1 space per room up to 100 rooms 0.75 spaces per room over 100 Retail Trade, Shopping Centers, Auto Repair, Supermarket, Convenience Store 1 space per 200 s.f. g.f.a. for facilities with less than 20,000 s.f. of g.f.a. 1 space per 250 s.f. g.f.a. for facilities in excess of 20,000 s.f. g.f.a. Theaters, Auditoriums, Stadiums, Arenas 1 space per 4 seats Indoor Entertainment 1 space per 300 s.f. g.f.a. for facilities with less than 20,000 s.f. g.f.a. 1 space per 350 s.f. g.f.a. for facilities in excess of 20,000 s.f. g.f.a. Retail Warehousing 1 space per 600 s.f. Other Warehousing, Fabricating, Storage, Distribution and Manufacturing 1 space per employee for maximum employment of 2 shifts combined All Other Nonresidential Uses 1 space per 300 s.f. g.f.a.  
Note- g.f.a. = gross floor area 
(Ord. No. 66-99, § 2, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 95-2001, § 3, 10-2-2001) 
[Sec.] 6225. - Design standards for parking facilities. 
    Design standards are established in this section to set the minimum dimensions and standards for design and construction of parking facilities. 
A.  Design standards for parking facilities shall be as follows: 
Angle of Parking 
Relative to Aisle 
(Degrees) Stall Dimension 
Perpendicular to Aisle 
(Feet) Stall Dimension 
Parallel to Aisle 
(Feet) Aisle Width One-Way Traffic 
(Feet) Aisle Width Two-Way Traffic 
(Feet) 90 18.0 9.0 24.0 24.0 60 20.1 10.4 16.0 20.0 45 19.1 12.7 11.0 20.0 30 16.8 18.0 11.0 20.0 0 9.0 22.0 12.0 24.0  
*When different angled parking is placed opposite each other, the greater aisle shall be applicable. 
B.  Handicapped parking requirements shall be in accordance with Texas Accessibility Standards (TAS), as amended. 
For typical parking lot designs, refer to exhibit A herein. 
(Ord. No. 66-99, § 2, 7-20-1999) 
[Sec.] 6230. - Loading regulations. 
    In any district other than the CBD Central Business District, for every building or part thereof erected with a minimum gross floor area of 12,000 square feet, which is to be occupied by a use which requires the receipt or distribution of vehicles, material or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the same lot with such building, at least one off-street loading space, plus one additional loading space for each additional 20,000 square feet, or major fraction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 66-99, § 2, 7-20-1999) 
[Sec.] 6235. - Design criteria for loading/unloading facilities. 
    The dimensions of each loading space shall be determined by the type of vehicle to be accommodated. 
A.  Minimal design criteria for off-street loading. 
Design 
Criteria 
(in feet) All Vehicles 
Except 
Tractor 
Trailer Tractor- 
Trailer 
Truck Vertical clearance 13 14 Depth of space 35 55* Width of space 12 12  
*This depth is required if tractor is not to be separated from trailer after the vehicle is parked. If the tractor is removed from the trailer, a 40-foot depth is allowed. 
B.  The city may require the description of the maneuvering area. Such areas and descriptions shall be dependent upon the type of vehicles, however, the city may include in its evaluation the necessity for requiring additional areas based on historical need of similar uses or vehicle type. 
C.  No loading space shall be located nearer than 50 feet to any residential use or to a SF-1-Single-Family Residential (large lot) and SF-2 Single-Family Residential (standard lot) Zoning District boundary, unless a demonstrated method for producing minimal impact upon adjacent residential uses is developed and approved by the Department of Community Development which considers enclosed buildings, fences, masonry walls, landscaping or combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. 66-99, § 2, 7-20-1999) 
[Sec.] 6240. - Curb cut regulations. 
    The intent of curb cut regulations is to provide for orderly ingress and egress from a property, to minimize on-site and off-site confusion and to identify those areas to motorist and pedestrians. 
A.  Curb cuts shall be approved by the Department of Community Development based on the curb cut requirements in exhibit B herein. 
B.  All access driveways shall be at an angle of 45 degrees to 90 degrees measured from roadway, street or alley centerline. 
C.  No curb opening shall be allowed within the area of corner curb return radius. 
D.  Alternatives to provisions herein shall be considered where such alternatives address the intent for providing curb cuts and their locations. 
(Ord. No. 66-99, § 2, 7-20-1999) 
[Sec.] 6250. - Final inspection and approval required. 
    All provisions required herein shall be subject to inspection and approval prior to issuance of a final inspection record. A final inspection record shall only be issued following compliance with regulations herein. Failure to obtain a final inspection record may cause interruption in a use or the business. 

EXHIBIT B 

A B C D Frontage Curb Return Radii Island 
Width Corner Clearance No. of 
Driveways Driveway 
Width Minimum Maximum Desirable Minimum Maximum 0 to 50 feet 7 feet 30 feet 25 feet 35 feet 30 feet 1 35 feet 51 feet to 100 feet 7 feet 30 feet 25 feet 35 feet 30 feet 2 35 feet 100 feet to 300 feet 7 feet 30 feet 25 feet 40 feet 30 feet 3 35 feet 301 to 600 feet 10 feet 30 feet 50 feet 45 feet 30 feet 4 35 feet 601 feet and up*  
*Frontages over 600 feet may generate traffic volumes creating hazardous conditions which may require use of channelization or other special design. The Department of Community Development shall review and approve such design. 
Curb return radii for single-family and duplex residential uses shall be allowed to extend in front of the adjacent property. 
_____
6300. - HISTORIC LANDMARKS 
    The historic landmarks regulations shall be subject to the provisions of section 62-36 et seq., of Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances as amended. 
6400. - AIRPORT ZONING 

[Sec.] 6405. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the airport zoning provision is to ensure protection of the utility of Sheppard Air Force Base/Wichita Falls Regional Airport and Kickapoo Downtown Airport and the public investment by the regulation of land uses in the vicinity of Sheppard Air Force Base/ Wichita Falls Regional Airport and Kickapoo Downtown Airport where it has been determined that Sheppard Air Force Base/Wichita Falls Regional Airport and Kickapoo Downtown Airport are essential economic elements of the city and surrounding cities and counties. 
    It is also the purpose of this provision to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public where it is recognized that obstructions, aircraft accidents, and excessive noise have the potential for endangering or harming the lives and/or property of users or occupants of land in the vicinity of Sheppard Air Force Base/Wichita Falls Regional Airport and Kickapoo Downtown Airport. 
(Ord. No. 155-94, § 1, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 32-2001, § 4, 4-3-2001; Ord. No. 8-2006, § 1, 2-7-2006) 
[Sec.] 6407. - Definitions. 
    AICUZ means Air Installation Compatible Use Zone. 
    Airport means Sheppard Air Force Base/Wichita Falls Regional Airport and Kickapoo Downtown Airport. 
    Airport elevation means the established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area measured in feet from mean sea level. 
    Airport hazard means any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the air space required for the flights of aircraft or which obstructs or interferes with the control or tracking and/or data acquisition in the landing, taking off or flight at an airport, or at any installation or facility relating to flight, and tracking and/or data acquisition of the flight craft; hazardous, interfering with or obstructing such landing, taking off or flight of aircraft or which is hazardous to or interferes with tracking and/or data acquisition pertaining to flight and flight vehicles. 
    Airport hazard area means any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established if not prevented as provided in this article. 
    Airport reference point means the point established as the approximate geographic center of the airport landing area and so designated. 
    Approach/departure surface means a surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in section 6425 of this ordinance. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
    Approach surface means a surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extending outward and upward from each end of the primary surface. An approach surface is applied to each end of each runway based upon the type of approach available or planned for that runway end. The slope and dimensions of the approach surfaces are set forth in section 6435. 
    Conical surface means a surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
    Departure surface means a surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extending outward and upward from each runway end. The slopes of the departure surfaces are 40 horizontal for each one vertical (40:1). The inner widths of the departure zones 1,000 feet and the outer widths are 6,466 feet. Slopes and dimensions of the departures zones are as set forth in section 6445. 
    Hazard to air navigation means an obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 
    Height. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this ordinance and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level (MSL) elevation unless otherwise specified. 
    Horizontal surface means a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal plane. 
    Landing area means the surface area of the airport used for the landing, take-off or taxiing of aircraft. 
    Non-conforming use means any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance or an amendment thereto. 
    Non-precision instrument runway means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in non-precision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. 
    Obstruction means any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in section 6448. 
    Person means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or body politic, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian, or other representative. 
    Primary surface means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. In accordance with FAR Part 77, the width of the primary surface at Kickapoo Downtown Airport is 500 feet for a non-precision instrument runway having visibility minimums greater than three-fourths statute mile. 
    Runway means a defined area on an airport prepared for landing and take-off of aircraft along its length. 
    Structure means an object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including, but not limited to, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission lines. 
    Transitional surfaces means those surfaces extend outward at 90 degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces, which projects through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at 90 degree angles to extended runway centerline. 
    Tree means any object of natural growth. 
    Visual runway means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures. 
(Ord. No. 8-2006, § 1, 2-7-2006) 
[Sec.] 6410. - Applicability. 
    Airport zoning regulations shall apply to all of the incorporated areas of the city and unincorporated areas which are located within an accident potential zone, noise zone or height restriction zone as described herein. The use of all land and any buildings or structures located upon the land, and the height, construction, reconstruction, alteration, expansion or relocation of any building or structure upon the land, shall conform to all regulations applicable to this section. No land, building, structure or premises shall be constructed and/or used for any purpose or in any manner other than is permitted in this section. 
    The airport zoning regulation shall be in accordance with prescribed regulations contained Texas Local Government Code § 241.001 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 155-94, § 1, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 8-2006, § 1, 2-7-2006) 
[Sec.] 6415. - Airport Zoning Board. 
    The Commission for the city shall be responsible for all duties and powers granted to an Airport Zoning Board as required by Texas Local Government Code § 241.001 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 155-94, § 1, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 8-2006, § 1, 2-7-2006) 
[Sec.] 6420. - Permitted uses. 
    Refer to the Land Use Compatibility Table included herein for permitted, controlled, and prohibited land uses in accordance with the latest AICUZ Study for Sheppard Air Force Base. 
(Ord. No. 155-94, § 1, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 72-2000, § 2, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 8-2006, § 1, 2-7-2006) 
6425. - SHEPPARD AIR FORCE BASE/WICHITA FALLS REGIONAL AIRPORT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 32-2001, § 2, adopted April 3, 2001, deleted the former § 6425 which pertained to definitions and derived from Ord. No. 155-94, § 1, adopted December 20, 1994. Said ordinance renumbered the former §§ 6430, 6435 and 6440 as §§ 6428, 6431 and 6435, respectively. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. For definitions, see § 2030. 
Cross reference- Aviation, ch. 18. 

[Sec.] 6428. - Accident potential zones for Sheppard Air Force Base/Wichita Falls Regional Airport. 
    Accident potential zones are established within the area of the Sheppard Air Force Base/ Wichita Falls Regional Airport for the purpose of regulating the development of areas which possess an accident potential hazard so as to promote compatibility between the airport and the surrounding land uses, protect the airport from incompatible encroachment, and promote the health, safety and general welfare of property users. 
A.  Zone boundaries. The boundaries of said zones are established as shown on the map included in the latest AICUZ Study for Sheppard Air Force Base. Accident Potential Zones are located beyond the clear zone at the end of the runways and are: 
1.  For runway 17/35, Accident Potential Zones I and II shall be 1,000 feet wide and 2,500 feet long. 
2.  For runways 15R/C/L and 33L/C/R, accident potential zone I (APZ I) shall be 3,000 feet wide and 5,000 feet long; Accident Potential Zone II (APZ II) shall be 3,000 feet wide and 7,000 feet long. 
B.  Compatible uses. Compatible uses within each Accident Potential Zone are established as shown in the AICUZ study for Sheppard Air Force Base dated August 1999. Only compatible uses will be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 155-94, § 1, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 72-2000, § 2, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 32-2001, § 6, 4-3-2001; Ord. No. 8-2006, § 1, 2-7-2006) 
[Sec.] 6431. - Noise zones for Sheppard Air Force Base/Wichita Falls Regional Airport. 
    For the purpose of regulating the development of areas which possess a noise hazard to certain land uses, so as to promote compatibility between the airport and the surrounding land uses, protect the airport from incompatible encroachment, and promote and protect the health, safety and general welfare of property users, noise zones are established within the area of the Sheppard Air Force Base/ Wichita Falls Regional Airport. 
A.  Zone boundaries. The boundaries of said zones are established as shown on the map included in the latest AICUZ study for Sheppard Air Force Base. Noise zones are located within the 65 dB or greater noise contour as shown in the AICUZ study for Sheppard Air Force Base. 
B.  Compatible uses. Compatible uses within the noise zone are established as shown in the latest AICUZ study for Sheppard Air Force Base. Only compatible uses will be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 72-2000, § 2, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 32-2001, § 7, 4-3-2001; Ord. No. 8-2006, § 1, 2-7-2006) 
[Sec.] 6435. - Height restriction zones for Sheppard Air Force Base/Wichita Falls Regional Airport. 
    In order to carry out the provisions included herein as it pertains to height restrictions, there are established certain height restriction zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach-departure surface, inner horizontal surface, conical surface, outer horizontal surface, and transitional surface as they apply to Sheppard Air Force Base/Wichita Falls Regional Airport. Such zones and height restrictions are shown in the most recent AICUZ study of Sheppard Air Force Base. The various zones are established and defined as follows: 
A.  Zones related to runways. 
1.  Primary zone (A zone). All of the land area lying beneath a primary surface, which is a surface on the ground centered lengthwise of the runway and extending 200 feet beyond each end of that runway. The width of the primary surfaces are: 
a.  For runway 17/35: 1,000 feet. 
b.  For runways 15R/33L, 15C/33C, and 15L/33R: 2,000 feet. 
No structure is permitted within the primary zone (A zone) as described herein. 
2.  Clear zone (B zone). All of the land area lying beneath a clear zone surface, which is a surface on the ground beginning at the runway end and symmetrical with the runway centerline extended. The width and length of the clear zone surfaces are: 
a.  For runway 17/35: 1,000 feet wide and 3,000 feet long. 
b.  For runways 15R/33L, 15C/33C, and 15L/33R: 3,000 feet wide and 3,000 feet long. 
3.  Approach/departure zone (C and D zones). All of the land area lying under an approach/departure surface, which is an inclined plane or combination inclined plane and horizontal plane, symmetrical about the runway centerline extended. The inclined plane flares outward and upward from the primary surface or planned expansion, and begins with the centerline elevation of the runway end. The slope ratio and dimensions of the inclined planes (C zone) and dimensions of the horizontal planes (D zone) are as follows: 
a.  Runway 17/35: one foot in height for each 40 feet in horizontal distance beginning at the runway ends. The runway end centerline elevations are 1,001 feet mean sea level (MSL) and 1,014 feet MSL for runways 17 and 35, respectively. The surface extends to a point 10,200 feet from the respective runway ends with an inner width of 1,000 feet and an outer width of 6,466 feet. The maximum elevations for the approach/departure clearance zones are 1,256 and 1,269 feet MSL for runways 17 and 35, respectively. 
b.  Runway 15R/33L: one foot in height for each 50 feet in horizontal distance beginning at the end of the primary surfaces and at the centerline elevation of the runway end. The runway end centerline elevation is 998 MSL feet for runway 15R and 1,000 MSL feet for 33L. The surfaces extend until they reach an elevation of 500 feet above established airfield elevation (1,515 MSL). They then continue horizontally at this elevation to a point 50,000 feet from the point of beginning. The outer width is 16,000 feet. 
c.  Runway 15C/33C (formerly 15L/33R): one foot in height for each 50 feet in horizontal distance beginning at the end of the primary surfaces and at the centerline elevation of the runway end. The runway end centerline elevation is 1,003 MSL feet for runway 15C and 989 MSL feet for runway 33R. The surfaces extend until they reach an elevation of 500 feet above established airport elevation (1,515 MSL). They then continue horizontally at this elevation to a point 50,000 feet from the point of beginning. The outer width is 16,000 feet. 
d.  Runway 15L/33R: one foot in height for each 50 feet in horizontal distance beginning at the end of the primary surface centerline elevation of the runway end. The runway end centerline is 1,021 MSL feet for runway 15L and 996.9 MSL for runway 33R. The surfaces extend until they reach an elevation of 500 feet above established airport elevation (1,515 MSL). They then continue horizontally at this elevation to a point 50,000 feet from the point of beginning. The outer width is 16,000 feet. 
B.  Zones related to airport reference points. 
1.  Inner horizontal zone (E zone). All of the land lying beneath the inner horizontal surface, which is an oval-shaped plane at a height of 150 feet above the established airfield elevation (1,165 MSL). It is constructed by scribing an arc with a radius of 7,500 feet about the centerline at each end of each runway and interconnecting these arcs with tangents. 
2.  Conical zone (F zone). All of the land area lying beneath the conical surface, which is an inclined plane that extends from the periphery of the inner horizontal surface outward and upward at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal distance of 7,000 feet to a height of 500 feet above the established airfield elevation (1,515 MSL). 
3.  Outer horizontal zone (G zone). All of the land area lying beneath the outer horizontal surface, which is an oval-shaped plane located 500 feet above the established airport elevation (1,515 MSL), extending outward from the outer periphery of the conical surface for a horizontal distance of 30,000 feet. 
4.  Transitional zone (H zone). All of the land area lying beneath a transitional surface, which are inclined planes that connect the primary surface and the approach-departure clearance surfaces to the inner horizontal surface, conical surface, outer horizontal, or other transitional surfaces. The slope is one foot in height for each seven feet in horizontal distance outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and runway centerline extended. To determine the elevation for the beginning of the transitional surface slope at any point along the lateral boundary of the primary surface, draw a line from the point, perpendicular to the runway centerline or to the runway centerline extended. The elevation of the runway or the runway centerline extended at that intersection is the elevation for the beginning of the seven to one slope. 
5.  Except as otherwise provided in this provision, no structure or obstruction shall be erected, altered or maintained in any zone created by this provision to a height in excess of the applicable height of the surface used to describe such zone. 
_____ 
C.  Diagram. 

(Ord. No. 155-94, § 1, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 32-2001, § 8, 4-3-2001; Ord. No. 8-2006, § 1, 2-7-2006) 
_____
[Sec.] 6448. - Height restriction zones for Kickapoo Downtown Airport. 
    In order to carry out provisions herein, there are established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, departure surfaces, transition surfaces, horizontal surface and conical surface as they apply to Kickapoo Downtown Airport. Such zones are shown on the zoning map for Kickapoo Downtown Airport. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. 
Primary zone. 
Primary zone. All of the land area lying beneath the primary surface, which is a surface on the ground centered lengthwise of the runway and extending 200 feet beyond each end of that runway or planned expansion. The width of the primary surface for runway 17/35 shall be 500 feet for a non-precision instrument runway having a non-precision instrument approach with visibility minimums less than three-fourths of a statute mile. 
Approach zones. 
Runway 17. One foot in height for each 20 feet in horizontal distance beginning at the end of the primary zone and extending a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from that point. The width of the approach zone shall be 500 feet at the end of the primary surface increasing to a width of 1,500 feet at a distance of 5,000 feet from the end of the primary surface. The elevation of the end of runway 17 is 979 feet. 
Runway 35. One foot in height for each 34 feet in horizontal distance beginning at the end of the primary zone and extending a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from that point. The width of the approach zone shall be 500 feet at the end of the primary surface increasing to a width of 3,500 feet at a distance of 10,000 feet from the end of the primary surface. The elevation of the end of runway 35 is 1002.9 feet. 
Transition zone. Slope seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach/departure surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the established airport elevation of 998 feet MSL. 
Horizontal zone. The area beneath a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of the runway 17/35 and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. 
Conical zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation. 
Departure zones. The departure zones are established at each runway end. The departure zone begins at the runway end and extends for a horizontal distance of 10,200 feet beyond the runway end. The inner surface of the departure zone is 1,000 feet in width increasing to a width of 6,466 feet at a distance of 10,200 feet. The elevation of the inner edge of the departure zone is the same as the elevation of the runway end. 
(Ord. No. 32-2001, § 12, 4-3-2001; Ord. No. 8-2006, § 1, 2-7-2006) 
[Sec.] 6450. - Height restriction zone construction limitations. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this [ordinance], no person or entity shall erect, alter, or maintain a structure, and permit no tree to grow in any airport height restriction zone to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zone. 
(Ord. No. 8-2006, § 1, 2-7-2006) 
[Sec.] 6455. - Additional use restrictions. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provisions, no use shall be made of land within any zone established herein in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise endanger or interfere with the safe landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
B.  No structure, tower, or tree shall be placed, erected or allowed to grow to a height that would penetrate a 100 to one slope from any point on a runway to the outer limits of the extraterritorial jurisdiction without a determination as to the impact of such use. The city and Sheppard Air Force Base shall be responsible for evaluating the impacts of the tower, structure or other obstruction and findings reported to the Airport Zoning Board for evaluation and determination of the impacts. The Airport Zoning Board shall be responsible for approving, conditionally approving or denying the placement of a tower, structure or other obstruction. An exception to requiring approval from the Airport Zoning Board exists where both the city and Sheppard Air Force Base have determined that no significant impact will result. 
C.  Regulations herein shall apply within the corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 155-94, § 1, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 32-2001, §§ 9, 10, 4-3-2001; Ord. No. 8-2006, § 1, 2-7-2006) 
[Sec.] 6460. - Nonconforming uses. 
A.  Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this provision shall not be construed to require changes in land use or the removal, lowering or other change or alteration of any structure established prior to the regulation as of October 31, 1982, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. 
B.  Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding provisions herein, the owner of any nonconforming structure is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such markers and lighting as shall be deemed necessary by Sheppard Air Force Base and/or Wichita Falls Regional Airport or the city to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport, the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the city and/or Sheppard Air Force Base. 
C.  Reconstruction. Any nonconforming use which is damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, explosion, wind, earthquake, war, riot, or other calamity may be reconstructed and used as it was before such happening. 
(Ord. No. 155-94, § 1, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 32-2001, § 13, 4-3-2001; Ord. No. 8-2006, § 1, 2-7-2006) 
[Sec.] 6465. - Permits. 
A.  New construction. A permit shall be required to construct a structure in any accident potential zone, noise zone, or height restriction zone established by this provision as specifically provided herein. Each application for a permit shall indicate the location, height, and if applicable, use of the structure, with sufficient particularity to enable it to be determined whether the resulting structure would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a structure inconsistent with these provisions shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with subsection C of this section. 
1.  In the limits of the accident potential zones (APZ I and II), a permit shall be required for any structure. Such permits shall be issued when the proposed use of the structure is permitted, and the vertical height of the structure above the ground does not exceed the height limits prescribed herein. 
(a)  In the area lying inside the accident potential zones (APZ I and II), a permit shall be required for any use or structure. Such permits shall be issued when the vertical height of the structure, above the ground, does not exceed the height limits prescribed herein and is found to be a compatible use as defined herein. 
(b)  In the area lying outside the accident potential zones (APZ I and II) and within a height restriction zone, a permit shall be required for any use or structure. Such permits shall be issued when the vertical height of the structure, above the ground, does not exceed the height limits prescribed herein and is found to be a compatible use as defined herein. 
2.  In the area within the 65 dB or greater noise contour as shown in the latest AICUZ study for Sheppard Air Force Base, a permit shall be required for any use or structure as identified in the Land Use Compatibility Table included herein as requiring noise attenuation. Such permits shall be issued when the building official has approved noise attenuation measures on those uses requiring attenuation as identified herein. 
No certificate of occupancy (CO) shall be issued for commercial properties until such time compliance is realized through inspection and approval by the building official for compliance with noise attenuation measures as required herein. For residential land uses required to attenuate, no water sales by the city or appropriate water districts or supply corporations shall be permitted until compliance is realized through inspection and approval of the building official. 
Noise attenuation measures as required herein, and as approved by the building official, shall be installed and maintained at the same level of attenuation as required by this provision. 
B.  Existing uses. 
1.  No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of any airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use or structure to be made higher or become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on the effective date of this ordinance. 
2.  No permit shall be granted that would allow the expansion of a use not herein permitted within the noise zone unless said use adheres to attenuation measures as required. 
C.  Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or use his property contrary to the regulations prescribed in this provision, may apply to the Board of Adjustment for a variance from such regulations in question. The application for variance from a height restriction shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. A variance request shall be processed in accordance with section 7300. 
D.  Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable by the director of community development or his designee or the Board of Adjustment to effectuate the purposes of this provision and is reasonable under the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure in question to install, operate and maintain, at their expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 155-94, § 1, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 72-2000, § 2, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 32-2001, § 14, 4-3-2001; Ord. No. 8-2006, § 1, 2-7-2006) 
[Sec.] 6475. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the director of community development or his designee to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits shall be made to the director of community development or his designee. Applications required by this provision to be submitted to the director of community development or his designee shall be promptly considered and granted or denied by him. In the event that the director of community development or his designee refuses to grant the application, the applicant may appeal such decision to the Board of Adjustment. 
    Applications for variances shall be made to the Board of Adjustment by first filing said application for variance with the director of community development or his designee who shall forthwith transmit said application to the Board of Adjustment for determination. 
(Ord. No. 32-2001, § 15, 4-3-2001; Ord. No. 8-2006, § 1, 2-7-2006) 
[Sec.] 6480. - Airport Board of Adjustment. 
    An Airport Board of Adjustment shall be appointed comprised of both residents of the City of Wichita Falls and residents located outside the city but within the area affected by this ordinance, in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Code. The board shall consist of five members appointed by the city council. Three members shall be citizens of the city, and two members shall be residents located outside the city, but within the area affected by this ordinance. The city council shall also appoint one ex-officio, non-voting member who shall serve two-year staggered terms commencing on December 31. The ex-officio member of the board shall be nominated by the military installation, Commander of the 82nd Training Wing. The city's resident members shall be appointed in even-numbered years, and the members located outside the city shall be appointed on odd-numbered years. The actions and procedures of the Airport Board of Adjustment shall be those as required under Texas Local Government Code § 241.032, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 155-94, § 1, 12-20-1994; Ord. No. 67-99, § 1, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 126-2000, § 1, 12-19-2000; Ord. No. 32-2001, § 16, 4-3-2001; Ord. No. 8-2006, § 1, 2-7-2006; Ord. No. 02-2016, § 1, 1-5-2016, eff. 2-5-2016) 
[Sec.] 6485. - Land use compatibility table for Sheppard Air Force Base/Wichita Falls Regional Airport. 
Accident Potential Zones Noise Zones 
(dB) SLUCM 
No. Land Use Clear 
Zone APZ I APZ II 65-70 70-75 75-80 80+ 10 RESIDENTIAL 11 HOUSEHOLD UNITS 11.11 Single Units; Detached N N Y 1 A 11 B 11 N N 11.12 Single Units; Semidetached N N N A 11 B 11 N N 11.13 Single Units; Attached row N N N A 11 B 11 N N 11.21 Two Units; Side by side N N N A 11 B 11 N N 11.22 Two Units; One above the other N N N A 11 B 11 N N 11.31 Apartments; Walk up N N N A 11 B 11 N N 11.32 Apartments; Elevator N N N A 11 B 11 N N 12 Group Quarters N N N A 11 B 11 N N 13 Residential Hotels N N N A 11 B 11 N N 14 Mobile Home Parks or Courts N N N N N N N 15 Transient Lodgings N N N A 11 B 11 C 11 N 16 Other Residential N N N 1 A 11 B 11 N N 20 MANUFACTURING 21 Food and Kindred Products; Manufacturing N N 2 Y Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 22 Textile Mill Products; Manufacturing N N 2 Y Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 23 Apparel and Other Finished Products Made From Fabrics, Leather, and Similar Materials; Manufacturing N N N 2 Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 24 Lumber and Wood Products (except furniture); Manufacturing N Y 2 Y Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 25 Furniture and Fixtures; Manufacturing N Y 2 Y Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 26 Paper and Allied Products; Manufacturing N Y 2 Y Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 27 Printing, Publishing and allied industries N Y 2 Y Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 28 Chemicals and Allied Products Manufacturing N N N 2 Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 29 Petroleum Refining and related industries N N Y Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 30 Manufacturing 31 Rubber and Misc. Plastic Products; Manufacturing N N 2 N 2 Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 32 Stone, Clay and Glass Products; Manufacturing N N 2 Y Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 33 Primary Metal Industries N N 2 Y Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 34 Fabricated Metal Products; Manufacturing N N 2 Y Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 35 Professional, Scientific, and Controlling Instruments; Photographic and Optical Goods; Watches and Clocks Manufacturing N N N 2 Y A B N 39 Miscellaneous Manufacturing N Y 2 Y 2 Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 40 TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATIONS AND UTILITIES 41 Railroad, Rapid Rail Transit and Street Railroad Transportation N 3 Y 4 Y Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 42 Motor Vehicle Transportation N 3 Y Y Y Y 13 Y 14 Y 15 43 Aircraft Transportation N 3 Y 4 Y Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 44 Marine Craft Transportation N 3 Y 4 Y Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 45 Highway and Street Right-of-way N 3 Y Y Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 46 Automobile Parking N 3 Y 4 Y Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 47 Communications N 3 Y 4 Y Y A 15 B 15 N 48 Utilities N 3 Y 4 Y Y Y Y 12 Y 13 49 Other Transportation, Communications and Utilities N 3 Y 4 Y Y A 15 B 15 N 50 TRADES 51 Wholesale Trade N Y 2 Y Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 52 Retail Trade-Building Materials Hardware and Farm Equipment N Y 2 Y Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 53 Retail Trade-General Merchandise N N 2 Y 2 Y A B N 54 Retail Made-Food N N 2 Y 2 Y A B N 55 Retail Trade-Automotive, Marine Craft, Aircraft and Accessories N Y 2 Y 2 Y A B N 56 Retail Trade-Apparel and Accessories N N 2 Y 2 Y A B N 57 Retail Trade-Furniture, Home Furnishings and Equipment N N 2 Y 2 Y A B N 58 Retail Trade-Eating and Drinking Establishments N N N 2 Y A B N 59 Other Retail Trade N N 2 Y 2 Y A B N 60 SERVICES 61 Finance, Insurance and Real Estate Services N N Y 6 Y A B N 62 Personal Services N N Y 6 Y A B N 62.4 Cemeteries N Y 7 Y 7 Y Y Y 13 Y 14, 21 63 Business Services N Y 8 Y 8 Y A B N 64 Repair Services N Y 2 Y Y Y 12 Y 13 Y 14 65 Professional Services N N Y 6 Y A B N 65.1 Hospitals, Nursing Homes N N N A* B* N N 65.1 Other Medical Facilities N N N Y A B N 66 Contract Construction Services N Y 6 Y Y A B N 67 Governmental Services N N Y 6 Y* A* B* N 68 Educational Services N N N A* B* N N 69 Miscellaneous Services N N 2 Y 2 Y A B N 70 CULTURAL, ENTERTAINMENT AND RECREATIONAL 71 Cultural Activities (including churches) N N N 2 A* B* N N 71.2 Nature Exhibits N Y 2 Y Y* N N N 72 Public Assembly N N N Y N N N 72.1 Auditoriums, Concert Halls N N N A B N N 72.11 Outdoor Music Shells, Amphitheaters N N N N N N N 72.2 Outdoor Sports Arenas, Spectator Sports N N N Y 17 Y 17 N N 73 Amusements N N Y 8 Y Y N N 74 Recreational Activities (including golf, riding stables, and water recreation) N Y 8, 9, 10 Y Y* A* B* N 75 Resorts and Group Camps N N N Y* Y* N N 76 Parks N Y 8 Y 8 Y* Y* N N 79 Other Cultural, Entertainment and Recreation N Y 9 Y 9 Y* Y* N N 80 RESOURCES PRODUCTION AND EXTRACTION 81 Agricultural (except livestock) Y 16 Y Y Y 18 Y 19 Y 20 Y 20, 21 81.5 Livestock Farming and Animal 81.7 Breeding N Y Y Y 18 Y 19 Y 20 Y 20, 21 82 Agricultural-related Activities N Y 5 Y Y 18 Y 19 N N 83 Forestry Activities and Related Services N 5 Y Y Y 18 Y 19 Y 20 Y 20, 21 84 Fishing Activities and Related Services N 5 Y 5 Y Y Y Y Y 85 Mining Activities and Related Services N Y 5 Y Y Y Y Y 89 Other Resource Production and Extraction N Y 5 Y Y Y Y Y  
LEGEND 
SLUCM: Standard Land Use Coding Manual, U.S. Department of Transportation. 
Y (Yes): Land use and related structures are compatible without restriction. 
N (No): Land use and related structures are not compatible and shall be prohibited. 
Y x (yes with restrictions): Land use and related structures generally compatible; see notes 1 through 21. 
N x (no with exceptions): See notes 1 through 21. 
NLR (Noise Level Reduction): NLR (outdoor to indoor) to be achieved through incorporation of noise attenuation measures into the design and construction of the structures. 
A, B, or C: Land use and related structures generally compatible; measures to achieve NLR for A (DNL 66-70), B (DNL 71-75), C (DNL 76-80), need to be incorporated into the design and construction of structures and approved by the building official. 
A x , B x , and C x : Land use generally compatible with NLR. However, measures to achieve an overall noise level reduction do not necessarily solve noise difficulties and additional evaluation is warranted. See appropriate footnotes. 
The designation of these uses as "compatible" in this zone reflects individual federal agencies' and program considerations of general cost and feasibility factors, as well as past community experiences and program objectives. The Airport Zoning Board shall review request and be responsible for issuing necessary permits based on its findings. 
NOTES 
1.  Maximum density of one-two dwelling units per acre or lot coverage less than 20 percent, whichever is greater. 
2.  Within each land use category, uses exist where further definition may be needed due to the variation of densities in people and structures (see Exhibit A included herein). 
3.  No buildings, structures or above-ground utilities shall be placed within the area defined as the clear zone. 
4.  No passenger terminals and no major above-ground transmission lines in APZ 1. 
5.  Factors to be considered: Labor intensity, structural coverage, explosive characteristics, and air pollution. The proposed use shall be evaluated by the director of community development or his designee in conference with the base AICUZ officer for Sheppard Air Force Base or designated personnel. 
6.  Low-intensity office uses only. Meeting places, auditoriums, etc. shall not be permitted. For the purpose of this provision, low-intensity is defined as an employment population not to exceed 25 people per acre per shift. 
7.  Excludes chapels. 
8.  Facilities must be low intensity. For the purpose of this provision, low-intensity is defined as an employment population not to exceed 25 people per acre per shift. 
9.  Clubhouse not permitted. 
10.  Areas for gatherings of people are not recommended. The director of community development shall be responsible for issuing the necessary permit based on his findings. 
11.  a.  Residential use is discouraged in DNL 65-69dB, strongly discouraged in DNL 70-75dB as allowed in 11.b and prohibited in DNL above 75dB. 
b.  Where residential uses are allowed, measures to achieve outdoor to indoor noise level reduction (NLR) to DNL 65dB shall be incorporated and considered in individual approvals. The building official shall be responsible for determining adequacy of attenuation measures. 
c.  NLR criteria will not eliminate outdoor noise problems. However, building location and site planning and design, and use of berms and barriers, may help mitigate outdoor exposure, particularly from near ground level sources. Measures that reduce outdoor noise shall be used whenever practical in preference to measures which only protect interior spaces. Such measures shall be indicated on a site plan and evaluated prior to approval of the required permit. 
12.  Measures to achieve the same NLR as required for facilities in DNL 65-69 dB range shall be incorporated into the design and construction of portions of these buildings where the public is received, office areas, noise sensitive areas or where the normal noise level is low. 
13.  Measures to achieve the same NLR as required for facilities in DNL 70-74 dB range shall be incorporated into the design and construction of portions of these buildings where the public is received, office areas, noise sensitive areas or where the normal noise level is low. 
14.  Measures to achieve the same NLR as required for facilities in DNL 75-79 dB range shall be incorporated into the design and construction of portions of these buildings where the public is received, office areas, noise sensitive areas or where the normal noise level is low. 
15.  If noise sensitive, use appropriate NLR. If not noise sensitive the use is compatible. 
16.  No buildings. 
17.  Land use is compatible provided special sound reinforcement systems are installed as approved by the building official. 
18.  Residential buildings require the same NLR as required for facilities in DNL 65-69 dB range. 
19.  Residential buildings require the same NLR as required for facilities in DNL 70-79 dB range. 
20.  Residential buildings are not permitted. 
21.  Land use is not allowed. 
The director of community development or his designee may require building elevations, building plans, landscape plans and other details to allow for proper evaluation of the proposed use in order to ensure the protection of the publics health, safety and welfare. 
EXHIBIT A 
    Uses are compatible if they do not result in a gathering of individuals in an area that would result in an average density of greater than 25 persons per acre per hour during a 24-hour period, not to exceed 50 persons per acre at any time. 
    The following is a reproduction of Appendix F, Volume H, of the 1992 AICUZ study for Sheppard Air Force Base, and is included here for ease of reference. 
Average Density 
    Average densities of persons per hour during a 24-hour period are determined by calculating the number of persons per acre expected on a site, multiplying by the number of hour they will be on the site, and dividing the total by 24. 
Example #1. One 8-hour shift of 30 workers on a one acre site. 
Avg. density = 30 persons expected × 8 hours on site = 240 
Then 240/24=10: Thus avg. density = 10 persons per hour per 24-hour period. 
Example #2. Two 8-hour shifts of 30 workers on a one acre site. 
Avg. density = 30 persons expected × 16 hours on site = 480 
Then 480/24=20: Thus avg. density = 20 persons per acre per hour per a 24-hour period. 
Maximum Density 
    The maximum number of persons allowed per acre per hour is calculated by dividing the number of hours persons will be on site by 24 hours, and then dividing by 25 persons per acre per hour by the result. The resulting number is the maximum number of persons allowed per acre per hour, provided it does not exceed 50. Fifty persons per acre at any one time is the maximum number of persons allowed under the standard. 
Example. Maximum density for two eight-hour shifts on a one acre site. 
25 divided by 16/24 = 37.5 persons per 
                      hour allowed. 
Application of this formula results in the following table which specifies the maximum persons per acre per hour for the duration of the time that persons are expected to be on site during a 24-hour period. 
PERSONS PER ACRE 
Hours of Operation 
Per Day Maximum Persons 
Allowed Per Acre/ 
During Each Hour 24 25 23 26 22 27 21 28 20 30 19 31 18 33 17 35 16 37 15 40 14 42 13 46 12 or less 50*  
Note: Fractions in the maximum persons allowed column are rounded to the lowest whole number. 
Note: Also note that concentrations of people may not exceed 50 people/acre at any time. 
(Ord. No. 18-2000, § 1, 3-7-2000; Ord. No. 36-2000, § 1, 4-4-2000; Ord. No. 32-2001, §§ 17, 18, 4-3-2001; Ord. No. 8-2006, § 1, 2-7-2006) 
6500. - ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS 

[Sec.] 6510. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the accessory use regulations is to establish the relationship among principal and accessory uses and provisions governing their uses. Sections 6500 through 6599 shall be known as the accessory use regulations. 
(Ord. No. 24-2003, § 1, 4-1-2003) 
[Sec.] 6515. - Residential accessory uses. 
    Residential accessory uses shall include the following uses and structures and shall be allowed on the same lot or site containing a residential use: 
A.  Playhouse, patios, porches, gazebos, cabanas, greenhouses and incidental household storage buildings. 
B.  Home occupations as permitted under section 5100. 
C.  Radio and television receiving antennas, including satellite dish antennas. 
D.  Recreational facilities, including swimming pools and tennis courts for use by residents. 
E.  A single accessory dwelling unit when the principal use is single-family residential on a lot over 10,000 square feet or greater. 
F.  Garages, carports and parking for the principal use. 
(Ord. No. 24-2003, § 1, 4-1-2003) 
[Sec.] 6516. - Accessory Building Setbacks 
    Front setback: 25 feet minimum, except for rear access subdivisions where reduced setbacks as per section 4210 shall apply. 
    Side setback interior: five feet minimum, except when the wall height exceeds eight feet or the total height exceeds 15 feet, the setback shall be equal to the total height. 
    Side setback, exterior: 15-foot minimum 
    Rear setback: From alley, one-foot minimum 
    From common property line as follows: 
    One foot minimum for buildings equal to or less than 150 square feet in area, eight feet in wall height, and 15 feet in total height. 
    Five feet minimum for buildings more than 150 square feet in area, except when the wall height exceeds eight feet or the total height exceeds 15 feet, the setback shall be equal to the total height. 
    Where there is proposed an accessory building that is of the same or similar style, uses materials that resembles and has the same detailing as the primary structure, the Commission may allow an exception to setback requirements under appendix A under terms of section 7200 herein. 
[Sec.] 6520. - Nonresidential accessory uses. 
    Nonresidential accessory uses shall include the following uses and structures and shall be allowed on the same lot or site containing a nonresidential use: 
A.  A single dwelling unit which may be an individual mobile home shall be allowed in the LI Light Industrial and HI Heavy Industrial District, when occupied by persons providing security to the principal establishment. 
B.  Parking for the principal use. 
C.  Enclosure for solid waste dumpsters. 
D.  Storage building operated as a part of the principal use and does not comprise a separate use or business activity. 
6600. - TEMPORARY USE REGULATIONS 

[Sec.] 6610. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the temporary use regulations is to establish provisions for uses of a temporary nature which are not otherwise permitted in a district. Sections 6600 through 6699 shall be known as the temporary use regulations. 
[Sec.] 6615. - Permitted temporary uses. 
    The following types of temporary uses may be allowed subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Mobile trailer units for use as construction offices or residential uses for security purposes shall be permitted for the duration of the construction period. 
B.  New subdivision sales offices located within the subdivision may be established and operated for a period of two years from the date of the first construction permit issued in the subdivision. 
C.  Model homes located within the subdivision or residential development to which they pertain. 
D.  Christmas tree sales lots. 
E.  Outdoor entertainment associated with a nonresidential use under the following conditions: 
1.  Duration of the outdoor entertainment use shall be no longer than three consecutive days. 
2.  Not more than four times per year. 
3.  Hours of operation shall not exceed 12:00 midnight. 
4.  Outdoor lighting erected or established for the use shall not encroach onto adjacent residential properties. 
5.  No music or noise associated with the outdoor entertainment is permitted to be audible at a residential property line. 
    A site plan accurately locating the proposed temporary use shall be required. Refer to the Department of Community Development for a listing of details to be included on the site plan. 
    A permit shall be required for the temporary use, and a fee assessed for the insurance of the permit of $25.00. 
    The director of community development or his designee shall have the responsibility of ensuring that the terms and conditions established herein are enforced. 
    The director of community development or his designee shall refer any temporary use which he refuses to approve to the Commission. 
(Ord. No. 100-94, § 1, 8-2-1994) 
6700. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

[Sec.] 6710. - Purpose. 
    Signs are recognized as important means of communication and reasonable modes of advertising, and therefore constitute a significant and specific use of land. Standards for the construction of signs are herein provided for the purpose of protecting places and areas of historical and cultural importance; to increase safety and lessen congestion in the streets; to conserve the value of buildings and land; to preserve residential values; and to encourage the most appropriate use of land. Sections 6700 through 6799 shall be known as the sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 48-2004, § 1, 6-15-2004) 
[Sec.] 6720. - Definitions. 
    Apartment sign means a sign containing the name of and/or information about a multifamily dwelling or complex that consists of three or more dwelling units. 
    Directional sign means a pole, ground sign, or wall ground sign, placed on a nonresidential property, that directs vehicular traffic. The sign may display arrows, words, or other symbols to indicate direction of facilities. No goods or services for sale may be listed. No sign may exceed 15 square feet or as elsewhere listed. 
    Flashing sign means a sign or part thereof, operated so as to create flashing; change in light intensity, color or copy or intermittent light impulses more frequent than one every ten seconds and further provided that message centers as defined herein shall not constitute flashing signs. It is further provided that a sign which creates intermittent light impulses which convey time of day and/or temperature only shall not constitute a flashing sign. 
    General business sign means an on-premises sign that directs attention to a business, product, activity or service that is conducted, sold, or offered on the premises where the sign is located. 
    Ground sign means a sign which is supported by two or more columns, poles, uprights, or braces placed in or upon the ground, or set within a foundation, and is not a part of a building. 
    Institutional sign means a sign placed on a premises of an institution containing the name of and/or information relating to such uses. Uses include nonprofit, quasi-public or public facilities, schools, religious assembly, hospitals, or government owned facilities. 
    Lighting , as the term is used in Table 6741 hereof, means the illumination of a sign face by a light source interior or exterior to such sign face. 
    Marquee sign means a projecting sign attached to or hung from a marquee and said marquee shall be known to mean a canopy or covered structure projecting from and supported by a building, when such canopy or covered structure extends beyond the building, building line, or property line. 
    Message center means a sign which provides public service information, any similar public interest information and/or related advertising for a general business located on the same premises through electronically controlled intermittent light impulses. The term "message center" shall consist of letters, words or numerals pictures or graphics, which can either change sequentially or travel across the display area. The term "message center" is deemed to be a sign subject to the requirements of Table 6741 hereof according to the particular use of said message center and the specific requirements for such uses determined by the classifications contained in said table. 
    Motion , as the term is used in Table 6741 hereof, means the moving or rotating of a sign or portion thereof. 
    Multi-tenant sign means an on-premises sign identifying individual businesses within a commercial building or buildings. 
    Noncommercial sign means any sign no larger than 32 square feet in area containing a noncommercial message and placed on a nonresidential property. Such signs shall include, but not be limited to, the advertising of celebrations, exhibitions, community events, or activities of churches or other charitable, nonprofit, educational or philanthropic organizations. 
    Off-premises advertising sign means a sign which directs attention to a business product, activity or service which is not conducted, sold, offered, or located on the premises where the sign is located. 
    Class I off-premises sign is a sign whose face exceeds 100 square feet in area, and is classified as a billboard. 
    Class II off-premises sign is a sign which has a sign face less than 15 square feet in area, is less than ten feet in height, and is used only to provide direction to a final location within five blocks. Such a sign is to carry no address, phone number or advertisement. 
    Class III off-premises sign is a prohibited sign which has a sign face greater than 15 square feet, and is not classified as a billboard. 
    Pole sign means a sign which is supported by one pole, column, upright or brace placed in or upon the ground and is not part of a building. 
    Political sign means a sign intended to advance a political statement, cause or candidate for office. 
    Portable sign means a sign constructed upon wheels, casters, skids or otherwise so designed to be movable from one location to another, including signs mounted upon a trailer, wheeled, carried, or other mobile structure; a portable sign which has its wheels removed shall be considered a portable sign hereunder. The term "portable sign" shall also include vehicles, trailers, and similar such medium placed on a property for the purpose of advertising a product, service or other activity not associated with the location of the vehicle, trailer, or similar such medium. The term "portable sign" shall not apply to kiosks, shelters, buses or other such devices approved by and under the control of the city for transit-related purposes; or to taxi cabs and privately operated buses; commercial vehicles used for sales, service, delivery or other such business activity currently taking place; or, to a temporarily parked vehicle used to advertise a special event for no longer than 72 hours, and not more than four times per year. 
    Premises , for the purpose of this section, shall be defined as any lot or unplatted tract or any combination of contiguous lots under a single owner, or a tract where two or more owners have adjacent connecting parking lots. 
    Projection sign means a sign which is attached or affixed to any building wall or structure other than a pole and extends or projects beyond the building wall, structure, building line or property line more than 12 inches. 
    Reader board signs means a changeable copy sign with strips attached to the face of the sign to hold readily movable letters and numerals. The sign may be internally or externally illuminated (ground or pole sign only). The area of a reader board sign shall be included in calculating the maximum allowed sign area. 
    Residential sign means any noncommercial sign placed on a residential property by the owner or occupant of said property. Such signs include, but are not limited to, special event signs, religious message signs, school sports signs and home security signs. 
    Roof sign means a sign which is erected, constructed, or maintained on or over the roof or parapet wall of a building. 
    Sign structure means any part of a sign, including the base, supporting columns or braces, display surface, or any other appendage thereto. 
    Street setback means the distance from the property line or right-of-way line of all streets adjacent to the premises on which a sign is located. 
    Temporary commercial sign I means any temporary on-premises sign of a commercial nature, no larger than 16 square feet in area, placed on a residential property by a person, business, or entity that is in the process of performing a service or construction, or engaging in an event at or sale of said premises. Such signs include, but are not limited to, garage sale signs, contractor signs, real estate signs and auction signs. 
    Temporary commercial sign II means any temporary on-premises sign of a commercial nature, no larger than 32 square feet in area, placed on a nonresidential property by a person, business, or entity that is performing a service or construction, or engaging in an event at or sale of said premises. Such signs include, but are not limited to, special event or sale signs, contractor signs, real estate signs and auction signs. 
    Temporary commercial sign III means any temporary on-premises sign of a commercial nature, no larger than 100 square feet in area, advertising vacant lots for sale within a residential or commercial subdivision, or advertising a pending residential subdivision or commercial development. Such signs shall include a contractor's sign placed during the construction of a nonresidential project or a residential subdivision. 
    Temporary residential sign means a residential sign larger than four square feet and no larger that 32 square feet. 
    Wall ground sign means a wall, not a part of a building, so erected for the purpose of placement or display of a sign. 
    Wall sign means a sign which is attached or affixed to the wall of a building or is an integral part of the wall of a building with the exposed face of the sign in a plan parallel to and not more than 12 inches from said wall; provided, however, that electric wall signs may project not more than 18 inches from said wall. A wall sign shall not extend above or beyond the parallel face to which the sign is attached. 
(Ord. No. 83-85, § 4, 8-6-1985; Ord. No. 157-96, § 3, 11-5-1996; Ord. No. 49-97, § 2, 5-20-1997; Ord. No. 48-2004, § 1, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 66-2004, § 1, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 7-2008, § 1, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 59-2011, § 1, 10-4-2011) 
[Sec.] 6740. - Schedule of sign standards. 
    No sign shall be erected, placed, displayed, or located except in accordance with the schedule of sign standards contained in Table 6741 hereof. However, signs required by law shall be exempt from these requirements. 
TABLE 6741 
SIGN TYPE ZONE ALLOWED MAX. AREA 
(SQ. FT.) MAX. HT. 
(FT.) CLASS 
(See Note 3) STREET SETBACK 
(FT.) SPACING LIGHTING MOTION MAXIMUM DURATION SPECIAL REQUIREMENT Apartment MFR, RMU, LC, GC, CBD 80 20 W, WG Note 1 1 per street front or proj. Yes Yes Perm. Note 1 Apartment MFR, RMU, GC, CBD 120 50 G, P, WG, W 10 1 per street front or proj. Yes Yes Perm. N/A Class I Off-Premises GC, LI, HI, CBD Note 2 Note 2 G, P Note 2 Note 2 Yes Note 8 Perm. Note 2 Class II Off-Premises GC, LI, HI, CBD 15 10 P 10 200' from SF-1, SF-2, or MFR No No Perm. Note 2 Directional All districts 15 6 G, P, WG Note 1 None No No Perm. Note 1 Gen. Bus. GC, LI, HI, LC, RMU, CBD, RDD Note 5 Note 5 Note 5 Note 5 Note 5 Yes Yes Perm. Note 1 & 4 Institutional MFR, SF-1, SF-2, LC 32 20 G, W, P, PR, RB, GW Note 1 2 per street front Yes No Perm. Note 1 & 10 Message Center GC, LI, HI, CBD, RDD Note 7 50 G, P Note 7 200' from SF-1, SF-2, or MFR Yes Yes Perm. Note 7 Multi-Tenant GC, LI, HI, CBD 120 50 G, P, WG, W 10 1 per platted lot per each street front Yes Yes Perm. Note 4 Multi-Tenant GC, LI, HI, CBD, LC 80 20 G, P, WG, W Note 1 & 4 1 per platted lot per each street front Yes Yes Perm. Note 1 & 4 Name Plate All districts 1 None W, PR None 1 per business No No Perm. N/A Political All districts 36 8 G, P, WG, W 10' if taller than 3' None No No N/A Note 9 Subdivision Entry MFR, SF-1, SF-2 200 20 WG, P, G 10 2 per entry way No No Perm. N/A Noncommercial sign All districts 32 4 G, P, W 10 1 per lot No No N/A Note 9 Temporary Commercial Sign I All districts 16 6 G, P, W Note 1 None No No 10 days after end of work or event Note 1 Temporary Commercial Sign II All districts 32 6 G, P, W Note 1 1 per street front No No 10 days after end of work or event Note 1 Temporary Commercial Sign III All districts 100 50 G, P 10 1 per street frontage Yes Yes 10 days after end of work or event N/A Temporary Residential Sign All districts 32 6 G, P, W 10 1 per lot No No 5 days per year Note 6 Residential All districts 4 4 G, P, W None Note 6 No No N/A Note 1 & 6  
Note 1. On-premises signs fronting a public street and located within ten feet of the property line shall have a clearance from the surrounding grade to the bottom of the sign face of not less than nine feet, except that low profile signs may be created within such area if the top of the sign does not exceed three feet above the surrounding grade. Poles, columns, or other supports for such signs shall not exceed 12 inches in dimension measured perpendicular to the street, and no portion of the sign shall overhang the property line. 
Exception : This requirement shall not apply to directional, residential or a temporary commercial sign I if such sign placement does not create a view obstruction to motorists or pedestrians. 
Note 2. 
A. Separation between signs. A minimum separation must be maintained between signs as follows: 
1. For Class I signs, the linear distance between signs shall be 1,500 feet. The linear distance shall be that distance measured between the same class of sign where the signs are located on the same side of the road, street or highway. 
2. The radial distance between signs shall be 500 feet. The radial distance shall be that distance between signs where the nearest portion of the sign is measured to the nearest portion of an adjacent sign. 
B. Separation from a residential use or residential zoning district. 200 feet from the nearest residential use, or residential zoning district. 
A residential zoning district shall be a zoning district which allows the placement of a residential use as a permitted use. The general commercial zoning district, for the purpose of this regulation, shall not be included as a residential zoning district. However, a residential use within that zoning district shall be included in the distance requirement. Separation from existing residential uses shall not apply when such uses are located within a zoning district that prohibits residential uses. 
For spacing from SF-1 Single-Family Residential (large lot), SF-2 Single-Family Residential (standard lot), and MFR-Multifamily Residential Districts, spacing shall be measured from the nearest portion of the sign to the residential district boundary. However, when such residential district boundary abuts a public alley or street right-of-way, the right-of-way width shall be included in the measurement. 
C. Setback from right-of-way. 
25 feet for Class I signs. 
Ten feet for Class II signs. 
25 feet for all other signs under this Note. 
D. Height. 
1. 42.5 feet for Class I signs. 
24 feet above roof for roof-mounted Class I signs. 
For Class I signs, height is measured from grade of roadway where sign is viewed. Where there exist more than one grade for the same street, road or system, the measurement shall be made from the highest grade. 
2. Ten feet for Class II signs. 
For Class II signs, the height shall not exceed ten feet when measured from installation grade. 
E. Measurement of height. 
1. Ground or pole sign within 100 feet of a street abutting the property on which the sign is located. From the top of the curb of the nearest street adjacent thereto, or if there is no curb, from a point six inches above the edge of the road surface, to the top of the sign structure. 
2. Ground or pole sign more than 100 feet from an adjacent street. From the ground at the sign base to the top of the sign structure. 
3. Roof sign. From the roof level at the base to the top of the sign structure. 
F. Sign area. 
672 square feet; or 
807 square feet with protrusions. 
Note 3. Classification standards. 
G-Ground. 
P-Pole. 
W-Wall. 
PR-Projecting. 
RB-Reader Board. 
WG-Wall Ground. 
R-Roof. 
Note 4. Maximum area is the total area of all businesses, tenants or services advertised on one sign structure; however, the total area of multi-faced signs shall be governed by section 6750 B. 
Note 5. In the LC Limited Commercial District, general business signs shall not exceed 80 square feet in face area nor exceed 20 feet in height. Signs shall be limited to one per business or street frontage when located within 25 feet of the property line. 
In the RMU Residential Mixed Use, GC General Commercial, LI Light Industrial, HI Heavy Industrial, and CBD Central Business districts, general business signs shall be limited by the following: If located within ten feet of the property line or the back of the curb, whichever is greater, the sign face area shall not exceed 80 square feet nor exceed 30 feet in height. If located at least ten feet from the property line or the back of the curb, whichever is greater, but less than 25 feet from the property line, the sign face area shall not exceed 120 square feet nor exceed 50 feet in height. If located 25 feet or more from the property line, the sign face area shall not exceed 900 square feet nor exceed 80 feet in height. Signs shall be limited to one per business or street frontage when located within 25 feet of the property line. 
See specific zoning district regulations in section 3000 for additional sign regulations for LO Limited Office, LC Limited Commercial, RDD River Development, and BA Brook Avenue zoning districts. 
Signs proposed within the CBD Central Business district not in conformance with the provisions of Note 5 herein, and placed on a wall of a building covering more than ten percent of the face of said wall, shall be reviewed through the conditional use procedure as outlined in section 7200. 
Note 6. Residential signs, as defined herein, placed upon a residential lot, shall not have a cumulative area greater than 12 square feet. Each individual residential sign shall be no larger than four square feet. Temporary residential signs as defined herein shall not be placed on a residential lot longer than five days per year. 
Note 7. Separation of message center signs from a residential use or residential zoning boundary. Message center signs as defined herein shall maintain a separation distance of 200 feet from the nearest property line of a residential use, or a SF-1 Single-Family Residential (large lot), SF-2 Single-Family Residential (standard lot), or MFR Multifamily Residential Zoning District boundary. For spacing from SF-1 Single-Family Residential (large lot), SF-2 Single-Family Residential (standard lot), and MFR Multifamily Residential Districts, the distance shall be measured from the nearest portion of the sign to the residential district boundary. However, when such residential district boundary abuts a public alley or street right-of-way, the right-of-way width shall be included in the measurement. An exception to the 200-foot separation requirement shall apply if: 
1. Any image produced by the message center sign remains static (no animation, movement, scrolling, or flashing) for a period of at least five seconds; or 
2. It can be reasonably demonstrated that the sign is not visible from any residential property within 200 feet of the sign. 
Street setback requirement and height restriction for message center signs. Message center signs shall be no closer than ten feet from the property line. If located more than ten feet from the property line but less than 25 feet from the property line, the sign face area shall not exceed 120 square feet. If located 25 feet or more from the property line, the sign face area shall not exceed 200 square feet. Message center signs shall not exceed 50 feet in height. Message center signs shall be limited to one per business or street frontage. 
Note 8. Class I off-premises signs shall have no motion as defined herein. The changing of the sign content through electronically controlled digital technology is permitted provided that: 
1. Any image produced by the sign remains static (no animation, movement, scrolling, or flashing) for a period of at least eight seconds; 
2. A change of message is accomplished within two seconds; 
3. A change of message occurs simultaneously on the entire sign; 
4. A default mechanism is provided that freezes the sign in one position if a malfunction occurs; and 
5. The intensity of the display is automatically adjusted to decrease in low natural or ambient light conditions. 
Note 9. A property owner may choose to display a political or other noncommercial message on any authorized commercial sign, subject to the payment of fees and regulations applicable to signs with commercial messages. 
Note 10. One of the two allowed institutional signs per street frontage may display information related to the institution through electronically controlled intermittent light impulses provided that a 200-foot separation distance from a residential use is maintained. An exception to the 200-foot separation requirement shall apply if: 
1. Any image produced by the institutional sign remains static (no animation, movement, scrolling, or flashing) for a period of at least five seconds; or 
2. It can be reasonably demonstrated that the sign is not visible from any residential property within 200 feet of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 83-85, §§ 5-8, 8-6-1985; Ord. No. 28-86, §§ 16, 17, 4-1-1986; Ord. No. 64-88, § 5, 5-31-1988; Ord. No. 157-96, §§ 1, 2, 11-5-1996; Ord. No. 48-2004, § 1, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 7-2008, §§ 3, 4, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 76-2008, § 1, 12-2-2008; Ord. No. 59-2011, §§ 2, 3, 10-4-2011; Ord. No. 39-2012, §§ 1, 2, 8-7-2012) 
[Sec.] 6745. - General provisions. 
    Permit required. Unless specifically exempted, a permit must be obtained from the Building and Code Administration official for the erection and maintenance of all signs erected or maintained within the city and in accordance with other ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
    Exceptions to permit requirement. The following signs are exempt from the requirement for a permit: 
i.  Directional signs; 
ii.  Noncommercial signs; 
iii.  Political signs; 
iv.  Residential signs; 
v.  Temporary residential signs; 
vi.  Temporary commercial signs I and II; 
vii.  Temporary commercial signs III when 64 square feet or less in area; 
viii.  Wall signs that do not project beyond the face of the wall more than 12 inches; 
ix.  Temporary signs providing legal notice required by law of local, state, or federal government; and 
x.  Seasonal displays and decorations which do not advertise a product or service. 
Exemptions from the necessity of securing a permit, however, shall not be construed to relieve the owner of the sign involved from responsibility for its erection and maintenance in a safe manner and in a manner in accordance with all the other provisions of this appendix. 
    Construction documents. Before any permit is granted for the erection of a sign or sign structure requiring such permit, construction documents shall be filed with the Building and Code Administration official showing the dimensions, materials and required details of construction, including loads, stresses, anchorage and any other pertinent data. The permit application shall be accompanied by the written consent of the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is to be erected and by engineering calculations signed and sealed by a Texas-registered professional engineer where required by the International Building Code. 
    Changes to signs. Except that which may be allowed by section 6760, no sign shall be structurally altered, enlarged or relocated except in conformity to the provisions herein, nor until a proper permit, if required, has been secured. The changing or maintenance of movable parts or components of an approved sign that is designed for such changes, or the changing of business names, lettering, sign faces, colors, display and/or graphic matter, or the content of any sign, shall not be deemed a structural alteration. 
    Permit fees. Permit fees to erect, alter or relocate a sign shall be in accordance with the fee schedule adopted within this jurisdiction. 
    Sign maintenance. All signs allowed within the provisions of this ordinance, including temporary signs, shall be kept in good condition and repair. Signs damaged or deteriorated shall be repaired or removed within ten days of notification by the Building and Code Administration. Failure to comply with the notification shall constitute a violation. 
(Ord. No. 157-96, § 3, 11-5-1996; Ord. No. 49-97, § 2, 5-20-1997; Ord. No. 48-2004, § 1, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 25-2009, § 1, 4-7-2009; Ord. No. 59-2011, § 4, 10-4-2011) 
[Sec.] 6747. - Prohibited sign elements and locations. 
A.  No sign using a revolving beam or beacon of light resembling any emergency vehicle or traffic control sign shall be permitted. No flashing sign as defined herein shall be permitted. 
B.  No high intensity light shall be permitted as part of a sign display visible from an adjacent street in any zoning district. Lighted signs, internally or externally, shall not cause glare or brightness to a degree that could constitute a hazard or nuisance, nor cause discomfort to approaching motorist, nor in anyway obscure the visibility of illuminated traffic control devices due to their brightness. 
C.  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section, no sign shall be erected which constitutes an obstruction to view of operators of motor vehicles on public streets or entering such streets from private property. All signs shall comply with section 102-40, Visibility Sight Triangle, Wichita Falls Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 48-2004, § 1, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 7-2008, § 2, 2-5-2008) 
[Sec.] 6750. - Rules of construction. 
A.  The area of a sign shall be computed by drawing a line or lines around the sign in such a way as to form not more than four regular geometric figures such as a rectangle, circle, triangle, trapezoid, or ellipse. The total of these figures shall be the total area of the sign. Support structures and/or support structure covers shall be included in the overall calculation of the sign area if the support structures or covers at any point measured parallel to the ground, has a width or cumulative width of 24 inches or more. Measurements of the support structures or covers shall be taken within the same plane as the face of the sign. 
B.  The maximum sign area prescribed in Table 6741 shall be applied to a sign with one face. A sign constructed with more than one face shall contain in the aggregate of all faces not more than twice the maximum area prescribed in Table 6741. The maximum interior angle between sign faces shall be 90 degrees. 
C.  The height of a sign shall be measured as follows: 
l.  Ground or pole sign within 100 feet of a street abutting the property on which the sign is located. From the top of the curb of the nearest street adjacent thereto, or if there is no curb, from a point six inches above the edge of the road surface, to the top of the sign structure. 
2.  Ground or pole sign more than 100 feet from an adjacent street. From the ground at the sign base to the top of the sign structure. 
3.  Roof sign. From the roof level at the base to the top of the sign structure. 
D.  An allowed portable sign shall be a reader board installed upon a trailer or skid which has a sign area of not greater than 35 square feet per side, does not exceed 6.5 feet in total height, does not contain more than two sides for advertising, and which was designed to be towed behind a vehicle. A skid-mounted portable sign is also permitted if conforming to square footage and other requirements herein. A vehicle used for the purpose of off-premises advertising shall also constitute an allowed portable sign if in conformance with height requirements herein, and subject to other applicable provisions herein. 
(Ord. No. 49-97, § 3, 5-20-1997; Ord. No. 48-2004, § 1, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 25-2009, § 2, 4-7-2009) 
[Sec.] 6755. - Prohibited signs and disposition. 
A.  The following signs are prohibited in the city. 
1.  Class III off-premises signs. 
2.  Signs not in conformance with standards contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 157-96, § 5, 11-5-1996; Ord. No. 48-2004, § 1, 6-15-2004) 
[Sec.] 6760. - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  Class I off-premises signs. 
1.  Billboard signs nonconforming with the standards herein addressing location and spacing shall be allowed to continue in operation and use as long as no part of a supporting structure or sign face structure is replaced for any reason. Should a supporting structure or sign face structure be required to be replaced for any reason, such sign shall be removed in its entirety. An action or event requiring the removal of a sign shall not include routine repairs nor changing sign content or advertiser. 
2.  Billboard sign face structures not in conformance with square footage standards may continue until such time that the sign face structure is in need of replacement for any reason. Once a sign face structure is removed or replaced, it shall be placed in compliance with standards herein, and shall not thereafter be returned to a nonconforming status. 
3.  If the sign is in nonconformance with height standards herein provided, the replacement or removal of any portion of a sign face structure or support shall be deemed sufficient to require the sign to come into conformance with standards herein. 
B.  On-premises signs. On-premises signs legally existing at the time of the adoption of the zoning ordinance from which this appendix is derived, or subsequent amendments, which are nonconforming with the standards herein, shall be allowed to continue in operation and use. On-premises signs that are nonconforming in terms of height, area, or setback, may be structurally altered provided that the original support structures are used and there is no increase in height or area, or decrease in setback. Once a support structure is removed or replaced it shall be placed in compliance with the standards herein and shall not thereafter be returned to a nonconforming status. 
(Ord. No. 157-96, § 4, 11-5-1996; Ord. No. 48-2004, § 1, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 25-2009, § 3, 4-7-2009) 
[Sec.] 6765. - Portable sign requirements. 
A.  A trailer or skid used in conjunction with an allowed reader board shall be maintained in a condition which does not permit the accumulation of rust or stains, and is not missing paint on heretofore painted surfaces. 
B.  Blank reader boards with discolored or broken faces, or those which do not carry advertisement of a business where the sign is located or illegible advertisement, shall be removed from the premises. 
C.  Vehicles allowed as portable signs shall carry current inspection and licensing, and shall not have flat tires, damaged glass, damaged body parts, shall be otherwise complete in their assembly, and shall be maintained in a condition which does not permit the accumulation of rust or stains, and is not missing paint on heretofore painted surfaces. 
D.  The areas under and around an allowed portable sign shall have a permit issued by the building and code administrator. 
E.  Allowed portable signs shall have a permit issued by the building and code administrator. 
F.  Setback of portable signs shall be subject to requirements shown under Table 6741. 
G.  No exterior lighting of any type shall be permitted, nor shall power be supplied by a gasoline- or diesel-powered generator. 
H.  No banners, flags, pennants, arrows, balloons or other such devices or objects shall be attached to any portion of the sign, trailer, skid or vehicle. 
I.  An allowed portable sign shall be anchored or otherwise secured so as to reasonably prevent damage or injury to life or property as a result of high winds or other such occurrence, and secured as required by the building official. 
J.  No more than one portable sign shall be placed on a lot, tract or parcel. 
K.  Portable signs shall otherwise be subject to provisions contained in the Building Code. 
L.  Portable signs shall be included in calculating the total number of signs per business. 
(Ord. No. 49-97, § 4, 5-20-1997; Ord. No. 48-2004, § 1, 6-15-2004) 
Editor's note- Section 4 of Ord. No. 49-97, adopted May 6, 1997, amended appendix C by adding provisions designated as § 6755. In order to avoid conflicts in section numbering the editor has redesignated these provisions as § 6765. Section 5 of Ord. No. 49-97 provided penalty provisions for the violation of portable sign regulations as follows: There is hereby established a fee and procedure for confiscation and impoundment of signs, vehicles, trailers, or other items confiscated and impounded of $50.00 for the cost of confiscating the sign, and $1.00 per day for impoundment in addition to costs incurred to remove and impound or otherwise confiscate a sign, vehicle, trailer or other item. Signs, vehicles, trailers or other items impounded shall be retained and reasonable efforts made to notify the owners of such confiscation and impoundment. A sign, vehicle, trailer or other item shall be retained for a period of 90 days, at which time the sign, vehicle, trailer or other item shall be disposed of at a public auction, sold for scrap, or otherwise disposed of to recover public cost involved and at the discretion of the city. 
[Sec.] 6766. - Signs on public right-of-way. 
    No signs of any kind shall be erected or placed on the right-of-way of any street or alley in the city, nor any public place or city owned property, except for temporary signs, flags or banners authorized under section 6767, traffic-control signs, signals and devices placed by the city under authority of the ordinances of the city, and advisory, safety and useful directional information signs placed by the city under authority of state law. Notwithstanding any other provision of this [ordinance], any sign so erected or placed on the right-of-way of any street or alley in the city in violation of this section shall be subject to immediate removal by the city manager's designee without notice to the owner or the lessee thereof. No signs of any kind shall be attached to any utility pole located in any street or alley right-of-way or utility easement except by the owner of such pole. 
(Code 1966, § 7-15; Ord. No. 48-2004, § 1, 6-15-2004) 
[Sec.] 6767. - Temporary signs across street. 
    Notwithstanding the other provisions of this [ordinance], upon a written request to the city manager or designee, a temporary sign, flag or banner may be permitted within city-controlled rights-of-way. Time, place, duration and manner of placement of signs, flags or banners shall be left to the discretion of the city manager or designee. A permit shall be required through the Building and Code Administration. A sign suspended across the street shall be not less than 20 feet above the street at the lowest point. Such signs, flags or banners may be used only for the purposes of advertising celebrations, exhibitions, rodeos, fairs or activities of churches or other charitable, nonprofit, educational or philanthropic organizations. 
(Code 1966, § 7-15; Ord. No. 48-2004, § 1, 6-15-2004) 
6800. - LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 54-97, § 1(Attachment A), amended former section 6800 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former section 6800 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 38-85, 4-23-1985; Ord. No. 28-86, §§ 8, 9, 4-1-1986; Ord. No. 64-88, § 6, 5-31-1988. 

[Sec.] 6805. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the landscaping regulation is to improve the quality of life for those living, working and visiting the city by enhancing the appearance of properties as viewed from rights-of-way, and to assist in attaining increased air quality as it relates to oxygenation and filtration of dust and other air-borne pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 54-97, § 1(att. A), 6-3-1997) 
[Sec.] 6810. - Minimum landscape requirements. 
A.  General landscaping requirements. 
1.  A suggested plant list is herein included for reference as to trees and other vegetation found compatible with local soil and climatic conditions. References made herein to a "canopy tree" shall refer to a tree which has a mature height exceeding 30 feet. References to an "understory tree" shall refer to a tree which has a mature height less than 30 feet. 
2.  Landscaping regulations shall apply to all uses other than single-family, duplex, and zero lot line residential uses. 
3.  Requirements herein shall apply to each separately platted lot, or each portion of a lot where applicable and determined appropriate by the city, or for the entire unplatted tract or parcel of land. 
4.  Where any property on one lot is to be developed in phases, so that only a portion of the site is to be used (such as parking lots for the current phase), there shall be consideration to define or limit the required landscaping to the area being currently developed or used. 
5.  Plant materials planted in pots shall not be counted or credited toward meeting landscape requirements herein. All plant materials shall be live and planted in the ground. 
6.  Canopy trees shall have a minimum caliper size of two inches in diameter when measured one foot above ground level. Understory trees shall have a minimum caliper size of 11/2 inches when measured one foot above ground level. 
7.  Where understory trees are permitted, and where the trees are multi-trunked, the minimum diameter of any single trunk shall be three-quarters of one inch as measured one foot from the crown. 
8.  For canopy trees, where multiple-trunked trees are proposed, and where the branches of a tree fork at or within one foot of the joint of a tree, no branch describing the fork shall be less than one inch in diameter when measured six inches after the fork. 
9.  Where shrubs are required herein, the minimum shrub size shall be five-gallon as defined by the American Nursery Association. 
10.  For every two landscaped islands, medians or peninsulas required herein, at least one island, or 50 percent of all islands, medians or peninsulas, shall be planted with a canopy tree and required shrubs. If only one island, median or peninsula is required, it shall contain a canopy tree and required shrubs. 
11.  A landscaped strip shall be provided along all portions of a property adjacent to a public right-of-way. Such strip shall be adjacent to the sidewalk or right-of-way, and shall not include a sidewalk or right-of-way. The minimum width of the landscaped strip shall be five feet. An adjustment in the configuration of the strip may be considered when such alternate proposal is equivalent to the square footage area provided by the strip. Such alternate consideration shall be more or less evenly distributed to the greatest extent possible along the area which would normally be occupied by the strip. 
12.  The required perimeter landscaping along public or private streets shall contain the following minimum plant materials: 
  One canopy tree per 40 linear feet of street frontage; 
  50 percent of the required trees as canopy trees and the remaining 50 percent as understory trees; or 
  50 percent of the required trees as canopy trees, 25 percent as understory trees, and the remaining 25 percent shrubs at a rate of five shrubs for every one understory tree substituted. 
If only one tree is required, that tree shall be a canopy tree. 
13.  All landscaped areas shall be protected with a concrete curb with a minimum height of six inches or of such a barrier using recognized methods and materials that will accomplish the intended purpose as approved by the Department of Community Development. No materials shall be considered which are subject to rot or decay, or will not afford sufficient long-term protection to protect from vehicular intrusion. 
14.  All landscaping elements required by this provision shall be constructed, installed and maintained so as not to obstruct the view of motorists and pedestrians between the street and access drives, parking aisles and entries and exits. 
15.  The required landscaped areas for parking lots shall be more or less evenly distributed throughout a parking lot. Adjustments may be considered when the shape or size of the parking lot, the location of existing trees, or other constraints reasonably prevent such distribution. 
16.  For those areas of a property to be used exclusively for docking and maneuvering areas, the landscaping area requirements for parking lots shall be determined by including the total area within the parking spaces, parking aisles, and travel lanes of the parking lot which are designed for the exclusive use of customers or employees. Maneuvering and docking areas are excluded. 
Maneuvering and docking areas facing a street shall be required to provide a landscaped area between the maneuvering and docking area and the street, using a combination of trees, shrubs, berms and other such landscape elements with the intent of providing a future screen of the view of such maneuvering and docking area to the greatest extent possible. 
17.  No lighting system, divider, fence, decorative column, fixture, equipment or similar material shall be placed within any parkway or public easement abutting a public street under the control of the city without approval by the city. 
18.  Xeriscape and drought-tolerant plants may be considered as a substitution to plant materials required herein provided that an irrigation system is installed to provide full coverage of all landscaping areas. 
19.  Any parking lot or portion thereof which is to contain more than 20 parking spaces shall provide permanently landscaped areas consisting of islands, peninsulas, or medians within the parking area. At a minimum, a landscaped island, median or peninsula not less than 160 square feet shall be provided as follows: 
  One per 20 parking spaces for sites having less than 100 parking spaces. 
  One per ten parking spaces for sites having 100 or more parking spaces. 
  For sites with less than 20 parking spaces, no additional island, median or peninsula is required. 
Each island, median or peninsula required herein shall, at minimum, contain the following: 
  One canopy tree; 
  Fifty percent of the required trees as canopy trees and the remaining 50 percent as understory trees; or 
  Fifty percent of the required trees as canopy trees, 25 percent as understory trees, and the remaining 25 percent five gallon shrubs at a rate of five shrubs for every one understory tree substituted. 
20.  For land uses where the total of all parking areas exceed 100 spaces, landscaping shall be installed along stacking aisles or circulation drives to identify and provide circulation control. Landscaping shall be used to identify ingress and egress points for traffic control and safety. Such landscaping shall be a combination of understory trees and shrubs. 
21.  A change in zoning, land use or a conditional use permit may require landscaping equivalent to provisions contained herein. 
22.  Reoccupying a structure exceeding 20,000 square feet which has been vacant for one year or when the structure is less than 20,000 square feet and has been vacant for two years, from the date of original vacancy, landscaping shall be required equivalent to provisions contained herein. 
23.  Parkways or public rights-of-way may be landscaped and maintained with a combination of grass, ground cover, shrubs and trees if: 
a.  They are not located so as to interfere with the use, maintenance, or repair of any natural or manmade drainage facility, public water or sewer lines, or other public utility or facility; 
b.  They are not located within five feet of an electrical utility pole and will not reach a mature height which will pass within eight feet of an electrical transmission or distribution line; 
c.  They are not located so as to create a view obstruction to vehicular or pedestrian traffic; and 
An approval to landscape a parkway is with the understanding that any utility work performed which disturbs or displaces installed vegetation or irrigation lines shall be the responsibility of the affected business or property owners to re-install or otherwise maintain the intent of section 6800. 
B.  Landscaping requirements for remodeling. For the purpose of this provision, a remodel shall include any change to the building interior or exterior or changes to a building site excluding routine maintenance and repair. 
1.  If a remodeling project has a total dollar value of less than 25 percent of the tax appraised value of the building, over a three-consecutive year period, no additional landscaping is required. 
2.  If renovation of a building over a three-consecutive year period causes the minimum cost to be 25 percent to 40 percent of the tax appraised value of the building, the minimum required landscaping area will be equivalent to the percentage. 
3.  Renovation of a building where the cost is at or exceeds 40 percent of the tax appraised value of the building, landscaping shall be required according to the standards under section 6810A. 
4.  For the remodeling of a building in the central business district, a plan shall be presented which strives to provide landscaping recognizing spatial constraints. 
C.  Landscape requirements for site improvements. 
1.  If an increase in parking area is proposed which is at least a 20 percent increase to the total parking area, existing parking lots shall be required to provide internal landscaping equivalent to or greater than 50 percent of required parking lot landscaping required under section 6810A. 
2.  Additional buildings placed on developed sites shall provide landscaping for any new parking provided, along with street frontage landscaping. Such parking and street frontage landscaping shall meet standards under 6810A. 
3.  Where additional ingress/egress points are proposed from a public street considering, and in relationship with other site improvements, landscaping shall define these ingress/egress points through the use of trees and shrubs. 
D.  Site constraints. Where it has been determined that site constraints exist which may limit the ability of a particular site to conform to requirements herein, the director of community development or [his] designee shall evaluate the ability of a proposal to come into conformance with requirements herein by considering constraints to that ability for any one use. If the proposal will not entirely fulfill the requirements herein, the director or designee may instruct that a proposal be presented which strives to maintain the intent of this section to the best of its ability. Such alternate proposal shall be approved by the director or designee. An appeal of the director's decision may be made to the Commission. 
(Ord. No. 54-97, § 1(att. A), 6-3-1997; Ord. No. 61-2002, § 1, 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 51-2018, § 4, 10-2-2018) 
[Sec.] 6815. - Irrigation required. 
A.  All landscaped areas shall be provided with a buried irrigation system sufficient to provide complete coverage of landscaped areas. Such a system shall be shown on the required landscape plan. 
B.  Hose bibbs may be used for irrigation purposes only if it is determined that installing an irrigation sprinkler system is not technically feasible. Cutting or removal of pavement or boring for irrigation lines beneath paving shall not in themselves be considered technical obstacles. 
(Ord. No. 54-97, § 1(att. A), 6-3-1997) 
[Sec.] 6820. - Preservation of existing trees. 
    The number of trees required shall be met, whenever possible, by the preservation of existing trees. Where parking lots are to be constructed to serve any development, the development shall be designed where possible so as to avoid locating parking or paving if such would result in the removal of any existing trees. 
    The landscape plan required by this regulation which shows removal of an existing tree shall consider the following: 
A.  The removal would leave sufficient number of other existing trees to meet the tree requirements of this regulation; or 
B.  Where the existing tree to be removed would otherwise be necessary to meet the number required, and removal is requested for the purpose of constructing any sewer, water, electric, gas lines or equipment, drainage facilities, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, or other facilities, utilities or improvements to serve the property. 
Such plan shall be considered if reasonable efforts have been made to avoid removal of the existing tree. In determining whether reasonable efforts have been made, the following shall be considered: 
1.  The feasibility of rerouting or relocating any of the improvements that requires the removal, including the relocation of any parking lot, or portion thereof, where sufficient land is available; and 
2.  The additional cost, if any, that would be incurred in insuring preservation of the existing tree. 
C.  Existing trees in the street right-of-way shall not be cleared, unless no other reasonable alternative is possible. 
(Ord. No. 54-97, § 1(att. A), 6-3-1997) 
[Sec.] 6825. - Common or phased development. 
    When any property is developed in phases, or is a common or unified development including more than one platted lot, the requirements of this regulation may apply to each phase of the development, or to all the lots being developed in common as though they were one lot, or otherwise apply the requirements as is reasonably necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of this regulation. 
(Ord. No. 54-97, § 1(att. A), 6-3-1997) 
[Sec.] 6830. - Credits. 
A.  An existing canopy tree which is preserved as shown on the approved landscape plan shall count as two trees toward the number of required canopy trees, if it is healthy and without substantial damage or defect. The caliper of the tree shall exceed three times the caliper herein required to be considered for credit. 
B.  For each approved landscaped peninsulas, islands or medians installed within parking lots, a credit shall apply to the required parking at a rate of 11/2 parking spaces. Such credit shall apply if each of the approved landscaped peninsulas, islands or medians are reasonably of the same area as a required parking space. A credit may be repeated for each approved landscaped peninsula, median or island. However, available parking to serve the proposed use shall not be reduced to a level below 90 percent of the required spaces, nor shall a reduction occur in the required number of handicapped parking facilities. 
(Ord. No. 54-97, § 1(att. A), 6-3-1997) 
[Sec.] 6835. - Landscape plan required. 
    The owner, developer or agent of any property to which this regulation applies shall submit and have approved a landscape plan prior to the issuance of a building permit. The plan shall contain sufficient detail to show the following: 
A.  The footprint of all existing and proposed structures. 
B.  Remaining and/or proposed site elements such as power poles, fences, walls, drainage swales, easements, sidewalks, parking lot layout, pedestrian walkways, and other such elements. 
C.  How the landscaping requirements are to be met, including the name, size, number, and location of all landscape elements. 
D.  Name, location and size of existing trees, and type and location of other vegetation proposed to remain or for removal. 
E.  When the internal landscaping requirements for parking lots apply, the size and location of the parking lot and the number of spaces, and how the owner proposes to address the interior landscaping requirement. 
F.  Location and size of irrigation lines. 
G.  Location of any buried pipeline or utility. 
H.  Location of any dedicated or proposed to be dedicated easement. 
I.  Such other information as may be reasonably necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this regulation. 
J.  Drawn at a scale of one inch to 100 feet or greater. 
(Ord. No. 54-97, § 1(att. A), 6-3-1997) 
[Sec.] 6840. - Maintenance requirements. 
A.  After complying with the requirements of this regulation, the owners and each successive owners of the property shall maintain the required landscaping vegetation, landscaped areas and irrigation systems in good and operating condition, and shall otherwise maintain the property so as to comply with any other requirement of this regulation. 
B.  Any dead, dying or damaged landscaping material shall be immediately replaced in conformance herein or, if due to inclement weather or out of season planting, specified in writing when such replacement shall occur, not to exceed 90 days. 
C.  Where any owner of property to which this regulation applies fails to reasonably maintain the required trees and other landscaping or maintain the property so as to comply with any requirement of this regulation, the city may issue a written notice and order the owner to replace any dead or dying trees, landscape plant materials and irrigation system that were required by the landscape plan or this regulation, or require any other action otherwise necessary to abate or correct any condition to meet the requirements of this regulation. 
(Ord. No. 54-97, § 1(att. A), 6-3-1997) 
[Sec.] 6845. - Certificate of occupancy or final inspection. 
A.  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued or final inspection made unless complying with terms and conditions required herein. 
B.  A certificate of occupancy may be issued or a final inspection made without the required landscaping in place provided that assurances are given in writing as to the date when landscaping will be installed, if a landscape plan has received prior approval and the required landscape areas are prepared for planting. All landscaping conforming to the approved landscape plan shall be installed no later than 90 days after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or final inspection. An irrigation system shall be installed and operational prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final inspection. 
C.  Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final inspection, the building official shall inspect the operation of the irrigation system, ensure that the required landscaping is installed as shown on the landscape plan, and other such information as may be required. The building official may use the services of other city departments to evaluate compliance with provisions established herein. 
D.  If the city is in Stage 3 drought emergency or greater pursuant to section 106-186 of this Code, then the developer may postpone the installation of landscaping until the city is no longer subject to Stage 3 or greater drought restrictions. Upon such postponement, the landscaping will be considered installed for the purpose of receiving a certificate of occupancy. To postpone the landscaping obligation, the developer must submit a request in a form promulgated by the city specifying the postponed landscaping and committing to install the postponed landscaping within 90 days after the end of the Stage 3 drought restrictions. After receiving postponement of the aforementioned obligation, then it shall be unlawful for an owner to fail to install the postponed landscaping within 90 days after being notified by the building official that the city is no longer subject to Stage 3 or greater drought restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 54-97, § 1(att. A), 6-3-1997; Ord. No. 17-2013, § 1(6845), 4-2-2013) 
_____
SUGGESTED PLANT LIST 
    The following set of tables includes a detailed list of plant species compiled by the Director of Parks and Recreation and represents species which have proven successful and compatible with soils found in the city. The Department of Parks and Recreation may provide information on experience with vegetation not included herein. 
Table 1. Trees Common Name Botanical Name Canopy Understory Mature 
Height 
(in feet) Mature 
Width 
(in feet) Crape Myrtle (treeform) Lagerstroemia indica X 10 10 Possumhaw Holly Ilex decidua X 15 10 Desert Willow Chilopsis linearis X 20 15 Redbud ('Texas' or 'Oklahoma') Cercis canadensis X 20 20 Vasey Oak Quercus pungens 'Vaseyana' X 25 25 Eve's Necklace Sophora affinis X 25 20 Mexican Plum Prunus mexicana X 25 15 Shantung Maple Acer truncatum X X 25 20 Chinese Pistache Pistacia chinensis X X 30 30 Golden Rain Tree Koelreuteria paniculata X X 30 20 Japanese Black Pine Pinus thunbergii X 30 20 Aristocrat Pear (only acceptable cultivar) Pyrus calleryana 'Aristocrat' X 40 30 Eastern Red Cedar Juniperus virginiana X 40 20 Lacebark Elm Ulmus parvifolia X 40 40 Escarpment Live Oak Quercus fusiformis X 50 50 Chinquapin Oak Quercus muehlenbergii X 50 30 Sawtooth Oak Quercus acutissima X 50 50 Austrian Pine Pinus nigra X 50 30 Bigtooth Maple (Edwards Plateau provenance only) Acer grandidentatum var. grandidentatum X 50 40 Pawnee Pecan Carya illinoinensis 'Pawnee' X 50 50 Cedar Elm Ulmus crassifolia X 55 40 Live Oak Quercus virginiana X 60 75 Shumard Red Oak (provenance certified, locally grown) Quercus shumardii X 60 60 Caddo Maple Acer barbatum var. Caddo X 60 40 Bur Oak Quercus macrocarpa X 60 45 Ponderosa Pine Pinus ponderosa X 75 30  
Placement of trees adjacent to paving should consider root growth characteristics of the species, and whether the eventual root growth will damage such paving. 
Typically a shrub may be used as a medium tree if pruned and trained to reach a mature height exceeding 15 feet. 
Table 2. Shrubs Common Name Botanical Name Mature Height 
(in feet) Mature Width 
(in feet) Glossy Abelia Abelia x grandiflora 6 6 Japanese Quince Chaenomeles japonica 5 6 Nellie R. Stevens Holly I. aquifolium x I. cornuta 'Nellie R. Stevens' 20 15 Burford Holly Ilex cornuta 'Burfordi' 10 10 Chinese Holly Ilex cornuta 10 8 Burford Holly, Dwarf Ilex cornuta 'Burfordi Nana' 4 4 Dwarf Chinese Ilex cornuta 'Rotunda' 3 3 Foster's Holly Ilex opaca x I. cassine 'Fosteri' 20 15 Yaupon Holly Ilex vomitoria 10 10 Dwarf Yaupon Ilex vomitoria 'Nana' 3 3 Compact Pfitzer Juniper Juniperus chinensis 'Compact Pfitzer' 3 6 Pfitzer Juniper Juniperus chinensis 'Pfitzeriana' 4 15 Sea Green Juniper Juniperus chinensis 'Sea Green' 7 15 Hollywood Juniper Juniperus chinensis torulosa 20 10 Creeping Juniper Juniperus horizontalis 2 8 Parson's Juniper Juniperus squamata expansa 'Parsonii' 3 8 Canaert Juniper Juniperus virginiana 'Canaertii' 25 20 Crape Myrtle Lagerstroemia indica 2-10 2-10 Dwarf Crepe Myrtle Lagerstroemia indica 3 3 Texas Sage Leucophyllum frutescens 8 8 Dwarf Wax Myrtle Myrica cerifera var. pumila 6 6 Harbour Dwarf Nandina Nandina domestica 'Harbour Dwarf' 1 2 Fraser's ('Redtip') Photinia Photinia x fraseri 15 10 Indian Hawthorn Rhaphiolepis indica 3 5 Rose Rosa sp. 'Knock Out' 3 3 Savannah Holly Savannah Ilex opaca x I. attenuata 'Savannah' 20 15  
  
Table 3. Succulents Common Name Botanical Name Spineless Prickly Pear Opuntia cacanapa 'Ellisiana' Yucca Hesperaloe parviflora 'Texas Red', 'White' Yucca Palm Yucca faxoniana 'Giant Faxon' Beaked Yucca Yucca rostrata Yucca (Spanish Dagger) Yucca sp. Agave Agave havardiana Agave Agave lechuguilla Pineapple Pincushion Coryphantha sulcata Escobaria Escobaria missouriensis  
  
Table 4. Vines Common Name Botanical Name Asian Jasmine Trachelospermum asiaticum Coral Honeysuckle Lonicera sempervirens Crossvine Bignonia capreolata English Ivy Hedera helix Grape Ivy Cissus incisa Passionflower Passiflora incarnata Pitcher Clematis Clematis pitcheri Scarlet Leatherflower Clematis texensis Vinca Vinca sp.  
  
Table 5. Turfgrasses Common Name Botanical Name Bermudagrass Cynodon dactylon Buffalograss Buchloe dactyloides Zoysiagrass Zoysia matrella (Sod) Zoysiagrass Zoysia japonica (Seed) Zoysiagrass 'Emerald' Zoysia japonica x Zoysia tenuifolia 'Emerald' Zoysiagrass 'Palisades' Zoysia japonica 'Palisades'  
  
Table 6. Perennials Common Name Botanical Name Alert Aster Aster novi-belgii 'Alert' Artemesias Artemesia sp. Baptisias Baptisia sp. Coreopsis Coreopsis sp. Daylilies Hemerocalliss sp. Globe Thistle Echinops ruthenicus 'Platinum Blue' Golden Jubilee Agastache Agastache foeniculum 'Golden Jubilee' Goldsturm Rudbekia Rudbeckia fulgida var sullivanti 'Goldsturm' Lantanas Lantana sp. Rosemary Rosmarinus officinalis Russian Sage Perovskia atriplicifolia Salvias Salvia sp. Upright Verbena Verbena bonariensis (reseeding annual) Winecup Callirhoe involucrate Yarrows Achilliea sp.  
  
Table 7. Do Not Plant (in Wichita Falls) Common Name Botanical Name Leyland Cypress Loblolly Pine Magnolia Pin Oak River Birch Rocky Mountain Juniper Juniperus scopulorum Skyrocket Juniper Slash Pine Sweetgum Sycamore  
(Ord. No. 54-97, § 1(att. A), 6-3-1997; Ord. No. 51-2018, § 4, 10-2-2018) 
_____
6900. - CONDITIONED ZONING 

[Sec.] 6905. - Purpose. 
    This provision allows the Commission to impose, and the city council to approve, conditions and restrictions on the use of land and buildings when approving a change in zoning district classification when necessary to mitigate adverse impacts or incompatibilities of land uses which might otherwise result at a specific site by prohibiting a land use otherwise permitted in a zoning district if necessary to ensure the compatibility of land uses. The city council may also impose such conditions as deemed necessary not previously recommended by the Commission. 
    This provision is also applicable to request for a conditional use permit when necessary to mitigate adverse impacts or incompatibilities of land uses which might otherwise result at a specific site. The Commission shall have final authority for approving a conditional use permit in accordance with section 7200 and any conditions set forth under this provision. 
    This provision is applicable to nonresidential zoning districts, or other zoning district which were created for a specific purpose within a specific area including, but not limited to the RDD River Development District, CBD Central Business District and BA Brook Avenue District, and shall include residentially zoned districts when application is being made for a conditional use permit as provided in this ordinance. 
[Sec.] 6910. - General provisions. 
A.  If conditions are imposed at time of rezoning request or initial zoning, every condition or use restriction established under this [ordinance] shall be considered an amendment to the regulations of the district and shall be incorporated in the ordinance providing for the change in zoning. 
B.  The procedures applicable to a request for a change in zoning district classification or application for a conditional use permit, including notice, public hearings and written protests, shall apply to any modification of any condition or restriction imposed under this section. 
C.  This provision does not authorize a land use which is not a permitted use in a zoning district, or a conditional use if applicable, and no requirement of any ordinance shall be waived or made less strict through the application of this provision. The council may prohibit a land use otherwise permitted in a zoning district if necessary to ensure the compatibility of land uses. 
D.  The city staff, Commission, or city council may require the applicant to submit plans, a site layout, maps, sketches, drawings, written statements, impact analyses or other information if determined necessary to review, make a recommendation, or decision on the application. 
[Sec.] 6920. - Conditions and restrictions. 
    In order to safeguard the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens and to protect properties from adverse impacts and incompatibilities, the Commission may recommend and the city council may impose conditions or restrictions on rezoning and initial zoning, and the Commission may impose conditions on a conditional use permit request, including, but not be limited to, one or more of the following matters: 
A.  Setbacks for buildings or structures. 
B.  Public street access. 
C.  Drainage. 
D.  Vehicular traffic circulation, parking lots or spaces. 
E.  Screening or buffers. 
F.  Hours of operation. 
G.  Activities permitted on the property. 
H.  Building or structure heights. 
I.  Landscaping. 
J.  Impervious surface area. 
K.  Floor area ratio. 
L.  Pedestrian circulation. 
M.  Signs. 
N.  Mitigation of noise, fumes, odors, vibration, or airborne particles. 
O.  Exterior lighting. 
P.  Building facades and exterior construction materials. 
Q.  Special fire protection measures. 
R.  Outside storage and display of merchandise. 
S.  Refuse and waste storage. 
T.  Other conditions or restrictions as shown on a site plan. 
    The applicant for a zoning change, initial zoning or conditional use permit under this provision may be required to submit additional details, such as building elevations and construction materials, to properly evaluate the proposed use against neighboring conditions. Such a plan, if required, shall become part of the ordinance change for rezoning or initial zoning consideration by the Commission and/or the city council. 
[Sec.] 6925. - Zoning district map. 
    Any property approved for a change of zoning district classification with conditions or restrictions as authorized by this provision shall be shown on the zoning district map with the abbreviated designation of the district followed by (c), to show the property as a conditioned zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 69-95, § 1, 7-5-1995) 
7000. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES 
7100. - SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURE 

[Sec.] 7105. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the site plan review procedure is to allow for the evaluation of site and design features of uses other than single-family or duplex to ensure compatibility with adjacent and neighboring land uses; to afford a procedure for mitigating potentially unfavorable effects on adjacent or neighboring land uses; to ensure compatibility with the thoroughfare plan and other plans; and to ensure compliance with other regulations. Sections 7100 through 7199 shall be known as the site plan review procedure. 
(Ord. No. 11-96, § 1, 2-6-1996) 
[Sec.] 7110. - Jurisdiction and appeal process. 
A.  The Planning Division shall be responsible for the administration of the site plan review procedure, who may use the services of other city departments in the administration of this provision. 
B.  The Board of Adjustment shall be responsible to review and rule on administrative appeals in the interpretation of this provision under provisions as provided in section 7400. 
C.  The Commission will be responsible for reviewing conditions placed on a site plan if the applicant requests such an appeal to the Commission by filing a request with the director of community development or [his] designee along with any fee required. Such request shall be placed on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission, but not less than 15 days from the date of receipt of such application, using the public notice procedure prescribed in section 7615. 
(Ord. No. 11-96, § 1, 2-6-1996) 
[Sec.] 7115. - Submission requirements. 
A.  The site plan shall contain information necessary to evaluate the site for aesthetic appearance from public streets, its effect upon adjacent and neighboring land uses and the effect of such a plan upon traffic circulation. A site plan shall include the following information, and each element shall be detailed on the site plan with the appropriate notes: 
1.  Name, address, and phone number of the applicant. 
2.  Address and legal description of the property. 
3.  The location, height, and intended use of existing and proposed buildings. 
4.  The construction material of each building proposed or proposed to remain. 
5.  Location of proposed or proposed to remain elements such as power poles and associated easements, other easements as may exist on the site, fences, water retention or detention facilities, and other such features or elements. 
6.  The location and number of existing and proposed parking areas including handicapped spaces and required signage. 
7.  Location of loading and docking areas and associated maneuvering areas. Maneuvering areas shall be documented on the site plan by showing the turning radius of a tractor/trailer truck using a tractor with dual rear axles and a trailer with dual axles unless other docking facility is proposed using other types of vehicles, and approved as to the type of vehicles. The intent of this provision is to ensure obstruction-free maneuvering areas so as to not interfere or encroach with such required site elements as landscaping, parking and other such site elements. 
8.  Location and dimensioning of all ingress and egress points, curb cuts, adjacent rights-of-way and paving width, median locations and median openings, nearest streets intersecting this street and nearest signalized or otherwise controlled intersection. 
9.  The location, description and height of proposed and proposed to remain site improvements including signs, lighting, fencing, drainage improvements, etc. 
10.  The location, type and other such information as to proposed or proposed to remain landscaping materials. 
11.  The location of irrigation lines for proposed and proposed to remain landscaping. 
12.  Location, type and description of the condition of existing trees whose caliper exceeds four inches, and those trees proposed for removal whose caliper exceeds six inches. 
13.  Location of floodplain and floodway boundaries if property is within these areas. If a project is proposed within a flood plain, a finished floor elevation shall be shown on all proposed structures. 
14.  The location and dimension of boundary line easements and required yards of all existing and proposed buildings. 
15.  The types of adjoining land uses. 
16.  Location of all structures or other above grade elements proposed for demolition. If an area is proposed for fill, the applicant may be required to provide necessary calculations in conformance with the code of ordinances. In fulfilling this requirement, a grading plan may be required by the director of public works. 
B.  To maintain compatibility of land uses along arterials and highways, an elevation plan may be requested to review the proposal and its relationship to adjacent or neighboring land uses. Such a plan may become a part of the building permit and will be reevaluated prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy to ensure compliance to regulations herein. 
C.  The director of community development shall have final authority to approve a site plan and shall ensure that site elements and placement thereof are in the best interest of the community as to appearance as viewed from a public street, function in relation to on-site and off-site traffic circulation, and the proposal in relationship to adjacent or neighboring land uses. 
(Ord. No. 11-96, § 1, 2-6-1996) 
[Sec.] 7120. - Approval process. 
A.  The application for site plan review shall be filed with the director of community development or [his] designee, who shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove a site plan within 21 days of the submission. 
B.  A site plan receiving approval shall be considered preliminarily approved. Final approval shall be the result of determinations made by the building official as to conformance of the as-built conditions in relationship to the approved site plan. If it is determined by the building official that the built site is not in conformance with the approved site plan, the director of community development shall determine whether or not the built condition of the site is in conformance with section 7115A as it relates to the effect of the site conditions upon on-site and off-site traffic circulation and the effect upon adjacent or neighboring land uses. If the director determines that the built site is in conformance with the intent of this provision, he shall order that a certificate of occupancy be issued. Such order shall consider conformance to other regulations as may apply or [be] required by this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 11-96, § 1, 2-6-1996) 
[Sec.] 7125. - Review criteria. 
    Site plans will be reviewed and evaluated for consistency with the zoning ordinance and other ordinances or plans as may apply. 
(Ord. No. 11-96, § 1, 2-6-1996) 
[Sec.] 7130. - Lapse of approval. 
    A site plan approval shall be valid for one year from the date of approval unless prior to such expiration date a building permit is issued and construction has commenced, is currently underway and is being diligently pursued towards completion. 
    A site plan may be renewed for an additional year only upon application by the applicant; however, such renewal may be subject to additional conditions of approval. Under this provision, no previous site plan shall be considered unless in compliance with this provision. 
(Ord. No. 11-96, § 1, 2-6-1996) 
7200. - CONDITIONAL USE PROCEDURE 

[Sec.] 7205. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the conditional use procedure is to allow for review of uses which would not be appropriate generally or without certain restrictions throughout a zoning district but which, if controlled as to the number, area, location or relation to the neighborhood, would promote the health, safety, and welfare of the community. The procedure is intended to allow broad public review and evaluation of the proposed development and to ensure adequate mitigation of potentially unfavorable impacts. Sections 7200 through 7299 shall be known as the conditional use procedure. 
[Sec.] 7210. - Jurisdiction. 
    The director of community development shall be responsible for the administration of the conditional use procedure; and the Commission shall be responsible for review, evaluation and action on all applications. 
[Sec.] 7215. - Submission requirements. 
    An application for a conditional use permit shall be submitted to the director of community development, along with any applicable fee required by section 7650, at least 21 days prior to the regular meeting of the Commission. The application shall include the same submission requirements for site plan review in section 7115. 
[Sec.] 7220. - Public hearing and notice. 
    The director of community development shall schedule a public hearing at the next regular meeting of the Commission and shall provide notice as prescribed in section 7620. 
[Sec.] 7225. - Report of the director of community development. 
    The director of community development shall review the application and submit a report to the Commission. This report shall be made available to the applicant at least ten days prior to the public hearing. 
[Sec.] 7230. - Action by the Commission. 
    The Commission shall review the application against the review and evaluation criteria established in section 7235 and approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the conditional use application. 
[Sec.] 7235. - Review and evaluation criteria. 
    The conditional use application shall be reviewed and evaluated using the following criteria: 
A.  Conformance with applicable regulations and standards established by this zoning ordinance. 
B.  Compatibility with existing or permitted uses on abutting sites, in terms of building height, bulk and scale, setbacks and open spaces, landscaping and site development, and access and circulation features. 
C.  Potentially unfavorable effects or impacts on other existing or permitted uses on abutting sites, to the extent such impacts exceed those which reasonably may result from use of the site by a permitted use. 
D.  Location, lighting, and type of signs, and relation of signs to traffic control, and adverse effect on adjacent properties. 
E.  Safety and convenience of vehicular and pedestrian circulation in the vicinity, including traffic reasonably expected to be generated by the proposed use and other uses reasonable and anticipated in the area considering existing zoning and land uses in the area. 
[Sec.] 7240. - Conditional approval process. 
    The Commission may place conditions upon the issuance of a conditional use permit and may condition its approval to ensure compliance with the intent of this provision. Such conditions shall include, but are not limited to: 
A.  Limits on the floor area of a use. 
B.  Limits of the hours of operation of a use. 
C.  Limits on activities within the use. 
D.  Approval of building elevation designs. 
E.  Approval of uses ancillary to the primary use. 
F.  Site ingress and egress. 
G.  Approval of site circulation plan. 
H.  Location of parking. 
I.  Location of loading and docking facilities. 
J.  Need for fencing and type of required fencing or other screening devices. 
K.  Location, height and dimensions of signs. 
L.  Other conditions which may be appropriate to ensure compatibility with adjacent or neighboring land uses and traffic patterns. 
(Ord. No. 10-96, § 1, 2-6-1996) 
[Sec.] 7245. - Appeals process. 
    A decision of the Commission may be appealed to the city council by filing such appeal with the director of community development, along with any fee required by section 7650, within ten days of the Commission decision. The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council, but not less than 15 days from the date of receipt of such appeal, using the public notice procedure prescribed in section 7625. 
[Sec.] 7250. - Lapse of approval. 
    A conditional use permit shall be valid for one year from the date of approval unless prior to such expiration date a building permit is issued and construction is commenced and diligently pursued towards completion. 
    A conditional use permit may be renewed for an additional year by the Commission upon application. Such renewal may be subject to additional conditions of approval. 
[Sec.] 7255. - Modification of conditional use permit. 
    Minor modifications of a conditional use permit may be modified if the director of community development determines such conditions will not change the intent and affect of the approval by the Commission. 
7300. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

[Sec.] 7305. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the variance procedure is to provide relaxation of the terms of this zoning ordinance when owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of actions of the applicant a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. Sections 7300 through 7399 shall be known as the variance procedure. 
[Sec.] 7310. - Jurisdiction. 
    The director of community development shall be responsible for the administration of the variance procedure; and the Board of Adjustment shall be responsible for review, evaluation, and action on all applications. 
[Sec.] 7315. - Applicability. 
    A variance may be authorized only for development standards, including sizes of lot area, yards, setbacks, heights, etc. This procedure shall not be applicable to establishment or expansion of a use [which] is otherwise prohibited or to grant relief from administrative procedures. 
[Sec.] 7320. - Submission requirements. 
    The application for variance shall be submitted to the director of community development, along with any applicable fee required by section 7650, at least 21 days prior to the regular meeting of the Board of Adjustment. The application shall include the following: 
A.  Name, address, and phone number of the applicants. 
B.  Legal description of the property. 
C.  Description of the nature of the variance requested. 
D.  A narrative statement demonstrating that the requested variance conforms to the following standards: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
(2)  That literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of a right commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this ordinance. 
(3)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant. 
(4)  That the granting of the variance would otherwise be in harmony with the objectives of this ordinance and would not confer upon the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this ordinance to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
E.  Such other information as the director of community development may require. 
[Sec.] 7325. - Public hearing and notice. 
    The director of community development shall schedule a hearing by the Board of Adjustment by placing it on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board, and shall provide notice as prescribed in section 7630. 
[Sec.] 7330. - Report of the director of community development. 
    The director of community development shall review the variance application and submit a report to the Board of Adjustment. This report shall be made available to the applicant at least ten days prior to the public hearing. 
[Sec.] 7335. - Action by the Board of Adjustment. 
    The Board of Adjustment shall review the variance application against the review and evaluation criteria established in section 7340 and shall either approve or deny the request unless it requires additional information before it can make a final determination. In such case, the board shall request the specific information required and schedule a rehearing at its next regular meeting. 
    The concurring vote of four members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to grant a variance. 
[Sec.] 7340. - Review and evaluation criteria. 
    The application for variance shall be reviewed and evaluated using the following criteria: 
A.  The granting of the variance will not be contrary to the public interest. 
B.  Special conditions exist, other than financial hardship alone, whereby a literal enforcement of the terms of this ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship to the owner of the land. 
C.  The variance will not permit an activity upon the land which is not allowed by the terms of this ordinance. 
D.  The granting of the variance is consistent with the intent of this ordinance, is in harmony herewith, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
[Sec.] 7345. - Lapse of approval. 
    Any variance granted or authorized by the Board of Adjustment under the provisions of this ordinance shall authorize the issuance of the building permit for a period of 180 days from the date of favorable action of the board unless said board shall have in its action approved a longer period of time and has so shown such specific longer period in the minutes of its action. If the building permit shall not have been applied for within said 180-day period or such extended period, as the board may have specifically granted, then the variance shall be deemed to have been waived and all rights thereunder terminated. Such termination and waiver shall be without prejudice to a subsequent appeal, and such subsequent appeal shall be subject to the same regulation and requirement for hearing as herein specified for the original appeal. 
7400. - ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS 

[Sec.] 7405. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the administrative appeals procedure is to afford review of administrative actions. Appeals concerning the interpretation or administration of this ordinance may be made by any person aggrieved, where such action may be in error. Sections 7400 through 7499 shall be known as administrative appeals. 
[Sec.] 7410. - Jurisdiction. 
    Administrative appeals shall be reviewed, evaluated, and acted on by the Board of Adjustment. 
[Sec.] 7415. - Appeals. 
    Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, or board of the city affected by the administrative decision of the director of community development or other officials having responsibilities for the administration or implementation of this ordinance. 
[Sec.] 7420. - Submission of appeals. 
    All appeals shall be submitted within 15 days time after the decision is made upon which the appeal is based, by filing with the director of community development a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds upon which the appeal is based along with any fee required by section 7650. The burden of proof shall rest with the appellant to establish the necessary facts to warrant favorable action by the board. 
[Sec.] 7425. - Stay of proceedings. 
    An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
[Sec.] 7430. - Public hearing and notice. 
    The Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing at its next regularly scheduled meeting, but no sooner than 21 days. Notice of such public hearing shall be given as provided for in section 7630. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
[Sec.] 7435. - Action by Board of Adjustment. 
    The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under these provisions. 
7500. - AMENDMENT PROCEDURE 

[Sec.] 7505. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the amendment procedure is to provide for changes in the text of this zoning ordinance (text amendment) and the application of the ordinance to property within the city by means of the zoning maps (rezoning). Sections 7500 through 7599 shall be known as the amendment procedure. 
[Sec.] 7510. - Jurisdiction. 
    The city council shall have jurisdiction with respect to text amendments and rezoning. The Commission shall review and submit recommendations to the city council on all such matters. 
[Sec.] 7515. - Initiation of amendments. 
    The city council or the Commission may initiate the amendment procedure. A rezoning may also be initiated by the owners or authorized agents of property as prescribed in this [ordinance]. 
[Sec.] 7520. - Submission requirements. 
    An application for rezoning shall be submitted to the director of community development, along with any applicable fee required by section 7650, at least 21 days prior to the regular meeting of the Commission. The application shall include the following information: 
A.  Complete name, address (including ZIP code), and telephone number of applicant. 
B.  Map of the area proposed for rezoning. 
C.  Present use. 
D.  Present zoning district. 
E.  Proposed use. 
F.  Proposed zoning districts. 
G.  A vicinity map at a scale approved by the city Division of Community Development showing property lines, streets, existing and proposed zoning and such other items as the director of community development may require. 
[Sec.] 7525. - Public hearing and notice. 
    The director of community development shall schedule a public hearing at the next regular meeting of the Commission and shall provide notice as prescribed in section 7635. 
[Sec.] 7530. - Report of the director of community development. 
    The director of community development shall review the application for rezoning and submit a report to the Commission. This report shall be made available to the applicant at least ten days prior to the public hearing. 
[Sec.] 7535. - Action of the Commission. 
    The Commission shall determine as to whether the change is consistent with the objectives of the comprehensive plan and shall make recommendations to the city council. The Commission may recommend a more restrictive classification than that requested by the applicant. 
[Sec.] 7540. - Action by the city council. 
A.  Upon receiving a recommendation from the Commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the text amendment or rezoning. Notice of the public hearing shall be given and prescribed in section 7635. 
B.  If the city council finds that the proposed change is consistent with the objectives of this ordinance or the comprehensive plan, it may make such amendment by passage of an ordinance. 
C.  Such amendment shall require three-fourths vote of the city council if protest of amendment has been filed with the director of community development, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners [of] at least 20 percent of the lots included in the proposed change or of the lots or land immediately adjoining the same and extending 200 feet therefrom. 
[Sec.] 7545. - Resubmission of request. 
    Upon denial of a request for any change, amendment, or any other action requiring action on this ordinance by the Commission, Board of Adjustment, or city council, no resubmittal shall be made within six months from the date of the latest request, unless the applicant can show that substantial changes affecting the respective property have occurred. The Community Development Director shall determine if substantial changes have taken place. 
(Ord. No. 32-94, § 1, 3-16-1994) 
7600. - PUBLIC NOTICE PROCEDURES AND FEE SCHEDULE 

[Sec.] 7605. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this public notice procedure is to establish the minimum requirement for notice to be given with respect to public hearings required by this ordinance. The purpose of the fee schedule is to establish fee applications and permits in order to defray administrative costs. Sections 7600 through 7699 shall be known as public notice procedures and fee schedules. 
[Sec.] 7610. - Procedure for notifying property owners. 
    Whenever public notice calls for notifying property owners by mail, such notice shall be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the Wichita Falls Post Office, not less than ten days before the date set for the public hearing to all such owners who have rendered their property for city taxes as the ownership appears on the last official city tax roll. 
[Sec.] 7615. - Public notice for site plan review appeals. 
    Notice of public hearing by the Commission for a site plan review appeal shall be given as follows: Notice of the public hearing shall be posted at least 72 hours prior to the public hearing in accordance with the open meetings law. 
[Sec.] 7620. - Public notice for conditional use permits. 
    Notice of public hearing for a conditional use permit by the Commission shall be given as follows: 
A.  Notice shall be given to property owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the property on which a conditional use permit is being sought. Such notice shall be given at least ten days prior to the public hearing in accordance with procedures prescribed in section 7610. 
B.  Notice of the public hearing shall be posted at least 72 hours prior to the public hearing in accordance with the open meetings law. 
[Sec.] 7625. - Public notice of conditional use appeal. 
    Notice of public hearing by the city council for a conditional use permit appeal shall be given as follows: Notice of the public hearing shall be posted at least 72 hours prior to the public hearing in accordance with the open meetings law. 
[Sec.] 7630. - Public notice for variances and administrative appeals. 
    Notice of the public hearing for a variance or administrative appeals shall be given as follows: 
A.  Notice of the public hearing shall be posted at least 72 hours prior to the public hearing in accordance with the open meetings law. 
B.  Notice shall be given to the parties in interest by mail at least ten days prior to the public hearing date. 
C.  At least 15 days prior to the date of the Zoning Board of Adjustment public hearing, the applicant or his agent shall place a sign or signs on the property for which the variance or administrative appeal has been submitted. Such signs shall be placed on the property, within ten feet and parallel to any street right-of-way, and shall be visible from such streets. These signs shall be furnished by the city for a fee prescribed in this ordinance, and the applicant shall use best effort to maintain posting throughout the period of the public hearings. 
D.  Written notice shall be given to property owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the property on which a variance is being sought. Such notice shall be given at least ten days prior to the public hearing in accordance with procedures prescribed in section 7610. 
(Ord. No. 76-86, § 1, 9-16-1986) 
[Sec.] 7635. - Public notice for zoning amendments. 
    Notice of zoning amendments shall be given as follows: 
A.  Commission public hearing. 
1.  Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least 15 days prior to such public hearing date in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
2.  Written notice shall be given to property owners of real property of the area of the lots or land included in such proposed change and of the lots or land immediately adjoining the same and extending 200 feet therefrom. Such notice shall be given in accordance with the procedure prescribed in section 7610. 
3.  Notice of the public hearing shall be posted at least 72 hours prior to the public hearing in accordance with the open meetings law. 
B.  City council public hearing. The notice of the city council public hearing on a zoning amendment will be similar to the procedure prescribed for the Commission public hearing. However, such notice shall not be given concurrently with the Commission notice. 
C.  At least 15 days prior to the date of the Commission public hearing, the applicant or his agent shall place a sign or signs on the property proposed for rezoning. Such signs shall be placed on the property, within ten feet and parallel to any street right-of-way, and shall be visible from such street. These signs shall be furnished by the city for a fee prescribed in this ordinance, and the applicant shall use best effort to maintain posting throughout the period of the public hearings. 
[Sec.] 7650. - Fee schedule. 
    Fees shall be established as provided in the development fee ordinance [sections 23-16 and 23-17 of this Code of Ordinances] adopted by the city council, which may from time to time adjust and revise the fees established, without amending this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 83-85, § 9, 8-6-1985; Ord. No. 28-86, §§ 11, 12, 4-1-1986; Ord. No. 76-86, § 1, 9-16-1986; Ord. No. 104-86, § 1, 12-16-1986; Ord. No. 89-87, § 2, 9-15-1987) 
[Sec.] 7700. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this zoning ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Community Development director. Sections 7700 through 7799 shall be called enforcement. 
[Sec.] 7705. - Duties of the director of community development. 
    For the purpose of this ordinance, the director of community development shall have the following duties: 
A.  Responsible for the general administration of the zoning program as outlined in this ordinance and ensuring compliance with its various provisions; 
B.  Upon finding that any of the provisions of this ordinance are being violated, notify in writing the persons responsible for such violations, ordering the action necessary to correct such violation; 
C.  Order discontinuance of illegal uses of land, buildings, or structures; 
D.  Order removal of illegal buildings or structures or illegal additions or structural alterations; 
E.  Order discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or 
F.  Take any other action authorized by this ordinance to ensure compliance therewith or to prevent violations thereof. 
This may include the issuance of and action on zoning permits and certificate of occupancy permits and such other administrative duties as are permissible under the law. 
7800. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Board of Adjustment, Texas Local Government Code §§ 211.008-211.011. 

[Sec.] 7805. - Establishment. 
    [There] is hereby created and established a Board of Adjustment which shall be organized and have all the powers and authority as set forth in the Charter of the City of Wichita Falls, Texas, and Texas Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq., or as the same is hereafter amended. 
[Sec.] 7810. - Organization and memberships. 
    The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members who shall be residents of the city. The city council shall also appoint one ex-officio, non-voting member. The ex-officio member of the board does not have to be a resident of the city and shall be nominated by the military installation, Commander of the 82nd Training Wing. The board members shall be appointed by the city council. The terms of such members shall be for a period of two years; however, the terms shall be so staggered commencing on December 31 so that not more than three will be appointed during any one calendar year. The length of service of any member of the Board of Adjustment shall not be for more than six consecutive years; however, a member may be reappointed after an absence of two years. The city council shall nominate one of the voting members as chairperson, and the chairperson shall appoint one of the remaining voting members vice-chairperson, both of which shall not serve more than a two-year term. The city council also shall appoint four alternate members who shall serve in the absence of one or more of the regular voting members. All appointees shall serve without compensation and may not hold an elective office of the state or political subdivision thereof. 
(Ord. No. 02-2016, § 2, 1-5-2016, eff. 2-5-2016) 
[Sec.] 7815. - Vacancies and removal from office. 
    Members of the Board of Adjustment may be removed by the city council upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant for any cause. 
[Sec.] 7820. - Quorum. 
    For the purpose of transacting any business, four voting members of the Board of Adjustment shall constitute a quorum and actions of the board shall be approved by a majority vote; except that a concurring vote of four voting members of the board shall be required to make a favorable determination for an application on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance or to effect any variation in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 02-2016, § 3, 1-5-2016, eff. 2-5-2016) 
[Sec.] 7825. - Rules of procedure. 
    The Board of Adjustment shall adopt its own rules of order and procedure to regulate both the actual meeting of the board and the activities directly related, thereto. The rules shall deal only with procedural matters and shall be available to the public and kept on file in the Community Development Department. 
[Sec.] 7830. - Public meeting required. 
    All meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be open to the public. The board shall meet not less than once each month or as necessary. 
[Sec.] 7835. - Powers and duties. 
    The Board of Adjustment shall have the power and it shall be its duty: 
A.  Administrative appeal. To hear and decide appeals, where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by any administrative official of the city in the enforcement of this ordinance. The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any such order, requirement, decision, or determination; or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance; or to effect any variation in the ordinance. 
B.  Variance. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship and the granting of the variance would provide substantial justice conforming with the spirit and intent hereof. 
[Sec.] 7840. - Records. 
    The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or if absent of failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep a record of its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the Community Development Department and shall be a public record. 
7900. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Commission, Texas Local Government Code § 211.007. 

[Sec.] 7905. - Organization and membership. 
    The Commission shall consist of nine members appointed by the city council. The city council shall also appoint one ex-officio, non-voting member. The ex-officio member of the board shall be nominated by the military installation, Commander of the 82nd Training Wing. The term of each member shall be for a period of two years; however, the terms shall be staggered. The city council shall also appoint two alternate members who shall serve in the absence of one or more of the regular voting members when requested to do so by the director of community development or [his] designee. Terms for members of the Commission shall expire on December 31. 
(Ord. No. 110-93, § 1, 9-7-1993; Ord. No. 105-99, § 3, 10-5-1999; Ord. No. 02-2016, § 4, 1-5-2016, eff. 2-5-2016) 
[Sec.] 7910. - Quorum. 
    For the purpose of transacting any business, five voting members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum; and all actions of the Commission shall be approved by a vote of no less than five affirmative votes. 
(Ord. No. 02-2016, § 5, 1-5-2016, eff. 2-5-2016) 
[Sec.] 7915. - Powers and duties. 
    The Commission shall have the power and it shall be its duty: 
A.  To review and take action on appeals to the site plan review procedure. 
B.  To conduct public hearings, review and take action on a conditional use permit application. 
C.  To conduct public hearings on any applications or proposals for any amendment, supplement, or other change to this zoning ordinance and make recommendations to the city council. 
D.  To act with and assist all other municipal and governmental agencies, and particularly the city council, in formulating and executing proper plans of municipal development and growth including annexation and disannexation. 
E.  To act in an advisory capacity to the city council on issues related to planning and zoning as may be assigned by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 105-99, § 2, 10-5-1999) 
8000. - ZONING DISTRICT MAP 

[Sec.] 8010. - Delineation of zoning districts. 
    The boundaries of the zoning districts described in this zoning ordinance are delineated on the zoning map of the city. The zoning map, together with all legends, symbols, notations, references, district boundaries, and other information thereon, shall be considered part of this ordinance as if the same were set forth herein in detail. The zoning map may be prepared in sections as required to adequately portray the boundaries of districts. 
[Sec.] 8020. - Official zoning map. 
    Three original, official, and identical copies of the zoning map are hereby adopted bearing the signature of the mayor and attestation of the city clerk and shall be filed and maintained as follows: 
A.  One copy shall be filed with the city clerk and retained as the original record and shall not be changed in any manner. 
B.  One copy shall be filed with the Community Development director and shall be maintained up-to-date by the director of community development by posting thereof changes and subsequent amendments. 
C.  One copy shall be filed in the Community Development Department and shall be maintained up-to-date by the director of community development by posting thereof all changes and amendments. 
[Sec.] 8030. - Boundaries of zoning districts. 
    The zoning district boundary lines shown on the zoning map are usually along streets, alleys, property lines, or extensions thereof. When uncertainty exists with respect to the zoning districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, alleys, or highways shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
B.  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines. 
C.  In case of a district boundary line dividing a platted lot into two parts, the district boundary line shall be construed to be the nearest property line. 
D.  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections A through C of this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
[Sec.] 8040. - Clarification of boundary location. 
    All questions concerning the exact location of district boundary lines or the meaning and intent of textual provisions of this ordinance shall be determined by the Commission according to the rules and regulations which may be adopted by it. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1966 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1966 Code, as supplemented, which are included herein. Sections of the 1966 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. 
1966 Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-2 1-4 1-11 1-5 1-14 1-6 1-13 2-1 2-31 2-01(b) 2-26 2-01(c) 2-27 2-01(d) 2-28 2-01(f) 2-29 2-2 2-32 2-3(a) 2-421 2-3(c) 2-422 2-4 26-1 2-7 98-1 2-8 2-1091 2-9(a) 2-996 2-9(g) 2-997 2-10 2-30 2-11(a) 2-454 2-33 2-453 2-34 2-452 2-35 2-451 2-36 2-455 2-37 2-456 2-38 2-457 2-39 2-486 2-40 2-487 2-41 2-488 2-42 2-489 2-44(a) 2-516, 2-517 2-44(b) 2-517 2-45 2-518 2-51 2-546-2-548 2-60 2-576 2-61 2-577 2-67 2-606 2-68 2-607 2-69 2-608 2-70 2-609 2-76 2-636 2-77 2-637 2-78 2-639 2-79 2-640 2-80 2-641 2-81 2-642 2-87 2-636 2-88(a) 2-638 2-88(b) 2-639 2-88(c) 2-639 2-89 2-671 2-90 2-673 2-95 2-701 2-97 2-731 2-98 2-732 2-98.1 2-761 2-98.2 2-762 2-99(a) 2-818 2-100 2-817 2-101 2-816 2-106 2-846 2-107 2-847 2-108 2-848 2-144 2-301 2-145 2-302 2-146 2-303 2-160.6 62-1 2-160.7 62-66 2-160.7.1(a) 62-36 2-160.7.1(b) 62-37 2-160.7.1(c) 62-38 2-160.7.1(d) 62-39 2-160.7.2 62-66 2-160.7.3 62-7 2-160.7.4 62-96 2-160.7.4(1) 62-97 2-160.7.4(2) 62-98 2-160.7.4(3) 62-99 2-160.7.5 62-6 2-160.7.6 62-2 2-160.7.7 62-5 2-160.7.8 62-4 2-174 2-331 2-175 2-333 2-176 2-334 2-177 2-335 2-178 2-336 2-179 2-339 2-180 2-337 2-181 2-338 2-182 2-340 2-183 2-332 2-241 2-1032, 2-1033 2-242 2-1032 2-243 2-1034 2-244 2-1035 2-246 2-1036 2-247 2-1037 2-248 2-1038 2-249 2-1039 2-250 2-1040 4-7 6-4 4-9(a) 6-5 4-10 6-6 4-21 6-3 6-6(c) 102-256 7-1 22-676 7-2 22-677 7-14 22-26 22-481 22-511 22-571 50-61 7-15 22-27 App. B, §§ 6766, 6767 7-16 22-482 7-17 22-572 7-18 22-512 7-25 22-601 7-26 22-602 7-27 22-603 7-28 22-604 7-29 22-605 7-30 22-606 7-31 22-607 7-33 22-608 7-54 22-637 7-55 22-638 7-56 22-641 7-57 22-636 7-58 22-639 7-59 22-640 7-60 22-642 7-61 22-643 7-62 22-644 7-63 22-645 7-64 22-646 7-65 22-647 7-66 22-648 8-1 26-61 8-2 26-91 8-3 26-63 8-4 26-31 8-5 26-92 8-6 26-93 8-7 26-95 8-8 26-96 8-9 26-94 8-10 26-97 8-11 26-98 8-12 26-99 8-13 26-100 8-14 26-62 8-18 26-31 8-152 26-225 8-153 26-31 8-154 26-226 8-155 26-227 8-156 26-229 8-157 26-230 8-158 26-228 8-159 26-231 8-160 26-232 8-161 26-233 8-162 26-234 8-165 26-223 8-166 26-235 8-166(c) 26-239 8-166(d) 26-240 8-167 26-332 10-1 30-28 10-2 30-29 10-3 30-31 10-4 30-30 10-5 30-33 10-6 30-32 10-7 30-26 10-8 30-27 10-9 30-34 10-10 30-35 11-20 2-876 12-1 34-26 12-2 34-27 12-5 34-28 12-6 34-29 12-7 34-30 13-11 66-27 13-12 66-26 13-13 66-92 13-14 66-96 13-15 66-97 13-16 66-98 13-17 66-92 13-18 66-61 13-20 66-62 13-21 66-63 13-22 66-29 13-23 66-30 13-31 66-127 13-32 66-126 13-33 66-128 13-34 66-131 13-35 66-132 13-36 66-133 13-37 66-129 13-38 66-130 13-51 66-162 13-52 66-161 13-53 66-163 13-54 66-164 13-55 66-165 13-56 66-166 14-1 22-56 14-2 22-111 14-4 22-146 14-4(A) 22-147 14-4(B) 22-148 14-5 22-149 14-6 22-150 14-7 22-151 14-8 22-155 14-9 22-152 14-10 22-153 14-11 22-112 14-12 22-154 14-19 22-156 14-22 22-57 14-23 22-408 14-24 22-409 14-25 22-113 14-26 22-114 14-27 22-115 14-28 22-402 14-29 22-403 14-30 22-405 14-31 22-116 14-32 22-117 14-33 22-406 14-34 22-407 14-35 22-401 14-37 22-404 14-64(A) 22-186 14-64(B) 22-186 14-64(C) 22-186 14-64(D) 22-186 14-64(E) 22-188 14-65 22-189 14-66 22-191 14-67 22-190 14-68 22-192 14-69 22-193 14-70 22-187 14-71 22-194 14-72 22-221 14-73 22-222 14-74 22-223 14-75 22-224 14-80 22-255 14-81 22-256 14-82 22-436 14-83 22-437 14-84 22-438 14-85 22-439 14-86 22-440 14-87 22-441 14-88 22-442 14-89 22-443 14-90 22-444 14-91 22-445 14-92 22-446 14-94 22-447 14-95 22-448 14-96 22-449 14-97 22-450 14-98 22-451 14-99 22-452 14-100 22-453 14-101 22-454 141/2-1 42-147 141/2-2(a) 42-181 141/2-2(b) 42-184 141/2-2(c) 42-182 141/2-2(d) 42-185 141/2-2(e) 42-187 141/2-2(f) 42-183 141/2-3 42-186 141/2-4 42-148 141/2-5 42-149 141/2-6 42-150 141/2-7 42-151 141/2-8 42-152 141/2-9 42-153 141/2-10 42-154 141/2-11 42-155 141/2-12 42-188 141/2-13 42-189 15-1(a) 50-93 15-1(b) 50-95 15-1(c) 50-96 15-1(d) 50-94 15-1(e) 50-97 15-1(f) 50-98 15-1(g) 50-98 15-1(h) 50-99 15-1(i) 50-100 15-1(j) 50-94 15-4 50-1 15-16 50-62 15-97 50-33 15-123 50-31 15-124 50-32 15-125 50-35 15-127 50-34 151/2-1 54-27 151/2-2 54-28 151/2-3 54-29 151/2-4 54-36 151/2-16 54-26 151/2-27 54-30 151/2-28 54-31 151/2-29 54-63 151/2-30 54-32 151/2-31 54-33 151/2-32 54-34 151/2-33 54-35 151/2-44 54-61 151/2-45 54-62 151/2-46 54-64 151/2-47 54-65 151/2-48 54-66 151/2-59 54-91 151/2-60 54-92 151/2-61 54-93 151/2-62 54-94 151/2-63 54-95 17-2 90-1 17-2.1 90-2 17-3 90-62 17-4 90-62 17-5 90-63 17-6 90-64 17-7 90-65 17-8 90-66 17-12 90-32 17-13 90-61 17-14 90-96 17-15 90-97 17-17 90-34 17-18 90-35 17-19 90-126 17-20 90-127 17-21 90-156 17-22 90-157 17-24 82-101 17-57 26-691 17-60 26-694 17-65 26-692 17-66 26-693 17-67 90-186 17-68 90-188 17-69 90-190 17-70 90-191 17-71 90-192 17-72 90-187 17-73 90-189 17-74 90-193 17-76 90-221 17-77 90-224 17-78 90-225 17-79 90-226 17-80 90-227 17-81 90-223 17-82 90-222 18-12 2-366 18-46 46-184 18-47 46-186 18-48 46-188 18-49 46-189 18-50 46-185 18-74 58-27 18-75 58-28 18-76 58-26 18-77 58-29 18-78 58-66-58-73 18-79 58-30 18-80 58-30 18-81 58-31 18-82 58-32 18-83 58-33 18-85 58-34 18-86 58-35 18-87 58-36 18-88 58-37 18-99 58-101 18-100 58-102 18-101 58-106 18-102 58-107 18-103 58-108 18-104 58-109 18-105 58-110 18-106 58-103 18-107 58-104 18-108 58-136 18-109 58-138 18-110(a) 58-139 18-110(b) 58-140 18-112 58-141 18-113 58-142 18-114(a) 58-137 181/4-1 22-541 181/4-2 22-542 181/4-3 22-543 191/4-1 46-218 191/4-2(a)(1) 46-220 191/4-2(a)(2) 46-220 191/4-2(a)(3) 46-221 191/4-2(a)(4) 46-222 191/4-3 46-223 191/4-4 46-224 191/4-6 46-219 20-3 94-7 20-6 94-8 20-7 94-9 20-11(a) 78-61 20-11(b) 78-62 20-11(d) 78-63 20-12 94-4 20-14 94-5 20-15 94-6 20-17.1 94-3 20-19 94-1 20-20 94-2 20-22 58-105 20-24(a) 78-1 20-25 78-82 20-26 78-25 20-27 78-26 20-32 46-19 20-33 46-20 22-1(a) 82-56 22-1(a)(2) 82-58 22-1(a)(3) 82-59 22-1(a)(6) 82-60 22-1(a)(8) 82-62 22-1(a)(9) 82-63 22-1(a)(10) 82-64 22-1(a)(11) 82-65 22-1(a)(12) 82-66 22-1(b) 82-57 22-3 82-67 22-4 82-68 22-5 82-69 22-13 82-26 22-14 82-27 22-15 82-28 22-16 82-29 22-27 82-96 22-31 82-97 22-32.1 82-98 22-34 82-99 22-40 82-100 22-57 82-131 22-58 82-132 22-59 82-133 22-90(a) 82-161 22-90(b) 82-162 22-91 82-163 22-92 82-164 22-93 82-165 22-94 82-166 22-95 82-167 23-17(1) 2-906 23-17(2) 2-907 23-17(3) 2-908 23-17(4) 2-909 23-17(5) 2-910 23-17(6) 2-911 23-17(7) 2-911 23-17(8) 2-911 23-17(9) 2-911 23-17(10) 2-911 23-17(11) 2-911 23-17(12) 2-911 23-17(13) 2-911 23-17(14) 2-912 24-9 70-1 24-19 70-31 24-20 70-32 24-21 70-33 25-49 10-81 25-51 10-82 25-62 10-111 25-63 10-112 25-64 10-141 25-65 10-142 25-66 10-144 25-67 10-147 25-68 10-113 25-69 10-143 25-70 10-145 25-71 10-146 26-1 86-31 26-2 86-32 26-3 86-33 26-4 86-34 26-5 86-35 26-6 86-2 26-8 86-1 27-1 90-35 27-2 94-10 27-3 94-11 27-4 94-12 27-5 94-13 27-6 94-14 27-20 94-66 27-21 94-67 27-22 94-68 27-23 94-70 27-24.1 94-96 27-24.2 94-97 27-24.5 94-98 27-24 94-69 27-25 94-99 27-33 94-162 27-34 94-163 27-35 94-191 27-36 94-192 27-37 94-193 27-38 94-194 27-38.1 94-164 27-38.2 94-221 27-38.3 94-222 27-38.4 94-223 27-38.5 94-224 27-38.6 94-225 27-38.7 94-226 27-38.8 94-227 27-39 94-286 27-40 94-287 27-41 94-288 27-42 94-289 27-43 94-256 27-44 94-257 27-45 94-258 27-51 94-316 27-52 94-319 27-53 94-320 27-54 94-321 27-55 94-322 27-56 94-323 27-57 94-324 27-57.1 94-325 27-58 94-326 27-59 94-327 27-60 94-317 27-61 94-318 28-6.1 98-61 28-8 98-31 28-9(a) 10-51 28-21 98-92 28-22 98-93 28-23 98-94 28-24 98-95 28-25 98-96 28-26 98-91 28-30 98-126 28-31 98-127 28-32 98-128 29-2 102-1 29-3 102-31 29-6 102-32 29-17(b) 102-34 29-18 102-2 29-19 102-35 29-20 102-36 29-25 102-3 29-26 102-103 29-42 102-101 29-43 102-102 29-44 102-104 29-45 102-105 29-52 102-106 29-70 102-33 29-89 102-107 29-90 102-108 29-91 102-109 29-91.3 102-110 29-105 102-144 29-106 102-145 29-107 102-142 29-108 102-146 29-114(a) 102-147 29-114(c) 102-148 29-115 102-149 29-116 102-150 29-117 102-152 29-120 102-151 29-122 102-152 29-124 102-153 29-125 102-154 29-126 102-143 29-127 102-181 29-128 102-183 29-129 102-182 29-130 102-184 29-131 102-185 29-132 102-186 29-133 102-187 29-134 102-188 29-135 102-189 29-136 102-190 29-137 102-191 29-138 102-141 29-147 102-223 29-148.1 102-224 29-151 102-225 29-152 102-226 29-153 102-222 29-197 102-66 29-198 102-67 29-199 102-68 29-200 102-69 29-201 102-70 29-202 102-71 29-203 102-72 29-204 102-73 29-215 102-39 29-216 102-37 29-217 102-38 30-10.3(a) 82-222 30-10.3(a)(1) 82-223 30-10.3(a)(2) 82-224 30-10.3(a)(3) 82-225 30-10.3(a)(4) 82-226 30-10.3(a)(5) 82-227 30-10.3(a)(6) 82-228 32-1 106-281 32-2 106-282 32-4 106-248 32-5 106-249 32-6 106-247 32-8 106-250 32-34 106-186 32-35(a) 106-216 32-37 106-187 32-38 106-188 32-41 106-217 32-56 106-246 32-57 106-251 32-68 106-531 32-69 106-532 32-70 106-533 32-71 106-534 32-72 106-535 32-73 106-536 32-74 106-537 32-75 106-538 32-86 106-311 32-87(a) 106-371 32-87(b) 106-372 32-87(c) 106-374 32-87(d) 106-375 32-88 106-376 32-89(a) 106-341 32-89(b) 106-342 32-89(c) 106-343 32-89(d) 106-344 32-90(a) 106-312 32-90(b) 106-373 32-90(c) 106-313 32-121(a) 106-568 32-121(b) 106-596 32-122 106-567 32-123 106-566 32-124(a)(1) 106-816 32-124(a)(2) 106-817 32-124(b) 106-818 32-124(c) 106-819 32-124(d) 106-820 32-124(e) 106-821 32-124(f) 106-822 32-125(a) 106-851 32-125(b) 106-852 32-125(c) 106-853 32-125(d) 106-854 32-125(e) 106-856 32-126(a) 106-751 32-126(b) 106-752 32-126(c) 106-753 32-126(d) 106-754 32-126(e) 106-755 32-126(f) 106-756 32-126(g) 106-757 32-126(h) 106-758 32-126(i) 106-759 32-127(a) 106-760 32-127(b) 106-761 32-127(c) 106-762 32-127(d) 106-763 32-127(e) 106-764 32-127(f) 106-765 32-127(g) 106-766 32-127(h) 106-767 32-128(a) 106-881 32-128(b) 106-882 32-128(c) 106-883 32-128(d) 106-884 32-128(e) 106-885 32-128(f) 106-886 32-128(g) 106-887 32-128(h) 106-888 32-128(i) 106-889 32-128(j) 106-890 32-128(k) 106-891 32-128(l) 106-892 32-128(m) 106-893 32-129 106-721 32-129(1) 106-722 32-129(2) 106-723 32-130 106-569 32-131 106-597 32-132 106-626 32-132(1) 106-627 32-132(2) 106-628 32-132(3) 106-629 32-132(4) 106-630 32-132(5) 106-631 32-132(6) 106-632 32-132(7) 106-633 32-132(8) 106-634 32-132(9) 106-635 32-133 106-661 32-133(1) 106-662 32-133(2) 106-663 32-133(3) 106-664 32-133(4) 106-665 32-134(a) 106-614 32-134(b) 106-615 32-134.1(a) 106-691 32-134.1(b) 106-692 32-134.1(c) 106-693 32-134.2(a) 106-921 32-134.2(b) 106-922 32-134.3(a) 106-923  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2001 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2001 Code, as supplemented, which are included herein. Sections of the 2001 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances included within this Code, see the table immediately following this table. 
2001 Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-4 1-4 1-5 1-5 1-6 1-6 1-7 1-7 1-8 1-8 1-9 1-9 1-10 1-10 1-11 1-11 1-12 1-12 1-13 1-13 1-14 1-14 1-15 1-15 2-26 2-26 2-27 2-27 2-28 2-28 2-29 2-29 2-30 2-30 2-56 2-31 2-57 2-32 2-126 2-126 2-127 2-127 2-128 2-128 2-129 2-129 2-130 2-130 2-131 2-131 2-301 2-301 2-302 2-302 2-303 2-303 2-331 2-331 2-332 2-332 2-333 2-333 2-334 2-334 2-335 2-335 2-336 2-336 2-337 2-337 2-338 2-338 2-339 2-339 2-340 2-340 2-366 2-366 2-367 2-367 2-368 2-368 2-369 2-369 2-380 2-380 2-381 2-381 2-382 2-382 2-383 2-383 2-390 2-390 2-391 2-391 2-392 2-392 2-393 2-393 2-421 2-421 2-422 2-422 2-451 2-451 2-452 2-452 2-453 2-453 2-454 2-454 2-455 2-455 2-456 2-456 2-457 2-457 2-486 2-486 2-487 2-487 2-488 2-488 2-489 2-489 2-516 2-516 2-517 2-517 2-518 2-518 2-546 2-546 2-547 2-547, 2-548 2-576 2-576 2-577 2-577 2-606 2-606 2-607 2-607 2-608 2-608 2-609 2-609 2-636 2-636 2-637 2-637 2-638 2-638 2-639 2-639 2-640 2-640 2-641 2-641 2-642 2-642 2-671 2-671 2-672 2-672 2-673 2-673 2-701 2-701 2-731 2-731 2-732 2-732 2-761 2-761 2-762 2-762 2-816 2-816 2-817 2-817 2-818 2-818 2-846 2-846 2-847 2-847 2-848 2-848 2-876 2-876 2-906 2-906 2-907 2-907 2-908 2-908 2-909 2-909 2-910 2-910 2-911 2-911 2-912 2-912 2-996 2-996 2-1001 2-997 2-1031 2-1032 2-1032 2-1033 2-1033 2-1034 2-1034 2-1035 2-1036 2-1036 2-1037 2-1037 2-1038 2-1038 2-1039 2-1039 2-1040 2-1040 2-1091 2-1091 6-1 6-1 6-2 6-2 6-4 6-4 6-6 6-5 6-7 6-6 10-51 10-51 10-81 10-81 10-82 10-82 10-111 10-111 10-112 10-112 10-113 10-113 10-141 10-141 10-142 10-142 10-143 10-143 10-144 10-144 10-145 10-145 10-146 10-146 10-147 10-147 14-1 14-1 14-2 14-2 14-3 14-3 14-4 14-4 14-5 14-5 14-6 14-6 14-7 14-7 14-8 14-8 14-9 14-9 14-36 14-41 14-66 14-71 14-67 14-72 14-68 14-73 14-69 14-74 14-70 14-75 14-71 14-76 14-72 14-77 14-73 14-78 14-74 14-79 14-75 14-80 14-76 14-81 14-106 14-106 14-107 14-107 14-109 14-108 14-110 14-109 14-111 14-110 14-112 14-111 14-113 14-112 14-114 14-113 14-115 14-114 14-116 14-115 14-117 14-116 14-118 14-117 14-119 14-118 14-146 14-150 14-147 14-151 14-148 14-152 14-149 14-153 14-150 14-154 14-176 14-177 14-177 14-178 14-178 14-179 14-206 14-197 14-207 14-218 14-208 14-219 14-209 14-220 14-210 14-221 14-211 14-222 14-212 14-223 14-213 14-224 14-214 14-242 14-215 14-243 14-216 14-244 14-217 14-245 14-219 14-246 14-236 14-297 14-237 14-298 14-266 14-330 14-267 14-331 14-268 14-332 14-269 14-333 14-270 14-334 14-271 14-335 14-272 14-336 14-273 14-337 14-274 14-338 14-275 14-339 14-276 14-340 14-306 14-369 14-307 14-370 14-308 14-371 14-309 14-372 14-310 14-373 14-311 14-374 14-312 14-375 14-313 14-376 14-314 14-377 14-315 14-378 14-316 14-379 14-317 14-380 14-321 14-404 14-322 14-405 14-323 14-406 14-324 14-407 14-346 14-428 14-347 14-429 14-348 14-430 14-349 14-431 14-350 14-432 14-351 14-433 14-352 14-434 14-381 14-452 14-382 14-453 14-383 14-454 14-384 14-455 14-385 14-456 14-386 14-457 14-387 14-458 14-388 14-459 14-416 14-487 14-417 14-488 14-418 14-489 14-419 14-490 14-420 14-491 14-421 14-492 14-422 14-493 14-423 14-494 14-424 14-495 14-425 14-496 14-426 14-497 14-451 14-518 14-452 14-519 14-453 14-520 14-454 14-521 18-26 18-43 18-27 18-44 18-28 18-45 18-29 18-46 22-26 22-26 22-27 22-27 22-56 22-56 22-57 22-57 22-111 22-111 22-112 22-112 22-113 22-113 22-114 22-114 22-115 22-115 22-116 22-116 22-117 22-117 22-146 22-146 22-147 22-147 22-148 22-148 22-149 22-149 22-150 22-150 22-151 22-151 22-152 22-152 22-153 22-153 22-154 22-154 22-155 22-155 22-156 22-156 22-186 22-186 22-187 22-187 22-188 22-188 22-189 22-189 22-190 22-190 22-191 22-191 22-192 22-192 22-193 22-193 22-194 22-194 22-221 22-221 22-222 22-222 22-223 22-223 22-224 22-224 22-255 22-255 22-256 22-256 22-346 22-346 22-347 22-347 22-348 22-348 22-349 22-349 22-350 22-350 22-351 22-351 22-352 22-352 22-353 22-353 22-354 22-354 22-355 22-355 22-356 22-356 22-357 22-357 22-358 22-358 22-359 22-359 22-360 22-360 22-361 22-361 22-362 22-362 22-401 22-401 22-402 22-402 22-403 22-403 22-404 22-404 22-405 22-405 22-406 22-406 22-407 22-407 22-408 22-408 22-409 22-409 22-436 22-436 22-437 22-437 22-438 22-438 22-439 22-439 22-440 22-440 22-441 22-441 22-442 22-442 22-443 22-443 22-444 22-444 22-445 22-445 22-446 22-446 22-447 22-447 22-448 22-448 22-449 22-449 22-450 22-450 22-451 22-451 22-452 22-452 22-453 22-453 22-454 22-454 22-481 22-481 22-482 22-482 22-511 22-511 22-512 22-512 22-541 22-541 22-542 22-542 22-543 22-543 22-571 22-571 22-572 22-572 22-601 22-601 22-602 22-602 22-603 22-603 22-604 22-604 22-605 22-605 22-606 22-606 22-607 22-607 22-608 22-608 22-636 22-636 22-637 22-637 22-638 22-638 22-639 22-639 22-640 22-640 22-641 22-641 22-642 22-642 22-643 22-643 22-644 22-644 22-645 22-645 22-646 22-646 22-647 22-647 22-648 22-648 22-676 22-676 22-677 22-677 22-700 22-700 22-701 22-701 22-710 22-710 22-711 22-711 26-1 26-1 26-31 26-31 26-61 26-61 26-62 26-62 26-63 26-63 26-64 26-64 26-65 26-65 26-91 26-91 26-92 26-92 26-93 26-93 26-94 26-94 26-95 26-95 26-96 26-96 26-97 26-97 26-98 26-98 26-99 26-99 26-100 26-100 26-126 26-126 26-127 26-127 26-156 26-156 26-157 26-157 26-158 26-158 26-159 26-159 26-160 26-160 26-161 26-161 26-162 26-162 26-163 26-163 26-165 26-164 26-166 26-165 26-221 26-221 26-222 26-222 26-223 26-223 26-251 26-225 26-252 26-226 26-253 26-227 26-254 26-228 26-255 26-229 26-256 26-230 26-258 26-231 26-259 26-232 26-260 26-233 26-261 26-234 26-286 26-235 26-287 26-236 26-288 26-237 26-289 26-239 26-290(a) 26-240 26-291 26-242 26-292 26-243 26-393 26-332 26-421 26-421 26-422 26-422 26-423 26-423 26-424 26-424 26-476 26-476 26-477 26-477 26-478 26-478 26-479 26-479 26-480 26-480 26-481 26-481 26-482 26-482 26-483 26-483 26-511 26-511 26-512 26-512 26-513 26-513 26-514 26-514 26-515 26-515 26-516 26-516 26-545 26-545 26-546 26-546 26-547 26-547 26-548 26-548 26-549 26-549 26-550 26-550 26-570 26-570 26-571 26-571 26-572 26-572 26-573 26-573 26-574 26-574 26-600 26-600 26-601 26-601 26-602 26-602 26-603 26-603 26-604 26-604 26-605 26-605 26-606 26-606 26-691 26-691 26-692 26-692 26-693 26-693 26-694 26-694 26-756 26-756 26-757 26-757 26-758 26-758 26-759 26-759 26-760 26-760 26-761 26-761 26-762 26-762 26-763 26-763 26-764 26-764 26-765 26-765 26-766 26-766 26-767 26-767 26-768 26-768 26-770 26-769 26-771 26-770 26-772 26-771 26-773 26-772 26-774 26-773 26-775 26-774 26-776 26-775 26-777 26-776 26-778 26-777 26-779 26-778 26-801 26-801 26-802 26-802 26-803 26-803 26-804 26-804 26-805 26-805 26-806 26-806 26-807 26-807 26-808 26-808 26-809 26-809 26-810 26-810 26-811 26-811 26-812 26-812 26-813 26-813 26-814 26-814 26-815 26-815 26-816 26-816 26-817 26-817 26-840 26-840 26-841 26-841 26-842 26-842 26-843 26-843 26-844 26-844 26-845 26-845 30-26 30-26 30-27 30-27 30-28 30-28 30-29 30-29 30-30 30-30 30-31 30-31 30-32 30-32 30-33 30-33 30-34 30-34 30-35 30-35 34-26 34-26 34-27 34-27 34-28 34-28 34-29 34-29 34-30 34-30 42-26 42-26 42-35 42-35 42-36 42-36 42-37 42-37 42-38 42-38 42-39 42-39 42-40 42-40 42-41 42-41 42-42 42-42 42-43 42-43 42-44 42-44 42-56 42-56 42-57 42-57 42-71 42-71 42-72 42-72 42-73 42-73 42-91 42-91 42-92 42-92 42-146 42-147 42-148 42-148 42-149 42-149 42-150 42-150 42-151 42-151 42-152 42-152 42-153 42-153 42-154 42-154 42-155 42-155 42-181 42-181 42-182 42-182 42-183 42-183 42-184 42-184 42-185 42-185 42-186 42-186 42-187 42-187 42-188 42-188 42-189 42-189 46-26 46-19 46-27 46-20 46-28 46-21 46-56 46-46 46-57 46-47 46-58 46-48 46-59 46-49 46-60 46-50 46-61 46-51 46-62 46-52 46-63 46-53 46-65 46-80 46-66 46-104 46-67 46-105 46-68 46-124 46-69 46-125 46-70 46-126 46-71 46-127 46-72 46-128 46-73 46-129 46-74 46-130 46-75 46-131 46-76 46-161 46-77 46-162 46-78 46-163 46-79 46-164 46-80 46-165 46-121 46-184 46-123 46-185 46-124 46-186 46-125 46-187 46-126 46-188 46-127 46-189 46-156 46-217 46-157 46-218 46-158 46-219 46-159 46-220 46-160 46-221 46-161 46-222 46-162 46-223 46-163 46-224 50-1 50-1 50-31 50-31 50-32 50-32 50-33 50-33 50-34 50-34 50-35 50-35 50-61 50-61 50-62 50-62 50-91 50-93 50-92 50-94 50-95 50-95 50-96 50-96 50-97 50-97 50-98 50-98 50-99 50-99 50-100 50-100 54-26 54-26 54-27 54-27 54-28 54-28 54-29 54-29 54-30 54-30 54-31 54-31 54-32 54-32 54-33 54-33 54-34 54-34 54-35 54-35 54-36 54-36 54-61 54-61 54-62 54-62 54-63 54-63 54-64 54-64 54-65 54-65 54-66 54-66 54-91 54-91 54-92 54-92 54-93 54-93 54-94 54-94 54-95 54-95 58-26 58-26 58-27 58-27 58-28 58-28 58-29 58-29 58-30 58-30 58-31 58-31 58-32 58-32 58-33 58-33 58-34 58-34 58-35 58-35 58-36 58-36 58-37 58-37 58-66 58-66 58-67 58-67 58-68 58-68 58-69 58-69 58-70 58-70 58-71 58-71 58-72 58-72 58-73 58-73 58-101 58-101 58-102 58-102 58-103 58-103 58-104 58-104 58-105 58-105 58-106 58-106 58-107 58-107 58-108 58-108 58-109 58-109 58-110 58-110 58-135 58-135 58-136 58-136 58-137 58-137 58-138 58-138 58-139 58-139 58-140 58-140 58-141 58-141 58-142 58-142 58-200 58-200 58-201 58-201 58-202 58-202 58-203 58-203 58-204 58-204 58-205 58-205 58-206 58-206 58-207 58-207 58-208 58-208 58-209 58-209 58-210 58-210 58-211 58-211 58-212 58-212 58-213 58-213 58-214 58-214 58-215 58-215 58-216 58-216 58-217 58-217 62-1 62-1 62-2 62-2 62-3 62-3 62-4 62-4 62-5 62-5 62-6 62-6 62-7 62-7 62-8 62-8 62-36 62-36 62-37 62-37 62-38 62-38 62-39 62-39 62-66 62-66 62-96 62-96 62-97 62-97 62-98 62-98 62-99 62-99 66-26 66-26 66-27 66-27 66-28 66-28 66-29 66-29 66-30 66-30 66-61 66-61 66-62 66-62 66-63 66-63 66-91 66-91 66-92 66-92 66-93 66-93 66-94 66-94 66-95 66-95 66-96 66-96 66-97 66-97 66-98 66-98 66-126 66-126 66-127 66-127 66-128 66-128 66-129 66-129 66-130 66-130 66-131 66-131 66-132 66-132 66-133 66-133 66-161 66-161 66-162 66-162 66-163 66-163 66-164 66-164 66-165 66-165 66-166 66-166 70-1 70-1 70-31 70-31 70-32 70-32 70-33 70-33 82-26 82-26 82-27 82-27 82-28 82-28 82-29 82-29 82-56 82-56 82-57 82-57 82-58 82-58 82-59 82-59 82-60 82-60 82-61 82-61 82-62 82-62 82-63 82-63 82-64 82-64 82-65 82-65 82-66 82-66 82-67 82-67 82-68 82-68 82-69 82-69 82-96 82-96 82-97 82-97 82-98 82-98 82-99 82-99 82-100 82-100 82-101 82-101 82-102 82-102 82-131 82-131 82-132 82-132 82-133 82-133 82-161 82-161 82-162 82-162 82-163 82-163 82-164 82-164 82-165 82-165 82-166 82-166 82-167 82-167 82-221 82-222 82-223 82-223 82-224 82-224 82-225 82-225 82-226 82-226 82-227 82-227 82-228 82-228 82-235 82-235 82-236 82-236 82-237 82-237 82-238 82-238 82-239 82-239 82-240 82-240 82-241 82-241 82-242 82-242 82-250 82-250 82-251 82-251 82-252 82-252 82-253 82-253 82-254 82-254 82-255 82-255 82-256 82-256 82-257 82-257 82-258 82-258 82-259 82-259 86-1 86-1 86-31 86-31 86-32 86-32 86-33 86-33 86-34 86-34 86-35 86-35 86-36 86-2 90-1 90-1 90-2 90-2 90-32 90-32 90-33 90-33 90-34 90-34 90-35 90-35 90-61 90-61 90-62 90-62 90-63 90-63 90-64 90-64 90-65 90-65 90-66 90-66 90-96 90-96 90-97 90-97 90-126 90-126 90-127 90-127 90-128 90-128 90-156 90-156 90-157 90-157 90-186 90-186 90-187 90-187 90-188 90-188 90-189 90-189 90-190 90-190 90-191 90-191 90-192 90-192 90-193 90-193 90-221 90-221 90-222 90-222 90-223 90-223 90-224 90-224 90-225 90-225 90-226 90-226 90-227 90-227 94-1 94-1 94-2 94-2 94-3 94-3 94-4 94-4 94-5 94-5 94-6 94-6 94-7 94-7 94-8 94-8 94-9 94-9 94-10 94-10 94-11 94-11 94-12 94-12 94-13 94-13 94-14 94-14 94-15 94-15 94-16 94-16 94-17 94-17 94-66 94-66 94-67 94-67 94-68 94-68 94-69 94-69 94-70 94-70 94-96 94-96 94-97 94-97 94-98 94-98 94-99 94-99 94-100 94-100 94-126 94-126 94-127 94-127 94-128 94-128 94-129 94-129 94-131 94-130 94-132 94-131 94-133 94-132 94-134 94-133 94-161 94-161 94-162 94-162 94-163 94-163 94-164 94-164 94-191 94-191 94-192 94-192 94-193 94-193 94-194 94-194 94-221 94-221 94-222 94-222 94-223 94-223 94-224 94-224 94-225 94-225 94-226 94-226 94-227 94-227 94-256 94-256 94-257 94-257 94-258 94-258 94-286 94-286 94-287 94-287 94-288 94-288 94-289 94-289 94-316 94-316 94-317 94-317 94-318 94-318 94-319 94-319 94-320 94-320 94-321 94-321 94-322 94-322 94-323 94-323 94-324 94-324 94-325 94-325 94-326 94-326 94-327 94-327 94-356 94-356 94-357 94-357 94-358 94-358 94-359 94-359 94-360 94-360 94-361 94-361 94-362 94-362 94-363 94-363 94-364 94-364 94-365 94-365 94-366 94-366 94-367 94-367 94-368 94-368 94-369 94-369 94-370 94-370 94-371 94-371 94-372 94-372 94-373 94-373 94-374 94-374 94-375 94-375 94-376 94-376 94-377 94-377 94-378 94-378 94-379 94-379 94-380 94-380 94-381 94-381 98-1 98-1 98-31 98-31 98-61 98-61 98-91 98-91 98-92 98-92 98-93 98-93 98-94 98-94 98-95 98-95 98-96 98-96 98-126 98-126 98-127 98-127 98-128 98-128 102-1 102-1 102-2 102-2 102-3 102-3 102-31 102-31 102-32 102-32 102-33 102-33 102-35 102-34 102-36 102-35 102-37 102-36 102-38 102-37 102-39 102-38 102-40 102-39 102-66 102-66 102-67 102-67 102-68 102-68 102-69 102-69 102-70 102-70 102-71 102-71 102-72 102-72 102-73 102-73 102-101 102-101 102-102 102-102 102-103 102-103 102-105 102-104 102-106 102-105 102-107 102-106 102-108 102-107 102-109 102-108 102-110 102-109 102-111 102-110 102-141 102-141 102-142 102-142 102-143 102-143 102-144 102-144 102-145 102-145 102-146 102-146 102-147 102-147 102-148 102-148 102-149 102-149 102-150 102-150 102-151 102-151 102-152 102-152 102-153 102-153 102-154 102-154 102-181 102-181 102-182 102-182 102-183 102-183 102-184 102-184 102-185 102-185 102-186 102-186 102-187 102-187 102-188 102-188 102-189 102-189 102-190 102-190 102-191 102-191 102-221 102-221 102-222 102-222 102-223 102-223 102-224 102-224 102-225 102-225 102-226 102-226 102-256 102-256 106-25 106-25 106-26 106-26 106-27 106-27 106-28 106-28 106-29 106-29 106-30 106-30 106-31 106-31 106-61 106-61 106-62 106-62 106-63 106-63 106-64 106-64 106-65 106-65 106-66 106-66 106-67 106-67 106-96 106-96 106-97 106-97 106-98 106-98 106-99 106-99 106-100 106-100 106-126 106-126 106-127 106-127 106-128 106-128 106-129 106-129 106-156 106-156 106-157 106-157 106-185 106-185 106-186 106-186 106-187 106-187 106-188 106-188 106-216 106-216 106-217 106-217 106-226 106-226 106-227 106-227 106-228 106-228 106-229 106-229 106-230 106-230 106-231 106-231 106-246 106-246 106-247 106-247 106-248 106-248 106-249 106-249 106-250 106-250 106-251 106-251 106-281 106-281 106-282 106-282 106-311 106-311 106-312 106-312 106-313 106-313 106-341 106-341 106-342 106-342 106-343 106-343 106-344 106-344 106-371 106-371 106-372 106-372 106-373 106-373 106-374 106-374 106-375 106-375 106-376 106-376 106-406 106-406 106-407 106-407 106-408 106-408 106-409 106-409 106-410 106-410 106-411 106-411 106-412 106-412 106-531 106-531 106-532 106-532 106-533 106-533 106-534 106-534 106-535 106-535 106-536 106-536 106-537 106-537 106-538 106-538 106-566 106-566 106-567 106-567 106-568 106-568 106-569 106-569 106-596 106-596 106-597 106-597 106-598 106-614 106-599 106-615 106-626 106-626 106-627 106-627 106-628 106-628 106-629 106-629 106-630 106-630 106-631 106-631 106-632 106-632 106-633 106-633 106-634 106-634 106-635 106-635 106-661 106-661 106-662 106-662 106-663 106-663 106-664 106-664 106-665 106-665 106-691 106-691 106-692 106-692 106-693 106-693 106-721 106-721 106-722 106-722 106-723 106-723 106-751 106-751 106-752 106-752 106-753 106-753 106-754 106-754 106-755 106-755 106-756 106-756 106-757 106-757 106-758 106-758 106-759 106-759 106-760 106-760 106-761 106-761 106-762 106-762 106-763 106-763 106-764 106-764 106-765 106-765 106-766 106-766 106-767 106-767 106-816 106-816 106-817 106-817 106-818 106-818 106-819 106-819 106-820 106-820 106-821 106-821 106-822 106-822 106-851 106-851 106-852 106-852 106-853 106-853 106-854 106-854 106-855 106-855 106-856 106-856 106-881 106-881 106-882 106-882 106-883 106-883 106-884 106-884 106-885 106-885 106-886 106-886 106-887 106-887 106-888 106-888 106-889 106-889 106-890 106-890 106-891 106-891 106-892 106-892 106-893 106-893 106-921 106-921 106-922 106-922 106-923 106-923 106-951 106-951 106-952 106-952 106-953 106-953 106-954 106-954 106-955 106-955 106-956 106-956 106-957 106-957 106-958 106-958 106-959 106-959 106-960 106-960 106-961 106-961 106-962 106-962 106-986 106-986 106-987 106-987 106-988 106-988 106-989 106-989 106-990 106-990 106-991 106-991 106-1000 106-1000 106-1001 106-1001 106-1002 106-1002 106-1003 106-1003 106-1004 106-1004 106-1005 106-1005 106-1006 106-1006 106-1007 106-1007 106-1008 106-1008 106-1009 106-1009 106-1010 106-1010 106-1011 106-1011 106-1012 106-1012 106-1013 106-1013 106-1014 106-1014 106-1015 106-1015 106-1016 106-1016 106-1017 106-1017 106-1018 106-1018 106-1019 106-1019 106-1020 106-1020 106-1021 106-1021 106-1022 106-1022 106-1023 106-1023 106-1024 106-1024 106-1039 106-1039 106-1040 106-1040 106-1041 106-1041 106-1042 106-1042 106-1043 106-1043 106-1044 106-1044 106-1045 106-1045 106-1046 106-1046 106-1047 106-1047 106-1048 106-1048 106-1050 106-1065 106-1051 106-1066 106-1052 106-1067 106-1053 106-1068 106-1054 106-1069 106-1055 106-1070 106-1056 106-1071 106-1057 106-1072 106-1058 106-1073 110-1 110-16 110-2 110-33 110-3 110-34 110-4 110-35 110-5 110-36 110-6 110-37 110-7 110-38 110-8 110-39 110-9 110-40 110-10 110-41 110-21 110-52 110-22 110-53 110-23 110-54 110-24 110-55 110-25 110-56 110-26 110-57 110-27 110-58 110-28 110-59 110-29 110-60 110-30 110-61 110-31 110-62 110-32 110-63 110-33 110-64 110-34 110-65 110-35 110-66 110-36 110-67 110-37 110-68 110-38 110-69 110-39 110-70 110-40 110-71 110-41 110-72 110-42 110-73 110-43 110-74 110-44 110-75 110-45 110-76 110-55 110-86 110-56 110-87 110-57 110-88 110-58 110-89 110-59 110-90 110-60 110-91 110-70 110-101 110-71 110-102 110-72 110-103 110-73 110-104 110-74 110-105 110-75 110-106 110-76 110-107 110-77 110-108 110-78 110-109 110-79 110-110 110-80 110-111 110-81 110-112 110-82 110-113 110-83 110-114 110-84 110-115 110-95 110-126 110-96 110-127 110-97 110-128 110-98 110-129 110-107 110-138 110-117 110-150 110-118 110-151 110-119 110-152 110-120 110-153 110-121 110-154 110-122 110-155 110-123 110-156 110-124 110-157 110-125 110-158 110-126 110-159 110-127 110-160  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
    This is a chronological/numerical listing of the ordinances of the City of Wichita Falls, Texas used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the reCodification and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Code 83-85 8-6-1985 1 App. B, § 3210 App. B, § 3290 App. B, § 3410 App. B, § 3490 4 App. B, § 6720 5 App. B, § 6740 6 App. B, § 6740 7 App. B, § 6740 8 App. B, § 6740 9 App. B, § 7650 84-85 8-6-1985 App. B, § 5410 App. B, § 5430 28-86 4-1-1986 1 App. B, § 3080 App. B, § 3140 App. B, § 3210 3 App. B, § 5250 7 App. B, § 2030 11 App. B, § 7650 12 App. B, § 7650 13 App. B, § 3280 App. B, § 3470 App. B, § 3530 15 App. B, § 3600 16 App. B, § 6740 17 App. B, § 6740 App. B, § 3290 App. B, § 3410 App. B, § 3490 76-86 9-16-1986 1 App. B, § 7630 App. B, § 7650 103-86 12-16-1986 1 App. B, § 5225 104-86 12-16-1986 1 App. B, § 7650 76-87 8-18-1987 1 App. B, § 2030 89-87 9-15-1987 2 App. B, § 7650 23-88 3-1-1988 1 App. B, § 2030 2 App. B, § 3480 App. B, § 3540 3 App. B, § 3805 39-88 3-15-1988 2 App. B, § 2030 64-88 5-31-1988 1 App. B, § 3361 App. B, §§ 3363-3366 2 App. B, § 2030 3 App. B, § 3010 5 App. B, § 6740 App. B, § 3367 92-88 8-2-1988 1 App. B, § 2030 30-89 5-2-1989 I App. B, § 2030 II App. B, § 3060 App. B, § 3070 App. B, § 3080 App. B, § 3120 App. B, § 3130 App. B, § 3140 App. B, § 3190 App. B, § 3200 App. B, § 3210 App. B, § 3270 App. B, § 3280 App. B, § 3290 App. B, §§ 3363-3365 App. B, § 3390 App. B, § 3400 App. B, § 3410 App. B, § 3470 App. B, § 3480 App. B, § 3490 App. B, § 3530 App. B, § 3540 App. B, § 3550 App. B, § 3600 App. B, § 3720 App. B, § 3750 App. B, § 3800 App. B, § 3805 App. B, § 3810 V App. B, § 5430 27-90 5-1-1990 3 App. B, § 3080 4 App. B, § 3140 App. B, § 3210 App. B, § 3290 App. B, § 3410 App. B, § 3490 App. B, § 5250 7 App. B, § 2030 81-90 12-6-1990 1 App. B, § 3363 App. B, § 3365 2 App. B, § 3080 App. B, § 3140 App. B, § 3210 App. B, § 3290 App. B, § 3365 App. B, § 3410 App. B, § 3490 App. B, § 5245 3 App. B, § 2030 App. B, § 3080 App. B, § 3140 App. B, § 3210 App. B, § 3290 App. B, § 3410 App. B, § 3490 App. B, § 5250 5 App. B, § 5240 6 App. B, § 3080 App. B, § 3140 App. B, § 3210 App. B, § 3290 App. B, § 3410 App. B, § 3490 31-91 4-2-1991 1 App. B, § 2030 2 App. B, § 5705 App. B, § 5710 App. B, § 5715 App. B, § 5720 App. B, § 5725 App. B, § 5730 App. B, § 5735 App. B, § 5740 3 App. B, § 3070 App. B, § 3130 App. B, § 3190 App. B, § 3363 App. B, § 3390 App. B, § 3470 App. B, § 3720 67-91 7-2-1991 1 App. B, § 3400 92-91 10-1-1991 App. B, § 3420 109-92 12-1-1992 App. B, § 2030 110-93 9-7-1993 1 App. B, § 7905 158-93 12-21-1993 2 App. B, § 2030 20-94 3-1-1994 2 App. B, § 5510 App. B, § 5520 App. B, § 5530 App. B, § 5560 32-94 3-16-1994 1 App. B, § 7545 50-94 4-19-1994 1 App. B, § 3600 74-94 5-17-1994 1 App. B, § 3400 2 App. B, § 2030 81-94 6-21-1994 1 App. B, § 3400 84-94 6-21-1994 1 App. B, § 3600 100-94 8-2-1994 1 App. B, § 6615 101-94 8-2-1994 1 App. B, § 5105 App. B, § 5110 App. B, § 5115 App. B, § 5120 App. B, § 5125 App. B, § 5130 App. B, § 5135 155-94 12-20-1994 1 App. B, § 6405 App. B, § 6410 App. B, § 6415 App. B, § 6420 App. B, § 6428 App. B, § 6435 App. B, § 6455 App. B, § 6460 App. B, § 6465 App. B, § 6480 69-95 7-5-1995 1 App. B, § 6925 10-96 2-6-1996 1 App. B, § 7240 11-96 2-6-1996 1 App. B, § 7105 App. B, § 7110 App. B, § 7115 App. B, § 7120 App. B, § 7125 App. B, § 7130 75-96 6-4-1996 1 App. B, § 2030 2 App. B, § 3060 App. B, § 3070 App. B, § 3120 App. B, § 3130 App. B, § 3190 App. B, § 3200 App. B, § 3270 App. B, § 3280 App. B, § 3390 App. B, § 3400 App. B, § 3470 App. B, § 3480 App. B, § 3540 App. B, § 3720 App. B, § 3730 App. B, § 3800 App. B, § 3805 86-96 6-18-1996 1 App. B, § 3480 App. B, § 3540 App. B, § 3600 App. B, § 3805 95-96 7-2-1996 1 App. B, § 2030 2 App. B, § 2030 3 App. B, § 6110 App. B, § 6120 App. B, § 6125 App. B, § 6127 App. B, § 6130 App. B, § 6140 App. B, § 6145 App. B, § 6150 157-96 11-5-1996 1 App. B, § 6740 2 App. B, § 6740 3 App. B, § 6720 App. B, § 6745 4 App. B, § 6760 5 App. B, § 6755 49-97 5-20-1997 2 App. B, § 6720 App. B, § 6745 3 App. B, § 6750 4 App. B, § 6765 54-97 6-3-1997 1(att. A) App. B, Suggested Plant List App. B, § 6805 App. B, § 6810 App. B, § 6815 App. B, § 6820 App. B, § 6825 App. B, § 6830 App. B, § 6835 App. B, § 6840 App. B, § 6845 64-97 7-1-1997 1 App. B, § 6125 2 App. B, § 6127 3 App. B, § 6140 4 App. B, § 6145 App. B, § 6150 70-97 8-5-1997 1 App. B, § 2030 35-98 4-21-1998 1 App. B, § 2030 App. B, § 3280 App. B, § 3470 App. B, § 3530 2 App. B, § 2030 App. B, § 3540 App. B, § 3600 66-99 7-20-1999 1 App. B, § 2030 2 App. B, §§ 6205, 6206 App. B, § 6210 App. B, § 6220 App. B, § 6225 App. B, § 6230 App. B, § 6235 App. B, § 6240 67-99 7-20-1999 1 App. B, § 6480 72-99 8-3-1999 1 App. B, § 3010 App. B, § 3520 App. B, § 3530 App. B, § 3540 App. B, § 3550 App. B, § 3610 105-99 10-5-1999 2 App. B, § 7915 3 App. B, § 7905 03-2000 1-4-2000 1 App. B, § 3470 2 App. B, § 3480 20-2000 3-1-2000 1 22-27 18-2000 3-7-2000 1 App. B, § 6485 36-2000 4-4-2000 1 App. B, § 6485 38-2000 4-18-2000 2 62-5 71-2000 7-5-2000 1 App. B, § 5622 3 App. B, § 2030 4 App. B, § 3280 5 App. B, § 3530 6 App. B, § 3600 7 App. B, § 3010 9 App. B, § 3330 10 App. B, § 3340 11 App. B, § 3355 14 App. B, § 5651 15 App. B, § 5652 1(5600) App. B, § 5620 1(5605) App. B, § 5605 1(5610) App. B, § 5610 1(5615) App. B, § 5615 1(5625) App. B, § 5625 1(5630) App. B, § 5630 1(5650) App. B, § 5650 72-2000 7-5-2000 2 App. B, § 6420 App. B, § 6428 App. B, § 6431 App. B, § 6465 74-2000 7-5-2000 1 58-32 82-2000 8-15-2000 2 82-102 94-2000 9-14-2000 1 62-5 93-2000 9-19-2000 1 50-34 97-2000 9-19-2000 1 46-19 103-2000 10-3-2000 2 App. B, § 2030 3 App. B, § 5905 5 App. B, § 3280 6 App. B, § 3480 7 App. B, § 3540 8 App. B, § 3730 9 App. B, § 3805 121-2000 12-19-2000 1 22-27 2 22-27 126-2000 12-19-2000 1 App. B, § 6480 127-2000 12-19-2000 1 22-27 07-2001 1-2-2001 1 62-66 2 62-7 62-36 3 62-37 4 62-38 5 62-96, 62-97 6 62-3 7 62-5 11-2001 2-6-2001 1 58-135 2 58-136 3 58-138 4 58-139, 58-140 6 58-141 7 58-142 8 58-137 13-2001 2-6-2001 106-251 22-2001 3-12-2001 1 78-61 32-2001 4-3-2001 2 App. B, § 2030 3 App. B, § 2030 4 App. B, § 6405 6 App. B, § 6428 7 App. B, § 6431 8 App. B, § 6435 9 App. B, § 6455 10 App. B, § 6455 12 App. B, § 6448 13 App. B, § 6460 14 App. B, § 6465 15 App. B, § 6475 16 App. B, § 6480 17 App. B, § 6485 18 App. B, § 6485 35-2001 4-17-2001 1 90-126 40-2001 5-1-2001 1 82-102 45-2001 5-1-2001 1 App. B, § 2030 2 App. B, § 3480 3 App. B, § 3530 4 App. B, § 3540 5 App. B, § 3600 6 App. B, § 3605 7 App. B, § 5910 52-2001 5-15-2001 1 106-186 56-2001 6-5-2001 1 2-912 2 2-912 65-2001 7-17-2001 1 102-67 2 102-71 3 102-73 66-2001 7-17-2001 1 82-164 83-2001 9-4-2001 1 70-33 89-2001 9-18-2001 1 App. B, § 5915 90-2001 9-18-2001 1 62-8 3 62-5 95-2001 10-2-2001 1 App. B, § 5905 2 App. B, § 2030 3 App. B, § 6220 4 App. B, § 3470 App. B, § 3530 App. B, § 3600 5 App. B, § 3280 App. B, § 3480 App. B, § 3540 App. B, § 3730 App. B, § 3805 96-2001 10-2-2001 1 App. B, § 2030 2 App. B, § 5640 98-2001 10-2-2001 1 22-27 2 22-27 100-2001 10-16-2001 1 90-62-90-66 90-96 101-2001 10-16-2001 1 90-126 109-2001 12-4-2001 1 98-126, 98-127 2-2002 1-3-2002 1 App. B, § 2030 2 App. B, § 4605 App. B, § 4610 App. B, § 4615 App. B, § 4620 App. B, § 4625 App. B, § 4630 App. B, § 4635 App. B, § 4640 App. B, § 4650 App. B, § 4670 11-2002 2-5-2002 1 82-162-82-165 25-2002 4-2-2002 1 106-566-106-568 106-596 106-629 106-634, 106-635 106-663, 106-664 106-691 106-722 106-751 106-753 106-760, 106-761 106-820 106-852-106-856 106-884 106-921-106-923 42-2002 6-4-2002 2 106-376 50-2002 7-2-2002 1 22-401 64-2002 7-2-2002 1 22-700, 22-701 53-2002 7-16-2002 1 App. B, §§ 3841, 3842 App. B, § 3845 App. B, § 3847 App. B, § 3849 App. B, § 3851 App. B, § 3853 2 App. B, § 2030 61-2002 8-6-2002 1 App. B, § 6810 75-2002 9-3-2002 1 22-701 79-2002 9-17-2002 1 106-281 85-2002 10-1-2002 1 70-33 89-2002 10-15-2002 3 90-128 90-2002 11-5-2002 1 App. B, § 3130 91-2002 11-5-2002 1 22-401 94-2002 11-5-2002 1 22-26, 22-27 2 22-605 104-2002 12-17-2002 1 22-27 7-2003 2-4-2003 1 94-126 2 94-127 3 94-128 4 94-129 6 94-130 7 94-131 8 94-132 8-2003 2-4-2003 1 App. B, § 3130 2 App. B, § 3070 10-2003 2-4-2003 1 App. B, § 5920 2 App. B, § 3070 App. B, § 3080 App. B, § 3130 App. B, § 3140 54-2003 3-18-2003 2 App. B, § 5430 24-2003 4-1-2003 1 App. B, § 6510 App. B, § 6515 27-2003 4-1-2003 1 App. B, § 1060 35-2003 4-15-2003 1 102-143 38-2003 4-15-2003 1 App. A, § 6 39-2003 4-15-2003 1 App. B, § 3080 App. B, § 3140 App. B, § 3210 App. B, § 3290 App. B, § 3365 App. B, § 3410 App. B, § 3490 App. B, § 3550 50-2003 5-20-2003 1 106-186 62-2003 7-1-2003 1 App. B, § 2030 2 App. B, § 3070 3 App. B, § 3130 79-2003 9-2-2003 1 2-906-2-909 2-912 82-2003 9-2-2003 1 106-251 84-2003 9-2-2003 1 62-5 89-2003 9-16-2003 1 62-5 91-2003 9-16-2003 1 70-33 92-2003 9-16-2003 1 62-1, 62-2 62-5 62-7 62-36, 62-37 62-39 62-66 62-97, 62-98 104-2003 11-4-2003 1 106-281 99-2003 11-4-2003 1 22-701 110-2003 11-18-2003 1 22-511 2 22-512 3 22-512 111-2003 11-18-2003 1 22-571 2 22-572 3 22-572 112-2003 11-18-2003 1 22-481 2 22-482 3 22-482 113-2003 11-18-2003 1 22-27 116-2003 12-2-2003 1 App. B, § 3400 118-2003 12-2-2003 1 50-61 2 50-62 3 50-62 119-2003 12-2-2003 2 94-15 121-2003 12-16-2003 1 26-94 2 26-93 122-2003 12-16-2003 1 106-186 1-2004 1-6-2004 1 22-26 2-2004 1-6-2004 1 2-911 8-2004 1-6-2004 1 106-186 29-2004 4-6-2004 1 106-186 34-2004 4-20-2004 1 90-64 36-2004 5-4-2004 1 102-221 48-2004 6-15-2004 1 App. B, § 6710 App. B, § 6720 App. B, § 6740 App. B, § 6745 App. B, § 6747 App. B, § 6750 App. B, § 6755 App. B, § 6760 App. B, §§ 6765-6767 54-2004 7-6-2004 1 18-43-18-45 57-2004 7-6-2004 1 46-20 2 46-21 58-2004 7-6-2004 1 102-67 61-2004 8-2-2004 1 14-339 59-2004 8-3-2004 1 82-223 66-2004 9-7-2004 1 App. B, § 6720 76-2004 9-21-2004 1 106-251 78-2004 9-21-2004 1 70-33 80-2004 9-21-2004 1 62-5 85-2004 10-19-2004 1 22-56, 22-57 22-111-22-117 22-146-22-156 22-186-22-194 22-221, 22-222 22-224 22-255, 22-256 22-346-22-362 22-401-22-409 22-436-22-454 02-2005 1-18-2005 1 62-5 10-2005 2-15-2005 1 90-128 29-2005 5-3-2005 1 58-73 51-2005 7-5-2005 1 22-27 52-2005 7-5-2005 1 102-153 72-2005 9-20-2005 1 90-96 2 90-126 3 90-128 74-2005 9-20-2005 1 22-401 85-2005 10-18-2005 1 22-26 86-2005 10-18-2005 1 46-184 46-186 88-2005 11-1-2005 1 App. B, § 4670 2 App. A, § 6 92-2005 11-15-2005 1 94-15 2 94-16 101-2005 12-6-2005 1 54-26 2 54-92 96-2005 12-6-2005 1 50-34 97-2005 12-6-2005 1 70-33 8-2006 2-7-2006 1 App. B, § 6405 App. B, § 6407 App. B, § 6410 App. B, § 6415 App. B, § 6420 App. B, § 6428 App. B, § 6431 App. B, § 6435 App. B, § 6448 App. B, § 6450 App. B, § 6455 App. B, § 6460 App. B, § 6465 App. B, § 6475 App. B, § 6480 App. B, § 6485 12-2006 2-7-2006 1 82-163, 82-164 17-2006 3-7-2006 1 46-46-46-53 46-80 46-104, 46-105 46-124-46-131 46-161-46-165 23-2006 4-4-2006 2 78-81 41-2006 6-6-2006 1 78-81 42-2006 6-6-2006 1 App. B, § 6127 56-2006 7-18-2006 1 94-98-94-100 2 App. A, § 6 3 94-129 57-2006 7-18-2006 1 46-46 2 46-188 61-2006 8-1-2006 1 App. B, § 3530 App. B, § 3540 71-2006 9-5-2006 1 2-380-2-383 78-2006 9-19-2006 1 46-217-46-224 3 App. B, § 2030 4 App. B, § 3540 82-2006 10-17-2006 1 58-200-58-217 83-2006 10-17-2006 1 22-482 86-2006 11-7-2006 1 42-147-42-155 42-181-42-189 90-2006 12-5-2006 1 2-1091 94-2006 12-5-2006 1 26-1 26-31 26-61-26-63 26-65 26-91-26-100 96-2006 12-19-2006 1 2-301 16-2007 2-6-2007 1 22-27 2 22-154 3 22-482 4 22-512 29-2007 3-20-2007 1 App. B, § 3070 2 App. B, § 3130 3 App. B, § 5715 39-2007 4-17-2007 1 62-5 45-2007 5-1-2007 1 22-26, 22-27 2 22-481, 22-482 3 22-511, 22-512 4 22-571, 22-572 5 22-700, 22-701 46-2007 5-1-2007 1 50-61 2 50-62 3 50-62 47-2007 5-1-2007 1 46-20, 46-21 69-2007 8-7-2007 2 1-15 78-2007 9-18-2007 1 106-251 80-2007 9-18-2007 1 90-33 2 90-96 3 90-126 87-2007 10-2-2007 1 50-34 88-2007 10-2-2007 1 70-33 92-2007 10-2-2007 1 App. B, § 3080 2 App. B, § 3140 3 App. B, § 3210 4 App. B, § 3290 5 App. B, § 3365 6 App. B, § 3410 96-2007 11-6-2007 1 App. B, § 5920 98-2007 11-6-2007 1 2-390-2-393 103-2007 12-18-2007 1 App. A, § 6 105-2007 12-18-2007 2 94-133 3-2008 1-15-2008 1 50-34 7-2008 2-5-2008 1 App. B, § 6720 2 App. B, § 6747 3 App. B, § 6740 4 App. B, § 6740 21-2008 4-1-2008 1 App. A, § 6 23-2008 4-15-2008 1 106-1039-106-1048 27-2008 5-6-2008 1 26-65 32-2008 5-20-2008 1 App. B, § 4605 App. B, § 4610 App. B, § 4615 40-2008 8-5-2008 1 2-906-2-909 42-2008 8-19-2008 1 82-235-82-242 52-2008 9-16-2008 2 106-251 54-2008 9-16-2008 1 90-66 2 90-96 3 90-126 60-2008 9-16-2008 1 50-34 65-2008 10-7-2008 1 26-840-26-845 69-2008 10-21-2008 1 2-126-2-131 73-2008 11-18-2008 1 22-710 76-2008 12-2-2008 1 App. B, § 6740 77-2008 12-2-2008 1 82-223 79-2008 12-16-2008 1 78-41-78-52 80-2008 12-16-2008 1 90-66 2 90-225 07-2009 1-6-2009 1 2-301 15-2009 2-17-2009 1 106-186 21-2009 3-3-2009 1 14-1-14-9 14-41 14-71-14-81 14-106-14-118 14-150-14-154 14-177-14-179 14-197 14-218-14-224 14-242-14-246 14-297, 14-298 14-330-14-338 14-340 14-369-14-380 14-404-14-407 14-428-14-434 14-452-14-459 14-487-14-497 14-518-14-521 25-2009 4-7-2009 1 App. B, § 6745 2 App. B, § 6750 3 App. B, § 6760 26-2009 4-21-2009 1 14-220 29-2009 5-5-2009 1 App. B, §§ 5802-5805 App. B, § 5810 App. B, § 5815 App. B, § 5820 App. B, § 5825 App. B, § 5830 App. B, § 5835 App. B, § 5840 App. B, § 5845 App. B, § 5850 App. B, § 5855 2 App. A, § 6 30-2009 5-5-2009 1 106-226-106-231 2 2-906 33-2009 5-19-2009 1 22-27 42-2009 7-7-2009 1 App. B, § 3811 45-2009 7-21-2009 1 App. A, § 6 47-2009 8-4-2009 1 78-49-78-52 60-2009 9-1-2009 106-406-106-412 66-2009 9-15-2009 1 106-25-106-31 106-61-106-67 106-96-106-98 106-100 106-126-106-129 106-156, 106-157 106-216, 106-217 71-2009 10-6-2009 1 2-911 73-2009 10-6-2009 1 82-163 77-2009 10-20-2009 70-33 78-2009 10-20-2009 50-34 79-2009 10-20-2009 82-59 81-2009 11-3-2009 1 26-421-26-424 26-476-26-483 26-511-26-516 26-545-26-550 26-570-26-574 26-600-26-606 83-2009 11-3-2009 1 106-922 85-2009 11-3-2009 App. B, § 3710 App. B, § 3720 App. B, § 3730 App. B, § 3740 App. B, § 3750 03-2010 1-5-2010 1 26-126, 26-127 26-156-26-165 13-2010 3-2-2010 82-163 18-2010 4-6-2010 1 102-153 19-2010 4-6-2010 14-72 24-2010 4-20-2010 1 18-46 32-2010 6-1-2010 1 App. B, § 3010 2 App. B, § 3905 App. B, § 3910 App. B, § 3915 App. B, § 3920 App. B, § 3925 App. B, § 3930 App. B, § 3935 App. B, § 3940 App. B, § 3945 36-2010 7-20-2010 1 26-756-26-778 41-2010 8-3-2010 106-1065-106-1073 53-2010 9-21-2010 1 50-36 3 2-906-2-909 4 2-907 5 22-27 22-154 22-482 22-512 6 42-184 42-186 7 106-126 8 106-127 9 106-251 58-2010 11-2-2010 1 106-986-106-991 63-2010 11-16-2010 App. A, § 6 71-2010 12-21-2010 1 110-16 110-33-110-41 110-52-110-76 110-86-110-91 110-101-110-115 110-126-110-129 110-150-110-160 07-2011 1-18-2011 1 106-990 10-2011 2-15-2011 1 App. A, § 6 12-2011 2-15-2011 1 90-2 13-2011 2-15-2011 1 90-128 15-2011 3-15-2011 1 82-250-82-259 33-2011 7-5-2011 1 22-26, 22-27 2 22-481, 22-482 3 22-511, 22-512 4 22-571, 22-572 5 22-700, 22-701 6 22-710, 22-711 7 50-61, 50-62 36-2011 7-19-2011 1 94-128 2 94-129 37-2011 8-2-2011 1(42-1) 42-26 1(42-10) 42-44 1(42-2) 42-36 1(42-20) 42-56 1(42-21) 42-57 1(42-3) 42-37 1(42-30) 42-71 1(42-31) 42-72 1(42-32) 42-73 1(42-4) 42-38 1(42-40) 42-91 1(42-41) 42-92 1(42-5) 42-39 1(42-6) 42-40 1(42-7) 42-41 1(42-8) 42-42 1(42-9) 42-43 Div. 2 42-35 39-2011 8-2-2011 1 106-951-106-962 42-2011 8-16-2011 1 46-184 2 46-186 3 46-188 4 46-189 44-2011 8-16-2011 1 14-452 54-2011 9-20-2011 2 90-96 3 90-126-90-128 4 106-127 5 106-129 59-2011 10-4-2011 1 App. B, § 6720 2 App. B, § 6740 3 App. B, § 6740 4 App. B, § 6745 69-2011 12- 6-2011 1 90-35 2 50-36 72-2011 12-20-2011 1 94-17 11-2012  3- 6-2012 1 26-801-26-817 12-2012  3- 6-2012 1 106-1000-106-1024 15-2012  3-20-2012 1 54-61, 54-62 54-64, 54-65 2 54-95 22-2012  4-17-2012 1 54-92 54-94 28-2012  5- 1-2012 1 94-356-94-381 31-2012  6- 5-2012 1 94-378 39-2012  8- 7-2012 1, 2 App. B, § 6740 41-2012  8-21-2012 1(102-109) 102-108 1(102-110) 102-109 46-2012  9- 4-2012 1 62-5 47-2012  9- 4-2012 1 62-5 49-2012  9- 4-2012 1 106-185, 106-186 51-2012  9- 4-2012 1 82-61 52-2012  9-18-2012 1 62-5 56-2012  9-18-2012 1 106-126 2 106-127 3 106-251 60-2012 10-16-2012 1 62-5 70-2012 12- 4-2012 1 90-126 03-2013  2- 5-2013 1 18-26 10-2013  2-19-2013 1(110-27) 110-58 2(110-32) 110-63 3(110-55) 110-86 4(110-117) 110-150 12-2013  3-19-2013 1(22-636) 22-636 2(22-638) 22-638 3(22-649) 22-649 13-2013  3-19-2013 1(14-381) 14-452 17-2013  4- 2-2013 1(6845) App. B, § 6845 19-2013  4-16-2013 1 62-5 32-2013  6- 4-2013 1 106-185, 106-186 35-2013  7-16-2013 1 62-5 38-2013  7-16-2013 1 106-126 47-2013  9- 3-2013 2 26-767 52-2013  9-17-2013 1 106-127 53-2013  9-17-2013 1 70-33 56-2013 10- 1-2013 1 2-172-2-179 60-2013 10-15-2013 1 106-126 2 106-126 63-2013 11- 5-2013 1 34-31 64-2013 11-19-2013 1 62-36 2 62-39 67-2013 12-17-2013 1 62-5 10-2014  3-18-2014 1 14-10, 14-11 11-2014  4- 1-2014 1 14-271-14-274 2 14-151 3 14-373 17-2014  4-15-2014 1 106-185, 106-186 26-2014  6-17-2014 1 58-101-58-110 34-2014  8- 5-2014 1 106-126 42-2014  9-16-2014 1 106-127(a) 44-2014  9-16-2014 50-34 47-2014 10-21-2014 1 106-186(g)(3)c 52-2014 11- 4-2014       Added Adopt. ord., p. xi 56-2014 11- 4-2014 1 22-27 58-2014 12- 2-2014 1 106-186(g)(1)-(3) 03-2015  1- 6-2015 1 App. B, § 2030 App. B, § 3540 App. B, § 3730 App. B, § 3800       Added App. B, §§ 5925-5975 04-2015  1- 6-2015 1 26-421-26-423 2 26-476 26-477(1) 26-478(b) 26-480 26-482, Tit.       Added 26-483(c) 3 26-512 4 26-545, Tit. 26-546, 26-547 26-548, Tit. 26-549 26-550 5       Rpld 26-570-26-606       Added 26-570-26-575 15-2015  4- 7-2015 102-108 26-2015  7- 7-2015 1 102-108 34-2015  8- 4-2015 1       Added 46-250-46-261 35-2015  8- 4-2015 1 94-9 2 1-14 44-2015  9-15-2015 1 106-62(j) 2 106-66 3 106-126(c) 4 106-128 5 106-251 6 106-281(b) 50-2015 10-20-2015 Att. 106-185 106-186 53-2015 11-17-2015 1 26-421-26-424 2 26-476-26-483 26-511-26-516 3       Rpld 26-545-26-550       Added 26-545-26-549 4 26-570-26-575 57-2015 12- 1-2015 1 22-26, 22-27 2 22-481, 22-482 3 22-511, 22-512 4 22-571, 22-572 5 22-700, 22-701 6 22-711, 22-712 7 50-61, 50-62 02-2016  1- 5-2016 1 App. B, § 6480 2 App. B, § 7810 3 App. B, § 7820 4 App. B, § 7905 5 App. B, § 7910 05-2016  2- 2-2016 1       Added 18-47 06-2016  2-16-2016 1       Added 62-5(a)(35) 09-2016  3- 1-2016       Rpld 2-126-2-131 14-2016  6- 7-2016 1 14-452(2) 21-2016 7-19-2016 1 26-61 2       Added 26-66 3 26-94 23-2016 6-19-2016 1 14-10 28-2016  8-16-2016 1       Added 22-712-22-714 31-2016  9- 6-2016 1       Added 26-517-26-524 32-2016  9- 6-2016 1 14-380 2       Added 14-381 46-2016 11- 1-2016 1       Rpld 110-16, 110-17, 110-33-110-41, 110-52-110-76, 110-86-110-91, 110-101-110-115, 110-126-110-129, 110-138, 110-150-110-160       Added 110-16, 110-17, 110-33-110-40, 110-52-110-75, 110-86-110-91, 110-101-110-112, 110-126-110-129, 110-138, 110-150-110-160, 110-185-110-207, 110-221-110-235 49-2016 11-15-2016 106-96, 106-97 50-2016 11-22-2016 1 2-30 43-2016 11- 1-2016       Added 46-289-46-296 App. B, §§ 2030, 3400, 3470, 3530, 3600 44-2016 11- 1-2016 1 App. B, §§ 2030, 3800 1       Added App. B, §§ 5980-5986 2 94-13 55-2016 12-20-2016       Rpld 2-380-2-383 56-2016 12-20-2016       Rpld 102-66-102-73 01-2017  1- 3-2017 14-406 02-2017  1- 3-2017 58-73 05-2017  2-21-2017 1       Added 102-66-102-69 12-2017  4- 4-2017 1 App. B, § 3480 App. B, §§ 5925-5975 1       Added App. B, § 5977 17-2017  6- 6-2017 1       Added 94-18 21-2017  6-20-2017 1       Rpld §§110-185-110-207 110-221-110-235 24-2017  7-18-2017 86-31 35-2017  9- 5-2017 1       Rpld 94-66-94-70 94-221-94-227 94-256-94-258 94-286-94-289       Added 94-256-94-281 40-2017  9-19-2017       Added 50-63 42-2017 10-17-2017 1 90-32 90-33       Rpld 90-34       Rnbd 90-35       as 90-34 2 90-96 90-221 90-223-90-226 50-2017 12- 5-2017 1 26-802 26-814, 26-815 03-2018  1- 2-2018 1 22-27 04-2018  1-16-2018 1 22-27 20-2018  5- 1-2018 App. A, §§ 2, 3.1-3.8, 4.3-4.5, 5.2-5.5, 6.1-6.3, 6.5-6.7, 6.9, 7, 11       Added § 14 15-2018  4- 3-2018 App. B, § 3680 28-2018  7-17-2018 1       Added 46-320-46-322 30-2018  7-17-2018 1       Added 102-4 35-2018  8- 7-2018 1 78-61-78-63 45-2018  9-18-2018 1 106-408(3), (7) 51-2018 10- 2-2018 1 App. B, § 5980       Dltd App. B, 
§§ 5981-5986 2 App. B, § 4220 3 App. B, §§ 2030, 3460, 3470, 3480, 3490       Added App. B, § 3495 App. B, §§ 3520, 3530, 3540, 3550       Added App. B, § 3555       Added App. B, § 3560 App. B, §§ 3590, 3600, 3605, 3610 4 App. B, § 6810 B., Suggested Plant List 52-2018 10- 2-2018 1 14-369 65-2018 12-18-2018       Dltd 2-172-2-179 02-2019  2-19-2019 1       Dltd 58-135-58-142       Added 58-135-58-143 03-2019  3- 5-2019       Added 106-1 106-248 106-532 07-2019  4- 2-2019 90-1, 90-2 17-2019  5-21-2019 1       Dltd 2-26-2-32       Added 2-26-2-32, 2-51-2-85, 2-106-2-115, 2-136-2-150  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Texas Statutes. 
Texas Ann. Civ. Stat. 
Article Section 
this Code 701 et seq. Char. § 75 823 et seq. Char. § 75 1175(1) Char. § 75 3010 Ch. 26, Art. III 5221 App. B, § 5610  
Texas Insurance Code 
Article Section 
this Code 6002.001 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. III Ch. 50 (note) 6002.002 42-147  
Texas Agriculture Code 
Section Section 
this Code 251.002 106-231  
Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1.01 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 6-1-6-3 1.04 6-1 App. B, § 5410 11.38 6-2 61.36 6-2 101.62 46-20 101.63 6-6 105.01 et seq. 6-6 105.03(c) 6-6 105.05(e) 6-6 109.32 6-6 109.33 App. B, 5400 et seq. 109.53 App. B, § 5430  
Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code 
Section Section 
this Code 101.101 et seq. Char. § 139 Ch. 2, Art. VIII  
Texas Education Code 
Section Section 
this Code 61.003 98-91  
Texas Election Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1.001 et seq. 2-29 141.001 et seq. Char. § 11  
Texas Finance Code 
Section Section 
this Code 371.001 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. V  
Texas Government Code 
Section Section 
this Code 29.001 et seq. Char. § 130 29.003 1-14 30.00001 et seq. Ch. 34 (note) 34-26 30.00301 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II 311.001 et seq. 1-2 311.007 1-4 311.014 1-2 312.008 1-2 362.001 et seq. 70-1 410.032 Ch. 50 (note) 417.0041 50-97 418.001 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) Ch. 30, Art. II 419.032 Ch. 50 (note) 442.001 et seq. Ch. 62 (note) ch. 551 2-56 2-63 551.041 2-65 551.047 2-64 551.001 et seq. Char. § 34 551.146 2-64 552.001 et seq. 2-1032 843.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V, 
Div. 2 2-846 2001.001 et seq. 58-103 2009.054(c) 2-1032  
Texas Health and Safety Code 
Section Section 
this Code 11.001 et seq. Ch. 58 (note) 121.001 et seq. 58-28 58-30 121.041 et seq. Ch. 58, Art. II 121.046 Ch. 58, Art. II, 
Div. 2 121.046(e)(4), 121.046(e)(5) 58-69, 58-70 122.001 et seq. Ch. 58 (note) 122.006 Ch. 46 (note) Ch. 58 (note) 146.001 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. IX 146.012 26-815 ch. 265 2-367-2-369 ch. 341 106-412 106-1042 341.001 et seq. Ch. 90 (note) Ch. 106, Art. II 341.011 58-201 341.064 Ch. 58, Art. IV 58-135 58-136 341.066 Ch. 58, Art. V 342.001 et seq. Char. § 147 Ch. 46 (note) Ch. 46, Art. IV Ch. 106, Art. III 342.006 106-962 106-1072 342.006(b)-(d), 342.006(a) 46-187, 46-188 342.007 46-189 106-962 106-1072 361.001 et seq. Ch. 90 (note) Ch. 90, Art. IV ch. 361, subch. W 106-1040 361.801 et seq. Ch. 106, Art. XI 361.805 106-1042 106-1046 363.111 Ch. 106 (note) 363.114 Ch. 106 (note) 365.001 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. IV 46-161 94-9 ch. 366 106-412 366.001 et seq. 106-247 366.002 106-231 ch. 382, subch. E 90-34 385.001 et seq. Ch. 58, Art. III 433.001 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. VI 437.001 26-421 437.001 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. VI Ch. 26, Art. VI, 
Div. 2 ch. 481 78-25 481.002(6) 78-25 481.151 et seq. 78-25, 78-26 ch. 483 78-25 483.001(3) 78-25 ch. 484 78-25 484.002 78-25 485.001 et seq. Ch. 78, Art. III 546.0065 102-66 753.001 et seq. Ch. 50 (note) ch. 757 58-135 757.005 58-138 58-136 ch. 773 102-66 773.001 et seq. Ch. 42 (note) Ch. 42, Art. II 791.001 et seq. Ch. 50 (note) 821.001 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) Ch. 14, Art. VI 822.001 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) Ch. 14, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 ch. 822, subch. D 14-336 14-518 ch. 822, subch. E 14-518 ch. 823 14-407 823.003(e) 14-407 826.001 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) Ch. 14, Art. II Ch. 14, Art. V 826.017 14-405 826.022 14-41 826.031 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II Ch. 14, Art. II, 
Div. 2 828.001 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 829.001 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 841.001 et seq. 78-81  
Texas Labor Code 
Section Section 
this Code 21.051 et seq. Ch. 66, Art. IV 21.101 et seq. 66-164  
Texas Local Government Code 
Section Section 
this Code 5.004 Char. (note) 9.004 2-70 11.003 94-257 26.001 et seq. Char. § 1 Char. §§ 7, 8 Ch. 42 App. A, § 2 43.001 et seq. Char. §§ 3a-3c 43.021 et seq. Char. § 3b 51.001 Char. §§ 7, 8 51.002 94-257 51.071 et seq. Char. §§ 7, 8 51.076(b) Char. § 138 52.013 Char. § 37 53.001 et seq. 1-1 54.001 Char. § 142 1-14 54.004 Ch. 46 (note) 54.012 et seq. Ch. 46 (note) 54.044 Ch. 46, Art. III, 
Div. 4 54.044(b)-(g) 46-124 54.044(c) 46-126 54.044(d), (e) 46-127 54.044(h) (i) 46-128 54.044(j), 54.044(k) 46-130, 46-131 101.001 Char. §§ 65-73 101.023 Char. § 138 102.001 et seq. Char. § 68 103.001 et seq. Char. § 107 127.042 34-26 130.001 et seq. 46-20 143.001 et seq. 2-876 Ch. 70, Art. II 143.021 50-34 143.021(a) 70-33 143.085 50-34 171.001 et seq. Char. § 132 176 2-139 201.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VII 2-1035 201.003 2-1032 203.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VII, 
Div. 3 203.023 2-1037 203.026 2-1036 204.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VII, 
Div. 2 2-996 205.001 et seq. 2-996 211.001 et seq. App. B (note) 211.006(d) 2-70 211.007 App. B, 7900 et seq. 211.008-211.011 App. B, 7800 et seq. 212.001 et seq. App. B, § 7805 212.151 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. II 214.001 et seq. Ch. 22 (note) Ch. 22, Art. VIII 214.011 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. IV 214.101 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. X 214.191 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. III 214.192-214.196 Ch. 42, Art. III, 
Div. 2 214.197 42-155 214.211 et seq. Ch. 22 (note) Ch. 22, Art. XI 214.212 22-700 214.214 Ch. 22, Art. III, 
Div. 4 214.903 Ch. 66, Art. II 215.002 et seq. Ch. 26 (note) 215.004(a) 110-16 215.070 34-26 215.073 Ch. 110 (note) Ch. 110, Art. II 217.001 50-96 217.042 Ch. 46 (note) Ch. 46, Art. II 82-102 218.001 42-147 218.006 42-154 235.001 et seq. Ch. 50 (note) 240.904 Ch. 50 (note) ch. 241 App. A, § 6 241.001 et seq. App. B, § 6410 App. B, § 6415 241.032 App. B, § 6480 243.001 et seq. App. B, 5500 et seq. 250.003 26-842 250.004 26-842 ch. 251 94-266 252.048 2-454 282.001 Ch. 94 (note) ch. 283 94-259, 94-278 283.057 94-278 ch. 284 94-266 Ch. 284 Subch. C 94-257 284.103 94-257 306.001 et seq. Ch. 82 (note) 306.0011 et seq. Ch. 82, Art. II 341.003 Ch. 70 (note) Ch. 70, Art. II 341.012 Ch. 70 (note) 341.031 et seq. Ch. 106 (note) 341.903 34-26 342.011 Ch. 50 (note) Ch. 70, Art. II 342.013 50-96 342.903 Ch. 70 (note) 351.001 et seq. Ch. 50 (note) 352.015 et seq. Ch. 50 (note) 362.001 et seq. 70-1 366.001 et seq. Ch. 106, Art. V, 
Div. 3 401.001 et seq. Ch. 106 (note) 401.002 34-26 402.001 et seq. Char. § 120a Ch. 106 (note) 402.0025 Ch. 106, Art. IV 402.017 Ch. 106 (note) ch. 552, subch. C 106-987 552.041-552.054 106-987 552.041 et seq. 106-990 552.046 106-987  
Texas Natural Resources Code 
Section Section 
this Code 191.001 et seq. Ch. 62 (note)  
Texas Occupations Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1.001 et seq. Ch. 26 (note) Ch. 1201 102-66 1201.001 et seq. App. B, § 2030 1301.001 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. IV 1301.255 22-481 ch. 1302, subch. F 26-236 ch. 1302, subch. G 26-236 ch. 1302, subch. K 26-236 1702.001 et seq. Ch. 42 (note) 1801.001 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. III 1802.001 et seq. 26-127 1956.001 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. V Ch. 26, Art. V, 
Div. 2 1956.001 et seq. 26-331 1956.001 26-221 1956.002 26-223 26-236 1956.003 Ch. 26, Art. V 1956.003(f) 26-222 1956.003(b) 26-224 1956.016 26-236 1956.022 26-236 1956.031 26-242, 26-243 1956.032 26-236 1956.032(g) 26-235 1956.033 26-235 1956.0331 26-2 1956.034 26-239 1956.035 26-238 26-240 1956.037 26-241 1956.039 26-244 1956.040 26-237 1956.051 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. V Ch. 26, Art. V, 
Div. 3 2001.001 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. II, 
Div. 2 2001.503 10-51 2152.001 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. III 2154.001 et seq. Ch. 50, Art. IV 2302.001 et seq. 26-773 ch. 2303 26-756 26-768 26-773 2303.001 et seq. 26-768 2303.002 26-756 2308.001 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. VIII 26-763 26-765 26-767 2308.002 26-756 2308.104 26-756 2308.203 26-767  
Texas Penal Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1.03 1-2 12.23 1-15 28.01(6) Ch. 50 (note) 42.01 Ch. 46, Art. II 46-20 42.05 2-79 42.09 Ch. 14 (note) Ch. 14, Art. VI 42.091 Ch. 14 (note) 42.092 Ch. 14 (note) 42.10 Ch. 14 (note) 42.11 14-1 48.01 Ch. 58, Art. III  
Texas Property Code 
Section Section 
this Code 21.001 et seq. Char. § 122 202.001 26-756 301.001 et seq. Ch. 66, Art. II 301.003 66-26 301.004 66-91 301.021 66-92 301.023 66-94 301.024 66-95 301.025 66-93 301.026 66-96 301.027 66-97 301.042 66-92 301.043 66-28 301.171 66-98  
Texas Tax Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1.01 et seq. Char. §§ 74-76 Char. § 74 Ch. 98 (note) Ch. 98, Art. II 1.05 98-1 11.13(d)-(f) Ch. 98, Art. II, 
Div. 2 11.24 Ch. 98, Art. IV 34.01 et seq. 98-31 152.001 98-91 301.001 et seq. Char. § 97 Ch. 98, Art. II 301.004 Char. § 96 301.01 et seq. Ch. 98 (note) 302.001(c) Ch. 98 (note) 302.101 Char. § 96 312.001 et seq. Ch. 98, Art. V 313.001 et seq. Ch. 98, Art. V 351.001 et seq. Ch. 98, Art. III 98-92 351.004 98-93 351.008 98-92  
Texas Transportation Code 
Section Section 
this Code 21.001 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) 22.001 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. III 22.021 18-43 201.610 Ch. 46, Art. II 46-20 311.001 et seq. Ch. 94 (note) 313.053(b) 2-70 391.094 Ch. 66, Art. III 396.001 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. V Ch. 46, Art. V 46-223 471.007 102-3 ch. 501 26-756 94-16 ch. 502 26-756 502.001 94-17 521.101 26-221 522.003(19) 26-772 522.041-522.043 26-772 541.001 et seq. Ch. 102 (note) 541.001-541.401 102-1 541.201 94-16 542.009 94-16 542.202(a)(1) Ch. 102, Art. II 542.202(2) Ch. 102, Art. V 544.003 Ch. 102, Art. V 545.151 Ch. 102, Art. V 545.202(a)(2) Ch. 102, Art. V 545.303 102-144 102-149 545.351 et seq. 102-107 547.604 46-20 551.001 et seq. Ch. 102, Art. VII 551.201 94-16 551.301 94-16 551.351 et seq. 94-15 551.401 et seq. 94-17 551.405 94-17 552.007 26-64 601.001 et seq. 102-40 601.451 et seq. 102-40 681.001 et seq. 102-143 102-153 681.009(b) 102-153 681.011 102-153 683.001 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. III 683.071 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. III 683.071 46-46 683.072 46-47 683.073 46-48 683.074(3) 46-163 683.075 46-80 683.0765 Ch. 46, Art. III, 
Div. 4 683.077 46-49 683.077(b) 46-46 683.0775 Ch. 46, Art. III, 
Div. 2 683.078 Ch. 46, Art. III, 
Div. 5 46-104 46-165  
Texas Water Code 
Section Section 
this Code 5.1035 Ch. 106, Art. II ch. 7 106-412 11.039 106-186 ch. 13 94-259 13.042 Ch. 106 16.311 et seq. 54-27 16.3145 Ch. 54, Art. II 16.315 Ch. 54, Art. II ch. 26 106-412 26.001 et seq. Ch. 106, Art. VIII 26.176 Ch. 106 (note) 26.177 Ch. 106 (note) ch. 37 106-412  
Texas Ann. C.C.P. 
Article Section 
this Code 18.05 2-641 45.011 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II 45.0511(f) 34-27 62.001 et seq. 78-81 102.014 34-30 102.017 34-28 102.0172 34-29 103.0031 34-31  
