CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF WHARTON, TEXAS 
____________ 
Published in 1993 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
WHARTON, TEXAS 
____________ 
Tim Barker 
Mayor 
____________ 
Alfred Bryant 
Terry Freese 
Steven Schneider 
Don Mueller 
Russell Machann 
Vincent Huerta 
City Council 
____________ 
Andres Garza, Jr. 
City Manager 
____________ 
Paul Webb 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Joan Andel 
Finance Director 
____________ 
Paula Favors 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Wharton, Texas. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1978 Code, as supplemented through August 22, 1988, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1978 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Supervising Editor, and Jody Wilson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Rob Ramsey, City Attorney, and Ms. June Jansky, City Secretary, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 1993-13 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Wharton, Texas; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Wharton, Texas: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Wharton, Texas" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 86, each inclusive, and Appendix A is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before May 11, 1992, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00. For all other violations, the maximum fine shall not exceed $500.00. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after May 11, 1992, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective May 10, 1993. 
    Passed and adopted by the city council this 10th day of May, 1993. 
/s/ Garland S. Novosad 
      Mayor   /s/ June Jansky 
      City Secretary   Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the city council of the City Wharton, Texas held on the 10th day of May, 1993. 
/s/ June Jansky 
      City Secretary   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance
Number Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supplement
Number 2010-19 12-13-10 Include 16 2011-08  5- 9-11 Include 17 2011-13  9-12-11 Include 18 2011-14  9-12-11 Include 19 2011-20 11-14-11 Include 19 2012-01  1- 9-12 Include 20 2012-02  1- 9-12 Include 20 2012-09  6-11-12 Include 21 2012-10  8-27-12 Include 22 2012-11  9-10-12 Include 22 2012-15 10-22-12 Include 23 2012-16 11-12-12 Include 23 2013-11  6-10-13 Include 24 2013-12  6-10-13 Include 24 2013-13  6-10-13 Include 24 2013-14  6-24-13 Include 24 2011-08 
(Corr.)  5- 9-11 Include 25 2013-18  7-22-13 Include 25 2013-19  7-23-13 Include 25 2013-16  7- 8-13 Include 26 2013-20  8-26-13 Include 26 2013-25 10-14-13 Include 26 2014-06 
(Corr.)  8-25-14 Include 27 2014-13 12-18-14 Include 28 2015-04  1-26-15 Include 29 2015-05  2-23-15 Include 29 2015-09  8-10-15 Include 30 2015-10  8-24-15 Include 30 2015-15 12-14-15 Include 31 2016-06  8-22-16 Include 32 2016-07  8-30-16 Include 32 2016-11 10-24-16 Include 33 2017-03  2-13-17 Include 34 2017-04  2-13-17 Include 34 2017-05  2-13-17 Include 34 2017-09  8-28-17 Include 35 2017-10  8-28-17 Include 35 2017-14 10-23-17 Include 36 2017-15 12-11-17 Include 36 2018-03  2-26-18 Include 37 2018-07  6-11-18 Include 38 2018-06  8-27-18 Include 39 2019-02  1-14-19 Include 40 2019-03  1-14-19 Include 40 2019-04  1-14-19 Include 40  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the city charter, as adopted on January 20, 1970. Amendments to the charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original charter. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Capitalization in amendments has been conformed to the rest of the charter. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION; FORM OF GOVERNMENT; CORPORATE AND GENERAL POWERS 

Sec. 1. - Incorporation. 
    The inhabitants of the City of Wharton, Wharton County, Texas within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter established in the manner provided by this charter, shall continue to be and are hereby constituted a municipal body politic and corporate, in perpetuity, under the name of the "City of Wharton," hereinafter referred to as "the city," with such powers, privileges, rights, duties, and immunities as are herein provided. 
Sec. 2. - Form of government; elective city council. 
    The municipal government provided by this charter shall be known as the "council-manager form of city government." Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the constitution and general laws of the State of Texas and by this charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in an elective city council, hereinafter referred to as "the city council" or "the council," which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and appoint the city manager who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the city. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
Cross reference- City manager, § 42 et seq. 
Sec. 3. - General powers of the city. 
    The city shall have all the powers granted to municipal corporations and to cities by the constitution and general and special laws of the State of Texas together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. The city may acquire any character of property within or without its corporate limits for any city or corporate purpose or purposes in fee simple or any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease, or condemnation, and may sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage and control such property as its interests may require; and, except as prohibited by the constitution or laws of this State or restricted by this charter, the city shall and may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. 
    The city may use a corporate seal; may sue and be sued, may contract and be contracted with, may implead and be impleaded in all courts and places and in all matters whatever; may cooperate with the government of the State of Texas or any agency thereof, the Federal Government or any agency thereof, or any political subdivision of the State of Texas, to accomplish any lawful purpose for the advancement of the interest, welfare, health, morals, comfort, safety and convenience of the city or its inhabitants; and may pass such ordinances as may be expedient for maintaining and promoting the peace, welfare and government of the city, and for the performance of the functions thereof. The enumeration of particular powers by this charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive, and in addition to the powers enumerated therein or implied thereby, or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, it is intended that the city shall have, and may exercise, all powers of local self-government, and all powers enumerated in or authorized by Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175 as amended and amendments thereto hereafter enacted, and other applicable articles of Vernon's Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas, or any other powers which, under the constitution and general laws of the State of Texas, it would be competent for this charter specifically to enumerate. 
Sec. 4. - Special provisions for damage claims. 
    Before the City of Wharton shall be liable for damages for the death or personal injuries of any person or for damage to or destruction of property of any kind, which does not constitute a taking or damaging of property under Article I, Section 17, Constitution of Texas, the person injured, if living, or his representatives, if dead, or the owner of the property damaged or destroyed, shall file with the city secretary notice, addressed to the city council, in writing of such death, injury, damage or destruction, duly verified by affidavit, within six (6) months after same has been sustained, stating specifically in such written notice when, where, and how the death, injury, damage or destruction occurred, and the apparent extent of any such injury, the amount of damages sustained, the actual residence of the claimant by street and number at the date the claim is presented, the actual residence of such claimant for six (6) months immediately preceding the occurrence of such death, injury, damage or destruction, and the names and addresses of all witnesses upon whom it is relied to establish the claim for damages; and the failure to so notify the city secretary within the time and manner specified herein shall exonerate, excuse and exempt the city from any liability whatsoever. No act of any officer or employee of the city shall waive compliance, or estop the city from requiring compliance, with the provisions of this section as to notice, but such provisions may be waived by resolution of the city council, made and passed before the expiration of the six (6) month period herein provided, and evidenced by minutes of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1991-06, § 1, 5-7-91) 
State Law reference- See also the Texas Tort Claims Act, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 101.001 et seq. 
Sec. 5. - Eminent domain. 
    The city shall have the full right, power and authority to exercise the power of eminent domain to acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any municipal or corporate purpose or purposes when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this charter, or by the constitution or general laws of the State of Texas. In all cases where the city seeks to exercise the power of eminent domain, it may be controlled, as nearly as practicable, by the laws and procedures governing the condemnation of property by railroad corporations in this State, the city taking the position of the railroad corporation in any such case. The city may also exercise the power of eminent domain in any other manner authorized or permitted by the constitution and general laws of this State, or in the manner and form that may be provided by ordinance of the governing body of the city. The power of eminent domain hereby conferred shall include the right of the city to take the fee in the lands so condemned and such power and authority shall include the right to condemn public property for such purposes. The city shall have and possess this power of condemnation for any municipal or public purpose, even though not specifically enumerated herein or in this charter. 
State Law reference- Condemnation for highways, grant of alternative power, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1201; condemnation by railroads, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6336 et seq.; eminent domain generally, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 21.001 et seq.; municipal right of eminent domain, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 251.001 et seq. 
Sec. 6. - Street powers. 
    The city shall have the power to lay out, establish, open, alter, widen, lower, raise, extend, grade, abandon, discontinue, abolish, close, care for, dispose of, pave, supervise, maintain and improve streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, squares, public places and bridges; and regulate the use thereof and remove or require the removal from streets, sidewalks, alleys and other public property or places of all obstructions and all fruit stands, showcases and encroachments of every nature or character upon or in the air above any of said streets, sidewalks or other public property. 
State Law reference- Obstruction of street illegal, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.03; authority to remove obstructions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175(5). 
Sec. 7. - Street control and improvements; drainage. 
    The city shall have exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction in, upon, over and under the public streets, avenues, alleys and highways of the city, and may provide for the improvement thereof by paving, repaving, raising, draining, or otherwise. The provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 1105b and 1201-1220a are expressly adopted and made a part of this charter. Such exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction in, upon, over and under the public streets, avenues, alleys and highways of the city shall also include, but not be limited to, the right to regulate, locate, relocate, remove, or prohibit the location of, all utility pipes, lines, poles, wires, or other property. The city shall also have the power to create and establish improvement districts as authorized by Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 1179, 1180 and other articles of Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. 
Editor's note- Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 1179 and 1180 have been replaced by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 372.041. 
Sec. 8. - Extending city limits upon petition. 
    Whenever a majority of the qualified voters who are citizens of the State of Texas and inhabitants of any territory adjoining the city, as said territory may be designated by the city council, or in case there are no qualified voters in said territory, then when persons owning a majority of the land in area in said territory desire the annexation of such territory to the city, they may present a written petition to that effect to the city council and shall attach to said petition the affidavit of one or more of their number to the effect that said petition is signed by a majority of such qualified voters, or in case there are no qualified voters said affidavit shall be to the effect that there are no qualified voters in said territory and that the persons signing said petition own a majority of the land in area in said territory; and thereupon the city council at a regular session held not sooner than twenty (20) days after the presentation of said petition may, at its discretion, institute annexation proceedings subject to the limitations, restrictions, powers and procedural rules prescribed by the "Municipal Annexation Act" of 1963, as set out in section 9 of this charter. Upon the final passage of the annexation ordinance, the territory so annexed shall be a part of the city and the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all rights, privileges and services of other citizens of the city as provided in the "Municipal Annexation Act," and shall be bound by the city charter, acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the city. 
Editor's note- Municipal annexation is now governed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.001 et seq. 
Sec. 9. - Extending and fixing city limits by ordinance as restricted by law. 
(a)  Any territory adjacent to the present or future boundaries of the city may, from time to time, in any size or shape approved by the city council, be admitted and become a part of the city on application made or written consent given to the city council by the owner or owners of all land constituting said territory, or by majority of the qualified voters resident on the land sought to be added to the city. 
(b)  The city council shall have the power by ordinance to fix or adjust and correct the boundary limits of the city and to provide by ordinance for the alteration and extension of said boundary limits and the annexation of additional territory lying adjacent to the city, with or without the consent of the territory and inhabitants annexed; provided, however, that the annexation of additional territory shall be subject to the limitations, restrictions, powers, and procedural rules prescribed by the "Municipal Annexation Act" of 1963, codified as Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 970a, including Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175(2), as amended by said act. The territory so annexed shall be a part of the city, and the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all rights, privileges, and services of other citizens of the city, as provided in the "Municipal Annexation Act," and shall be bound by the city charter, acts, ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the city. 
(Election of 4-4-72, Prop. No. 3; Ord. No. 87-3, § 1, 2-9-87) 
Editor's note- The statutes cited in the above section have been replaced by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.001 et seq. 
Sec. 10. - Garbage disposal. 
    The city council shall have the right by ordinance to adopt and prescribe rules and regulations for the handling and disposition of all garbage, trash and rubbish within the city, and shall further have the right to fix charges and compensation to be charged by the city or franchise holder for the removal of garbage, trash and rubbish, providing rules and regulations for the collection of such charges or compensation. 
Sec. 11. - Water, sewerage and other systems. 
    In addition to the powers relative to city property and utilities contained elsewhere in this charter and the State laws, and without the intent of limitation, the following are set out for greater certainty: 
(1)  The city shall have the power to provide for sewage disposal and a sanitary sewer system; to require property owners to connect their premises with such sewer system, 
and to provide for charging the cost of such connection to the property, and the fixing of a lien against the property to cover the cost of such connection; to provide for fixing penalties for failure to make sanitary sewer connections; and shall further have the right to fix charges and compensation to be charged by the city for sewerage service, providing rules and regulations for the collection thereof. 
(2)  The city shall have power to provide for a water supply and waterworks system, and other service facilities; and shall have the power by ordinance to adopt and prescribe regulations governing the use of such systems or facilities, including the right by ordinance to provide for regulations governing the collection of charges for water and other services. 
(3)  The city shall also have power to extend the lines and services of its sewerage and waterworks systems or other service facilities outside the city limits and to sell water, sewerage services and other services to any person, firm or corporation outside the city limits, or permit them to connect therewith under contract with the city under such terms and conditions as may appear to be for the best interest of the city. The city council shall have power to prescribe rules and regulations governing the conditions under which the city may allow its water, sewerage or other service facilities to be used. 
ARTICLE II. - THE CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 12. - Governing body, number, election, term; mayor; districts; numbered places. 
A.  The governing and legislative body of the City of Wharton, as herein provided, shall consist of an elected mayor and six (6) councilmen, and said body shall be known as the "city council." The mayor's and councilmens' terms of office shall be two (2) years, or until their successors have been elected and qualified. The mayor and two (2) councilmen shall be elected from the city at large by a majority of vote of the qualified voters at the election. The other four (4) councilmen shall be elected by majority vote by single-member election districts designated geographically. 
B.  The initial districts shall be designated by an ordinance so as to take effect prior to the calling of the 1986 city general election. Reapportionment of the district shall be made by ordinance within a reasonable time, but not to exceed one (1) year, after each United States decennial census is officially published or after any substantial alteration is made in the boundaries of the city which may result in a substantial population change. 
C.  The initial boundaries and any adjustments of the boundaries shall, as closely as practical, result in districts being as near to equal in population as is practical so as to insure proportionate representation. 
D.  Until such time as the boundaries of election districts are reapportioned by ordinance, residents of newly annexed territories shall be deemed to be residents of the election district closest to where they reside as set forth in the annexation ordinance. 
E.  The councilmen shall serve for staggered terms. The mayor and the other six (6) councilmen shall all stand for election in 1986. Thereafter, the mayor and three (3) of the councilmen shall be elected at the regular election in even-numbered years and three (3) of the councilmen shall be elected at the regular election in odd-numbered years. By ordinance, the council shall determine the method of staggering the terms, the position names and numbers and the district names or numbers. 
F.  The regular election to elect a mayor or city councilman, special elections and other city election except as hereby modified shall be held as provided in Article[s] III and X, other articles of this chapter [charter] or applicable general laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 85-3, § 1, 2-25-85) 
State Law reference- Elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 1.001 et seq. 
Sec. 13. - Qualifications. 
    The mayor and each of the six councilmen shall be citizens of the United States of America and qualified voters of the City of Wharton and the State of Texas; shall be in compliance with all of the eligibility requirements for public office set out in the Texas Election Code as it now exists or may hereafter be amended; and shall not at the same time hold any other elected or appointed public office of emolument. A mayor or member of the council ceasing to possess any of the qualifications specified in this section, or convicted of a felony while in office, shall immediately forfeit his office. 
(Ord. No. 78-3, § 1, 2-13-78; Ord. No. 87-3, § 2, 2-9-87) 
State Law reference- Eligibility for public office, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 141.001 et seq. 
Sec. 14. - Compensation of members of city council. 
    The compensation of the mayor and city councilmen for council meetings shall be twenty ($20.00) dollars for attendance upon each meeting of the city council, provided, however, that no compensation shall be allowed the mayor or a councilman if absent from any regular meeting, unless such absence be unavoidable, the reason therefor presented in writing and be considered sufficient by a majority of the other members of the council, and such reason and action be spread upon the minutes of a council meeting. The mayor, in addition to the council meeting attendance allowance, shall receive fifty ($50.00) dollars per month as compensation for the performance of his additional duties as mayor. The members of the city council shall be entitled to all necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties or officially representing the city when such expenses are authorized and approved by a majority vote of the members of the council at a meeting of the council. After this charter has been in effect for two (2) years the council shall have the power to change the compensation allowed members of the city council and additional allowance provided for the mayor, following public notice and councilmen during their then current terms of office. 
(Ord. No. 78-3, § 2, 2-13-78; Ord. No. 1994-06, § 1, 2-14-94; Ord. No. 1994-14, § 1, 5-23-94) 
State Law reference- Compensation of officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 141.004. 
Sec. 15. - Presiding officer; mayor; mayor pro tem. 
    The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council and shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law, but shall have no regular administrative duties. The mayor shall sign all bonds, time warrants and such other official documents as directed by this charter or by the council, and perform such other duties consistent with the office as may be imposed upon him by this charter, and ordinances or resolutions passed in pursuance to the provisions of this charter. The mayor shall be entitled to vote upon all matters considered by the council, but he shall have no veto power. Following such regular annual election, upon the induction of the newly elected members of the governing body into office, the members of the city council shall elect one of the councilmen to be mayor pro tem. 
Sec. 16. - Vacancies in council. 
    A vacancy in the office of mayor shall be filled by the mayor pro tem for the balance of the unexpired term of the mayor or until the next regular annual election, whichever comes first. A vacancy in the office of councilman shall be filled by majority vote of the remaining members of the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term or until the next regular annual election, whichever comes first. All discussions and deliberations regarding filling a vacancy in the office of councilman shall take place in open session of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 87-3, § 3, 2-9-87) 
Sec. 17. - Powers, enumerated. 
    All powers of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter, and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the city council. Without limitation of the foregoing and among the other powers that may be exercised by the council, the following are hereby enumerated for greater certainty: 
(1)  Appoint and remove the city manager, and fix his compensation. 
(2)  Appoint and remove the director of finance, and fix his compensation. 
(3)  Approve the appointment and removal of any department head. 
(4)  Authorize the issuance of bonds, including the calling of elections therefor. 
(5)  Inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the city and make investigations as to municipal affairs. 
(6)  Provide for a planning commission, a zoning commission, a zoning board of adjustment, a human rights commission and such other boards and commissions as deemed necessary; and appoint the members of all such commissions and boards. The planning and zoning commissions may be combined. Such boards and commissions shall have all powers and duties now or hereafter conferred and created by this charter, by city ordinance or by law. 
(7)  Adopt plats. 
(8)  Adopt and modify the official map and master plan of the city. 
(9)  Adopt, modify, and carry out plans for housing standards, the clearance of slum districts and rehabilitation of blighted areas. 
(10)  Adopt, modify and carry out plans for the replanning, improvement and redevelopment of neighborhoods and for the replanning, reconstruction or redevelopment of any area or district which may have been destroyed in whole or in part by disaster. 
(11)  Regulate, license and fix the charges or fares made by any person owning, operating or controlling any vehicle of any character used for the carrying of passengers for hire or the transportation of freight for hire on the public streets and alleys of the city. 
(12)  Provide for the establishment and designation of fire limits and to prescribe the kind and character of buildings or structures or improvements to be erected therein, and to provide for the erection of fireproof buildings within certain limits, and to provide for the condemnation of dangerous structures or buildings or dilapidated buildings or buildings calculated to increase the fire hazard, and the manner of their removal or destruction. 
(13)  Define all nuisances and prohibit the same within the city and outside the city limits for a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet; police all parks or playgrounds, speedways, streets, roads, avenues or alleys owned by or under the jurisdiction of the city within or without the city limits; and prohibit the pollution of all sources of water supply of the city; provide for the protection of water sheds and the policing of the same. 
(14)  Provide for the inspection of dairies, cows, dairy herds, slaughter pens, slaughterhouses and abattoirs, within or without the city limits from which milk, milk products, meat, or eggs are furnished to the inhabitants of the city; provide for the inspection of meat markets, grocery stores, drugstores, confectioneries, fruit stands, ice cream factories, laundries, bottling plants, hotels, motels, restaurants and bakeries, the source, storage and distribution of their water supply, and all other places where food or drinks for human consumption are manufactured, handled, sold or exposed for sale; and regulate and inspect the quality and sanitary conditions of such articles of food and drinks so sold or offered for sale. 
(15)  Provide for the regulation and inspection of the sanitary condition of all premises and vacant lots within the city; for the removal of garbage, trash, rubbish, nightsoil and insanitary vegetation; provide for establishing a lien against the property for any expenses incurred by the city in enforcing such regulations; and adopt and enforce all necessary regulations for the health and sanitation of the city and its inhabitants. 
(16)  Provide regulations to require property owners, their agents and lessees to remove within a reasonable length of time, dirt, slush and other debris from the sidewalks fronting on property owned, occupied or controlled by such owner, agent or lessee; and to require such owner, agent or lessee to remove all low hanging limbs of trees adjacent to sidewalks and keep their shrubbery from obstructing the view of pedestrians or the operators of vehicles at or near street intersections. 
(17)  Regulate or prohibit the driving of herds of domestic animals along or upon the streets, alleys, parks or public grounds of the city; regulate, restrain or prohibit the running at large of animals, livestock and fowl, and regulate and restrain the keeping of animals, livestock and fowl within the city; establish and regulate public pounds or animal shelters, including regulations for impounding, sale or other disposition of animals, livestock and fowl where owner of same violates such regulations; and to prohibit the inhumane treatment of animals, livestock or fowl. 
(18)  Regulate, license or grant permits to any lawful business, occupation or calling susceptible to the control of the police power of the city. To regulate, license, control or prohibit the erection of awnings, signs or billboards within the city for control of safety hazards and nuisances. 
(19)  Regulate, restrain or prohibit the manufacture, sale, possession or use of fireworks within the city or outside the city limits for a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet; prohibit and restrain the shooting or discharging of firearms or air guns, or the use and practice of any amusement on the streets or sidewalks to the annoyance of pedestrians or persons using such streets or sidewalks; regulate, restrain or prohibit the ringing of bells, or blowing of horns, bugles and whistles, crying of goods, and all other noises, practices and performances tending to the collection of persons in the streets or tending, unnecessarily, to interfere with the peace and quietude of the inhabitants of the city; and regulate, restrain and prohibit all unnecessary noises. 
(20)  Regulate the operation of railway trains, buses, streetcars, motor vehicles, and all character of vehicles using or crossing the streets, alleys or other public places within the city. 
(21)  Regulate and fix standards for weights, measures and meters. 
(22)  Provide for regulations and the issuance of permits for the erection, demolition or moving of all buildings, for the inspection during construction of all buildings in respect to proper electric wiring and electric appliances and apparatus and gas piping and appliances, flues, chimneys, air conditioning and cooling towers, plumbing and sewer connections, and in respect to conformance with the building, electrical, plumbing and other applicable ordinances. 
(23)  Provide for the gathering, compiling, filing, and keeping of any character of public statistics; prescribe the form of blank report forms and records that shall be used; and determine who shall make and file any such report. 
(24)  Establish a traffic violations bureau, to be under the general supervision of the corporation [municipal] court judge, where persons charged with a traffic regulation violation may appear, under specified conditions, and pay a prescribed fine. 
(25)  To fine for and prohibit other offenses against persons, the public, or property; and to provide for the enforcement of all ordinances and codes of the city by assessing fines up to the maximum amount authorized by the laws of the State of Texas. 
(26)  Provide for the suspension and remission of punishment and the commutation of fines imposed, by labor in a workhouse or on the public streets and grounds of the city; and for the collection of any fine imposed by the corporation [municipal] court, execution may be enforced as executions in civil cases; provided that the punishment imposed for a violation of any offense denounced by a State law, over which the corporation [municipal] court has jurisdiction, may not be suspended or remitted unless provision therefor is made by State law. 
(Ord. No. 87-3, § 4, 2-9-87; Ord. No. 1994-06, § 2, 2-14-94; Ord. No. 1994-14, § 2, 5-23-94) 
Cross reference- Investigation by council, § 30; city manager, § 42 et seq.; preparation and submission of budget, § 51. 
State Law reference- Enumeration of powers, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175; name of corporation court changed to "municipal court," V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.002. 
Sec. 18. - Appointment of city manager. 
    The council shall appoint an individual who shall be an officer of the city who shall have the title of city manager and who shall have the powers and perform the duties in this charter provided. No mayor or councilman shall receive such appointment during the term for which he shall have been elected, nor within one (1) year after the expiration of the term of the office to which he was elected; provided, however, in the event of a vacancy in the office of city manager, the council may appoint the mayor or other member of the council as acting city manager to serve as such at the pleasure of the council and with remuneration to be set by the council and until such time as the vacancy in the office of city manager is filled. 
(Ord. No. 1994-06, § 3, 2-14-94; Ord. No. 1994-14, § 3, 5-23-94) 
Cross reference- City manager, § 42 et seq.; absence of city manager, § 44. 
Sec. 19. - Removal of city manager. 
    The council shall appoint the city manager for an indefinite term and may remove him from office in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for removal and may suspend the manager from duty for a period not to exceed forty-five (45) days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the manager. 
(2)  Within five (5) days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the manager, he may file with the council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held at a council meeting not earlier than fifteen (15) days nor later than thirty (30) days after the request is filed. The manager may file with the council a written reply not later than five (5) days before the hearing. 
(3)  The council may adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be made effective immediately, by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after five (5) days from the date when a copy of the preliminary resolution was delivered to the manager, if he has not requested a public hearing, or at any time after the public hearing if he has requested one. 
(4)  The manager shall continue to receive his salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. The action of the council in suspending or removing the manager shall not be subject to review by any court or agency. 
Sec. 20. - Council not to interfere in appointments or removals. 
    Neither the city council nor any of its members shall request or direct the appointment of any person to, or his removal from office or employment, except as authorized by any other section of this charter. Except for the purpose of inquiry the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately. 
(Ord. No. 1994-06, § 4, 2-14-94; Ord. No. 1994-14, § 4, 5-23-94) 
Sec. 21. - Right of city manager and other officers in council. 
    The city manager and such other officers of the city as may be designated by vote of the council, shall be entitled to seats in the council, but shall have no vote therein. The city manager shall have the right to take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the council. 
Cross reference- City manager, § 42 et seq. 
Sec. 22. - Administrative departments. 
    There are hereby created the following administrative departments: Finance, Tax, Police, Fire, Legal, Public Works, Health, and Utilities. The council may, if it deems it advisable, consolidate into one department not more than three (3) of the departments hereby established. The council by ordinance may create, change, and abolish offices, departments, or agencies other than the offices, departments and agencies established by this charter. The council by ordinance may, consistent with this charter, define the powers and duties of officers, departments and agencies. 
Sec. 23. - City secretary. 
    The city council shall designate an individual who shall be an officer of the city who shall be recommended by the city manager to serve as city secretary. He shall give notice of council meetings, shall keep the journal of its proceedings, shall authenticate by his signature and record in full in a book kept for the purpose all ordinances and resolutions, shall be authorized to accept all filings of notices addressed to or required to be filed with the city council except filings of notices on behalf of the council, shall serve as clerk for absentee voting, and shall perform such other duties as the city manager shall assign to him. He also may serve as head or director of one or more other departments or divisions when authorized to do so by the council, upon recommendations of the city manager. The council may provide for one or more deputy city secretaries and define their powers and duties. 
Sec. 24. - Corporation [municipal] court; appointment of judge and clerk. 
    There is hereby established a corporation [municipal] court, and to preside over such court, a city recorder [judge] or magistrate shall be appointed by the city council, to serve for a term of two (2) years. He may be removed for incompetency, misconduct, or malfeasance. He shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the council from time to time. The recorder [judge] shall be the "judge of the corporation [municipal] court" which shall have the jurisdiction and shall be conducted in the manner prescribed and authorized by law. The corporation [municipal] court shall also have jurisdiction over violations of any ordinance prohibiting the maintenance of any nuisance outside the city limits, within five thousand (5,000) feet of the corporate limit lines. In the event the judge of the corporation [municipal] court is unable to act for any reason, the city council shall appoint someone to act in his place. All costs and fines imposed by the corporation [municipal] court, or by any court in cases appealed from judgments of the corporation [municipal] court, shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city. The city secretary or his deputy shall be clerk of the corporation [municipal] court. The city secretary as clerk of the said court and his deputies shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of said court thereto, and generally do and perform any and all acts usual and necessary by clerks of courts in issuing processes of said courts and conducting the business thereof. The council may authorize the appointment of persons other than the city secretary or his deputies to serve as clerk or deputies of the court. 
State Law reference- Name of corporation court changed to "municipal court," V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.002; term "recorder" construed to refer to "judge," V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.004. 
Sec. 25. - Induction of council into office; meetings of council. 
    At the next meeting of the council following the regular municipal election held each year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the council shall meet at the usual time and place for holding meetings, and the newly elected mayor or councilmen or both mayor and councilmen shall qualify and assume the duties of office. Thereafter, the council shall meet regularly at such times as may be prescribed by its rules, but not less frequently than once each month. All city council meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the State of Texas Open Meetings Act (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6252-17), as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. The city secretary shall call special meetings upon the request of the mayor, city manager, or a majority of the councilmen. Any four (4) members of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business. The affirmative vote of four (4) members of the council shall be sufficient and necessary to adopt or repeal any ordinance or resolution, unless a greater number is required elsewhere by this charter or by state law. 
(Ord. No. 78-3, § 3, 2-13-78; Ord. No. 87-3, § 5, 2-9-87) 
State Law reference- Open meeting law, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6252-17. 
Sec. 26. - Council to be judge of qualifications of its members. 
    The council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its members and for such purpose shall have power to subpoena witnesses and require the production of records, but the decision of the council in any such case shall be subject to review by the courts. 
Sec. 27. - Rules of procedure; journal. 
    The council shall determine its own rules and order of business. The council may compel the attendance of its members at meetings of the council. It shall keep minutes of its proceedings and shall make these minutes available for public inspection in accordance with the provisions of the Texas Open Records Act (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6252-17a), as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 87-3, § 6, 2-9-87) 
Sec. 28. - Ordinances, when required. 
    In addition to such acts of the council as are required by statute or by this charter to be by ordinance, every act of the council establishing a fine or other penalty or providing for the appropriation of funds or for the annual levy of taxes, shall be by ordinance. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be, "BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WHARTON, TEXAS" and the enacting clause of resolutions shall be similar. 
Sec. 29. - Procedure for passage of ordinances. 
    Every ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form and, upon passage, shall take effect at the time indicated therein; provided that any ordinance imposing a penalty, fine or forfeiture for a violation of its provisions shall become effective not less than ten (10) days from the date of its passage. The city secretary shall give notice of the passage of every ordinance imposing a penalty, fine or forfeiture for a violation of the provisions thereof, by causing the descriptive caption or title, including the penalty of any such ordinance to be published in the official newspaper in the city once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks after the passage of said ordinance. He shall note on every ordinance, the caption of which is hereby required to be published, and on the record thereof, the fact that same has been published as required by the charter, and the dates of such publication, which shall be prima facie evidence of the legal publication and promulgation of such ordinance; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the correction, amendment, revision and codification of the ordinances of the city for publication in book or pamphlet form. Except as otherwise provided in section 117 of this charter, it shall not be necessary to the validity of any ordinance that its caption shall appear on the agenda at more than one city council meeting or be considered at more than one (1) session of the city council. Every ordinance shall be authenticated by the signature of the mayor or mayor pro tem and city secretary and shall be systematically recorded in an ordinance book in a manner approved by the council. It shall only be necessary to record the caption or title of ordinances in the minutes or journal of council meetings. The city council shall have power to cause the ordinances of the city to be corrected, amended, revised, codified and printed in code form as often as the council deems advisable, and such printed code, when adopted by the council, shall be in full force and effect without the necessity of publishing the same or any part thereof in a newspaper. Such code shall be updated by supplement as required. Such printed code shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and places without further proof. 
(Ord. No. 1991-06, § 2, 5-7-91) 
Sec. 30. - Investigation by council. 
    The council shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any office, department, agency, officer, board or commission of the city and to make investigations as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses or issue attachments, administer oaths, and compel the production of books, papers and other evidence. Failure to obey such subpoena or attachment or to produce books, papers or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute an act of contempt of the city council punishable by fine not to exceed two hundred ($200.00) dollars, and each day's failure to obey shall constitute a separate offense. 
Cross reference- Additional grant of authority, § 17(5). 
Sec. 31. - Independent annual audit. 
    Prior to the end of each fiscal year, the council shall designate a licensed public accountant or a certified public accountant who, as of the end of each fiscal year, shall make an independent audit of accounts and other evidences of financial transactions of the city government and shall submit his report to the council. Notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper in the city that the annual audit is on file at the city hall for inspection. Such accountant shall not maintain any accounts or record of the city business, but, within specifications approved by the council, shall postaudit the books and documents kept by the department of finance and any separate or subordinate accounts kept by any other office, department or agency of the city government. 
ARTICLE III. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 

Sec. 32. - Municipal elections; regular and special. 
    The regular elections to elect members of the city council shall be held on the first Saturday of May each year. At the regular election in each even-numbered year, the voters shall elect a mayor and three councilmen. At the regular election in each odd-numbered year, the voters shall elect three (3) councilmen. The mayor and councilmen shall serve for terms and numbered places as provided in Article II of this charter. The city council may, by ordinance or resolution, order special elections, fix the dates, give notice, and provide all means for holding such special elections. 
(Election of 4-4-72, Prop. No. 1; Ord. No. 87-3, § 7, 2-9-87; Ord. No. 1991-06, § 3, 5-7-91) 
State Law reference- Election dates, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 41.001 et seq. 
Sec. 33. - Regulation of elections. 
    The council shall make all regulations which it considers needful or desirable, not inconsistent with this charter or the laws of the State of Texas, for the conduct of municipal elections, for the prevention of fraud in such elections. Municipal elections shall be conducted by the appointed election officials, who shall also have power to make such regulations not inconsistent with this charter, with any regulations made by the council or the laws of the State of Texas. 
Sec. 34. - Voting precincts. 
    The city council shall, when the total number of qualified voters justify it, subdivide the city into two (2) or more convenient election or voting precincts. Such precincts shall be well defined, contain approximately the same number of qualified voters in each and be provided with voting place or polling place. The qualified voters actually residing in such a voting precinct shall vote in that precinct in all city elections. Until such voting precincts are established by ordinance as herein provided, city elections shall be held at the voting place designated in the ordinance or resolution calling an election. 
State Law reference- Polling places, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 43.001 et seq. 
Sec. 35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 8 of Ord. No. 87-3, adopted on February 9, 1987, amended the charter by repealing former § 35 in its entirety, which section pertained to status of officers and election of one councilman at the time of adoption of this charter, and derived from the original charter provisions adopted on January 20, 1970. 
Sec. 36. - How to get name on ballot. 
    Any qualified voter of the city who is otherwise qualified to hold elective office under this charter may have his name printed upon the official ballot for the particular office at any election by filing his sworn application and loyalty affidavit as required by the election code of the State of Texas with the city secretary at least thirty (30) days prior to the election day. 
State Law reference- Placing candidate's name on ballot, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 52.003; candidate for city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 143.001 et seq. 
Sec. 37. - Mayor and councilmen ballots. 
    The names of all candidates for the office of mayor or councilman as hereinbefore provided, except such as may have withdrawn, died or become ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballots without party designations. If two (2) candidates with the same surnames, or with names so similar as to be likely to cause confusion have made application to have a place on the ballot, the addresses of their places of residence shall be placed with their names on the ballot. The order of the names of candidates for places on the ballot shall be determined by lot. 
Sec. 38. - Election of mayor and councilmen by majority; runoff elections. 
    When, in any regular election to elect a mayor or councilmen or both to fill the mayor's place or numbered councilmen places or both, no candidate receives a majority of all of the votes cast for any one of such offices or places at such election, the city council shall, not later than the 5th day after the date the final canvass of the main election is completed, order a runoff election for every such officer's place to which no one was elected. Any such runoff election shall be held not earlier than the 20th day nor later than the 30th day after the date of completing the final canvass of the main election. In any runoff election, the candidates shall be the two (2) candidates who, in the preceding regular election, received the highest and second highest number of votes for each office or numbered councilman place to which no one was elected. The candidate who receives the majority of the votes cast for each such office or place in the runoff election shall be declared elected to such office or numbered councilman place. If the candidates in the runoff election tie, they shall draw lots to determine the winner. The city secretary shall supervise the drawing of lots. 
(Election of 4-4-72, Prop. No. 2; Ord. No. 78-3, § 4, 2-13-78; Ord. No. 87-3, § 9, 2-9-87) 
Sec. 39. - Vacancy in office of mayor or councilman. 
    A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilman shall be filled by a person qualified under this charter by a majority vote of the remaining members of the city council as set out in section 16 of this charter. In case of vacancies in all of the elective offices at the same time, such vacancies shall be filled by a special election called by the county judge of Wharton County under the same procedure as provided herein for action by the city council or remaining members of the city council. 
Sec. 40. - Laws governing city elections. 
    All city elections, including absentee voting, shall be governed, except as otherwise provided by the charter, by the laws of the State of Texas governing general and municipal elections, so far as same may be applicable thereto; and in the event there should be any failure of the general laws or this charter to provide for some feature of the city elections, then the city council shall have the power to provide for such deficiency, and no informalities in conducting a city election shall invalidate the same, if it be conducted fairly and in substantial compliance with the general laws, where applicable, and the charter and ordinances of the city. 
Sec. 41. - Canvassing election returns. 
    All returns of city elections, general, runoff and special, shall be made by the election officers to the city council and delivered to the city secretary for safekeeping, and it shall be the duty of the council within one (1) week after each election to canvass the returns and declare results of the election. If the election is held for the purpose of electing a mayor or councilmen, the council shall cause to be issued proper certificates to the successful candidates. 
ARTICLE IV. - THE CITY MANAGER; DEPARTMENT HEADS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Appointment of city manager required, §§ 2, 18; power to appoint city manager, § 17(1); removal of city manager, § 17(1); participation by city manager in council meetings, § 21. 

Sec. 42. - The city manager; qualifications. 
    The city manager shall be chosen by the council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his actual experience in, or his knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the duties of his office as hereinafter set forth. At the time of his appointment, he need not be a resident of the city or State of Texas, but during his tenure of office he shall reside within the city unless otherwise authorized by the council. The city manager shall provide a bond, payable to the city, with such surety, in such amount and in such form as the city council may require except that such bond shall be in an amount of not less than ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars. The premium of such surety bond shall be paid by the city. 
Sec. 43. - The city manager; powers and duties. 
    The city manager shall be the chief executive officer and the head of the administrative branch of the city government. He shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city, except as otherwise provided in this charter, and to that end, he shall have power and be required to: 
(1)  See that the laws and ordinances of the city are enforced. 
(2)  Appoint and, when necessary or desirable for the good of the city, remove all officers and employees of the city except as otherwise provided by this charter and except as he may authorize the head of a department to appoint and remove subordinates in such department, such appointments being made upon merit and fitness alone. 
(3)  Prepare and submit to the council his recommendations concerning the establishment, and the revision from time to time, of a merit system and personnel policy for city employees. 
(4)  Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the council and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
(5)  Prepare and submit to the council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year. 
(6)  Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations as may seem to him desirable. 
(7)  Carry out the program or programs adopted by the council. 
(8)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or required of him by the council, not inconsistent with this charter. 
Sec. 44. - Absence of city manager. 
    To perform his duties during his temporary absence or disability, the city manager may designate by letter addressed to the council and filed with the city secretary a qualified administrative officer of the city. In the event of failure of the city manager to make such designation, the council shall by resolution appoint an officer of the city to perform the duties of the manager until he shall return or his disability shall cease. 
Cross reference- Interim designation of member of council, § 18. 
Sec. 45. - Directors of departments. 
    At the head of each administrative department there shall be a chief or director, who shall be an officer of the city and shall have supervision and control of the department subject to the city manager. Two or more departments may be headed by the same individual, the city manager may head one or more departments, and directors of departments may also serve as chief of divisions. The heads of administrative departments and other officers and employees of the city may be required to provide individual bonds or be covered under a blanket bond, with such surety, in such amount or amounts and in such form as the council may direct. The premium of such bond or bonds shall be paid by the city. 
Sec. 46. - Departmental divisions. 
    The work of each administrative department may be distributed among such divisions thereof as may be established by the city council upon the recommendations of the city manager. Pending the passage of a resolution by the council distributing the work of departments under the supervision and control of the city manager among specific divisions thereof, the manager may establish temporary divisions. 
ARTICLE V. - ATTORNEY 

Sec. 47. - Appointment of attorney and assistants. 
    The city council shall appoint an attorney, who shall hold office for the duration of his appointment unless sooner removed by the council. The city attorney shall appoint such assistants and other employees as may be authorized by the council. The attorney, his assistants, and employees shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the council. The city council may employ special legal counsel when in its judgment such counsel is needed for specific cases or objectives. 
Sec. 48. - Qualifications of attorney and assistants. 
    The attorney and his assistants shall be licensed to practice before the Supreme Court of Texas, and be members of the State Bar of Texas in good standing. 
Sec. 49. - Powers and duties. 
    The attorney shall be the chief legal advisor and attorney for the city. He shall attend all meetings of the council and all advisory board meetings when designated by the council, unless excused for good cause. He shall give such necessary written opinions as may be requested of him by the council, the city manager, the various department heads of the city government or the chairman of the various advisory boards appointed by the council. The attorney or one of his assistants shall represent the city in the corporation [municipal] court and shall file such suits on behalf of the city or defend the city in all such suits against the city as the need therefor arises and shall have charge of all litigation involving the city in State and Federal courts. The attorney shall approve all ordinances prior to their passage, prepare contracts and other legal instruments for the city and approve as to form all bonds required to be submitted to the city. 
ARTICLE VI. - THE BUDGET 

Sec. 50. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on the first day of October and shall end on the last day of September of the next following calendar year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year. As used in this charter the term "budget year" shall mean the fiscal year for which any particular budget is adopted and in which it is administered. The council shall have the power to change the dates of the fiscal year, after notice and public hearing. 
Cross reference- Finance administration, art. VII. 
Sec. 51. - Preparation and submission of budget. 
    The city manager, at least thirty (30) days prior to the beginning of each budget year, shall submit to the council a proposed budget and an explanatory budget message in the form and with the contents provided by sections 60 and 62. For such purpose, at such date as he shall determine, he, or an officer designated by him shall obtain from the head of each office, department or agency estimates of revenue and expenditure of that office, department, or agency detailed by organization units and character and object of expenditure, and such other supporting data as he may request. In preparing the budget, the city manager shall review the estimates, shall hold hearings thereon and may revise the estimates, as he may deem advisable. 
Cross reference- Authority to adopt budget, § 17(3); finance administration, art. VII. 
Sec. 52. - Budget a public record. 
    The budget, as well as the budget message and all supporting schedules, shall be open to public inspection, in accordance with the provisions of the Texas Open Records Act (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6252-17a), as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 87-3, § 10, 2-9-87) 
Sec. 53. - Publication of notice of public hearing. 
    At the meeting of the council at which the budget and budget message are submitted, the council shall determine the place and time of the public hearing on the budget, and shall cause to be published one time in the official newspaper a notice of the place and time, not less than seven (7) days nor more than fourteen (14) days after date of publication, at which the council will hold a public hearing. 
Sec. 54. - Public hearing on budget. 
    At the time and place so advertised, or at any time and place to which such public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the council shall hold a public hearing on the budget as submitted, at which all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard, for or against the estimates or any item thereof. 
Sec. 55. - Vote required for adoption. 
    The budget shall be amended or adopted by the favorable votes of at least a majority of all members of the council. 
Sec. 56. - Date of final adoption; failure to adopt. 
    The budget for the ensuing fiscal year shall be finally adopted not later than the last day of the then current fiscal year. Should the council take no final action on or prior to the twentieth day after the last day of the fiscal year which has just ended, the budget as submitted by the city manager, shall become effective as if finally adopted by the council. 
Sec. 57. - Effective date of budget; certification; copies made available. 
    Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the budget year. A copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be filed with the city secretary, the county clerk of Wharton County, and the State Comptroller of Public Accounts in Austin. The final budget shall be printed, mimeographed or otherwise reproduced and sufficient copies shall be made available for the use of all offices, departments and agencies, and for the use of interested persons and civic organizations. 
Sec. 58. - Budget establishes appropriations. 
    From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects and purposes therein named. 
Sec. 59. - Budget establishes amount to be raised by property tax. 
    From the effective date of the budget, the amount stated therein as the amount to be raised by property tax shall constitute a determination of the amount of the levy for the purposes of the city, in the corresponding tax year, subject, however, to the limitations of this charter and the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
Sec. 60. - Budget message. 
    The budget message submitted by the city manager to the council shall be explanatory of the budget, shall contain an outline of the proposed financial policies of the city for the budget year and shall describe in connection therewith the important features of the budget plan. It shall set forth the reasons for salient changes from the previous year in expenditure and revenue items and shall explain any major changes in financial policy. 
Sec. 61. - Supporting schedules. 
    Attached to the budget message shall be such supporting schedules, exhibits and other explanatory material, in respect to both current operations and capital outlays as the city manager shall believe useful to the council. 
Sec. 62. - Budget contents. 
    The budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the fiscal year. It shall contain the following: 
(1)  A budget message. 
(2)  A consolidated statement of receipts and expenditures for all funds. 
(3)  An analysis of property valuations. 
(4)  An analysis of anticipated tax rate. 
(5)  Tax levies and tax collections by years for at least five (5) years. 
(6)  General fund resources in detail. 
(7)  Summary of proposed expenditures by function, department and activity. 
(8)  Summary of proposed expenditures by character and object. 
(9)  Detailed estimates of expenditures shown separately for each activity to support the summaries mentioned in subsections (7) and (8) above. Such estimates of expenditures are to include an itemization of positions showing the number of persons having each title and the rate of pay. 
(10)  A revenue and expense statement for all types of bonds. 
(11)  A description of all bond issues outstanding, showing rate of interest, date of issue, maturity date, amount authorized, amount issued, and amount outstanding. 
(12)  A schedule of requirements for the principal and interest on each issue of bonds. 
(13)  A special funds section. 
(14)  The appropriation ordinance. 
(15)  A copy of the tax levying ordinance, in outline. 
    The total estimated expenditures of the general fund and debt service fund shall not exceed the total estimated resources of each fund (prospective income plus cash on hand). The classification of revenue and expenditure accounts shall conform as nearly as local conditions will permit to the uniform classification as promulgated by the National Committee on Municipal Accounting or some other nationally accepted classification. 
Sec. 63. - Anticipated revenues compared with other years. 
    In parallel columns opposite the several items of revenue there shall be placed the actual amount of such items for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year, and the proposed amount for the ensuing budget year. 
Sec. 64. - Proposed expenditures compared with other years. 
    The proposed expenditures for the administration, operation, maintenance and capital outlay of each office, department or agency of the city shall be itemized by character and object. In parallel columns opposite the various items of expenditures, there shall be placed the actual amount of such items of expenditures for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year and the proposed amount for the ensuing budget year. 
Sec. 65. - Contingent appropriation. 
    Provision shall be made in the annual budget and in the appropriation ordinance for a contingent appropriation in an amount not more than three (3) percent of the total general fund expenditure, and like amounts of the utility funds, to be used in the case of unforeseen items of expenditures. Such contingent appropriation shall be under the control of the city manager and distributed by him after approval by the city council. Expenditures from this appropriation shall be made only in case of established emergencies and a detailed account of such expenditures shall be recorded and reported. The proceeds of the contingent appropriation shall be disbursed only by transfer to other departmental appropriations, the spending of which shall be charged to the departments or activities for which the appropriations are made. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCE ADMINISTRATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Fiscal year, § 50; budget, § 51 et seq.; tax administration, art. VIII; issuance and sale of bonds, art. IX. 
State Law reference- Depositories for municipal funds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 105.001 et seq. 

Sec. 66. - Director of finance; appointment. 
    There shall be a department of finance, the head or director of which shall be the city manager or be an appointment by the city council as set out in section 17 of this charter. 
(Ord. No. 1994-06, § 5, 2-14-94; Ord. No. 1994-14, § 5, 5-23-94) 
Sec. 67. - Director of finance; qualifications. 
    The director of finance shall have expert knowledge of municipal accounting and taxation and shall have had experience in budgeting and financial control. 
Sec. 68. - Director of finance; surety bond. 
    The director of finance shall provide a bond with such surety and in such amount as the council may require, except that such bond shall be in an amount of not less than ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars. The premium of such bond shall be paid by the city. 
Sec. 69. - Director of finance; powers and duties; city treasurer. 
    The director of finance shall have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the city and to that end he shall have authority and shall be required to: 
(1)  Compile the estimates of revenues and expenditures for the budget as directed by the city manager. 
(2)  Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all moneys and have control over all expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations are not exceeded. 
(3)  Maintain or be responsible for a general accounting system for the city government and each of its offices, departments and agencies; exercise financial budgetary control over each office, department and agency; be responsible for the establishment and maintenance of a system of accounting which conforms to the standards set by recognized authorities such as the Municipal Finance Officers Association and the National Committee on Governmental Accounting; and require reports of receipts and disbursements from each receiving and spending agency of the city government, to be made daily or at such intervals as he may deem expedient. 
(4)  Submit to the council a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the city. 
(5)  Prepare, as of the end of each fiscal year, a complete financial statement and report, a summary of which shall be published. 
(6)  Supervise the collection of all revenues for the city and receive all money receivable by or due the city from the State or Federal government, or from any court, or from any office, department or agency of the city. 
(7)  Serve as ex officio city treasurer, and have custody of all public funds belonging to or under the control of the city, or any office, department or agency of the city, and deposit all funds coming into his hands in such depositories as may be designated by resolution of the council, or by the city manager, if no such resolution be adopted, subject to the requirements of law as to surety and the payment of interest on deposits, but all such interest shall be the property of the city and shall be accounted for and credited to the proper account; provided that some other officer of the city may by resolution be designated to perform the duties of treasurer. 
(8)  Have custody of and be responsible to the council for all investments and invested funds of the city government, or in possession of such government in a fiduciary capacity, and have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the city and the receipt and delivery of city bonds and notes for transfer, registration or exchange. 
(9)  Supervise and be responsible for the purchase, storage and distribution of all supplies, materials, equipment and other articles used by any office, department or agency of the city; provided that these duties may be imposed upon some other officer of the city by resolution. 
(10)  Approve all proposed expenditures; certify that there is an unencumbered balance of appropriations and available funds, before appropriations shall be encumbered and before expenditures shall be made. 
(Ord. No. 1994-06, § 6, 2-14-94; Ord. No. 1994-14, § 6, 5-23-94) 
Sec. 70. - Transfers of appropriations. 
    The city manager may at any time with the approval of the council transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof between general classifications of expenditures within an office, department or agency. At the request of the city manager and within the last three (3) months of the budget year, the council may by resolution transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof from one office, department or agency to another. 
Sec. 71. - Accounting supervision and control. 
    The director of finance shall have power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Prescribe the forms of receipts, vouchers, bills or claims to be used by all the offices, departments and agencies of the city. 
(2)  Examine and approve all contracts, orders and other documents by which the city incurs financial obligations, having previously ascertained that moneys have been appropriated and allotted and will be available when the obligations shall become due and payable. 
(3)  Audit and approve before payment all bills, invoices, payrolls and other evidence of claims, demands or charges against the city government, and with the advice of the city attorney determine the regularity, legality and correctness of such claims, demands or charges. 
(4)  Inspect and audit any accounts or records of financial transactions which may be maintained in any office, department or agency of the city apart from or subsidiary to the accounts kept in his office. 
Sec. 72. - Appropriations lapse at end of year. 
    All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the budget year to the extent that they shall not have been expended or lawfully encumbered. 
Sec. 73. - Fees shall be paid to city. 
    All fees and charges for city services received by any officer or employee shall belong to the city and, unless otherwise prescribed by ordinance, shall be paid to the department of finance at such times as required by the director of finance. 
Sec. 74. - Division of purchases; purchasing agent. 
    A division of purchases shall be established in the department of finance or in the office of the city manager, the chief of which shall be the city purchasing agent who shall be the city manager or be designated by him. The division of purchases, pursuant to rules and regulations established by ordinance, shall contract for, purchase, store and distribute all supplies, materials and equipment required by any office, department or agency of the city. The division of purchases shall also have power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Establish and enforce specifications with respect to supplies, materials, and equipment required by the city. 
(2)  Inspect or supervise the inspection of all deliveries of supplies, materials, and equipment, and determine their quality, quantity, and conformance with specifications. 
(3)  Have charge of such general storerooms and warehouses as the council may provide by ordinance. 
(4)  Transfer to or between offices, departments or agencies; or with the approval of the council, sell surplus, obsolete, or unused supplies, material and equipment. 
(5)  Cause a running inventory to be kept showing receipts and disbursements of materials, supplies and equipment. 
Sec. 75. - Sale of city personal property; procedure. 
(a)  Before the city makes any sale or contract for the sale of any personal property belonging to the city, having an estimated value of one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars or less, opportunity shall be given for open competition under such rules and regulations as the city council may prescribe. 
(b)  In the sale of any such property valued at more than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars, the property shall be advertised, one time in the official newspaper, for sale and bids. The contract of sale shall be awarded to the highest responsible bidder after such public notice and competition as may be prescribed by the council, provided the council shall have the power to reject all bids and advertise again. 
Sec. 76. - Purchase procedure. 
    Before the city makes any purchase, lease, lease purchase or contract for supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services, opportunity shall be given for competition. The director of finance, under the direction and with the approval of the city manager, shall have authority to make expenditures without the approval of the city council for all budgeted items not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in total consideration. Any expenditure involving more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in total consideration must be expressly approved in advance by the city council. All leases, lease purchases, contracts or purchases involving more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in total consideration shall be let to the lowest and best bid by a responsible bidder after having given an opportunity for competitive bidding. When an expenditure of more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in total consideration is involved, notice of the time and place that the city shall let such contract shall be published in a newspaper in the city once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the time for making such lease purchase or letting such contract, the time of the first publication to be at least fourteen (14) days prior to the time for making such lease purchase or letting such contract; provided, however, that the city council shall have the right to reject all bids and advertise again; and provided further that nothing herein shall apply to contracts for professional services nor to work done by the city and paid for by the day as such work progresses, nor to grave emergencies declared by the mayor and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 78-3, § 5, 2-13-78; Ord. No. 87-3, § 11, 2-9-87; Ord. No. 1994-06, § 7, 2-14-94; Ord. No. 1994-14, § 7, 5-23-94) 
Sec. 77. - Contracts for city improvements. 
    Any city improvement costing more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) total consideration shall be executed by contract or lease, except where such improvement is authorized by the council to be executed directly by a city department in conformity with detailed plans, specifications and estimates. All such contracts or leases for more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) total consideration shall be awarded to the lowest and best bid by a responsible bidder after there has been an opportunity for competitive bidding. Where such an improvement contract or lease will involve the expenditure of more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) total consideration, notice of the time and place, when and where such contract or lease shall be let shall be published in a newspaper in the city once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the time for letting such contract or lease, the time of the first publication to be at least fourteen (14) days prior to the time for letting such contract or lease; provided the city council shall have the power to reject all bids and advertise again. Alterations in any contract or lease may be made when authorized by the council upon written recommendations of the city manager; provided that such alteration is acceptable to the other party of the contract or lease. 
(Ord. No. 78-3, § 5, 2-13-78; Ord. No. 87-3, § 12, 2-9-87; Ord. No. 1994-06, § 8, 2-14-94; Ord. No. 1994-14, § 8, 5-23-94) 
State Law reference- Purchasing and contracting authority of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 252.001 et seq. 
Sec. 78. - Accounting control of purchases. 
    All purchases made and contracts executed by the division of purchases shall be pursuant to a written requisition from the head of the office, department or agency whose appropriation will be charged, and no contract or order shall be issued to any vendor unless and until the director of finance certifies that there is to the credit of such office, department or agency a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance to pay for the supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services for which the contract or order is to be issued. 
Sec. 79. - Disbursement of funds. 
    All checks, vouchers or warrants for the withdrawal of money from the city depository shall be prepared and signed by the city treasurer, or his deputy, and countersigned by the city manager, two different signatures being required. No payment of any claim in connection with city purchases shall be made unless such claim shall be evidenced by an itemized account or invoice and the required references to purchase orders, and be approved by the head of the office, department or agency whose appropriation will be charged and by the director of finance or the city manager. In the absence of the city manager, checks may be countersigned by the city secretary or some other officer designated by the council by resolution, two different signatures being required. The council may authorize the use of an approved type of mechanical signature. 
Sec. 80. - Borrowing in anticipation of property taxes. 
    In any budget year, in anticipation of the collection of the property tax for such year, whether levied or to be levied in such year, the council may by resolution authorize the borrowing of money by the issuance of negotiable notes of the city, each of which shall be designated "tax anticipation note for the year 19___" (stating the budget year). Such notes shall mature and be payable not later than the end of the fiscal year in which the original notes shall have been issued. 
Sec. 81. - Borrowing in anticipation of other revenues. 
    In any budget year, in anticipation of the collection or receipt of other revenues of that budget year, the council may by resolution authorize the borrowing of money by the issuance of negotiable notes of the city, each of which shall be designated "special revenue note for the year 19___" (stating the budget year). Such notes may be renewed from time to time, but all such notes, together with the renewals, shall mature and be payable not later than the end of the fiscal year in which the original notes shall have been issued. 
Sec. 82. - Sale of notes; report of sale; other borrowing. 
    All notes issued pursuant to this article may be sold at not less than par and accrued interest by the director of finance without previous advertisement, but such sale shall be authorized and approved by the council; provided, however, that the council shall also have the power by resolution to authorize the temporary or short-term borrowing of money on the credit of the city by the issuance of notes, or by the issuance of time warrants as authorized by law. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TAX ADMINISTRATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Finance administration, art. VII. 

Sec. 83. - Department of taxation; assessor and collector. 
    The city council shall have the authority to establish a department of taxation. The city manager shall have the authority to appoint the head of this department, whose title shall be city tax assessor or tax collector or both. The city manager's appointment of the head of this office shall be subject to council approval. The head of the department shall be responsible for the assessment of property for city taxes and for the collection of all taxes that the council levies. The head of the department shall also be responsible for performing any such other duties that city ordinances or state laws may require. The assessor and collector shall give a surety bond, in an amount that the city council fixes, for the faithful performance of his duties, including compliance with all controlling provisions of this charter, any ordinances of the city, and any state laws relating to the functions of the assessor and collector's office. The city shall pay the premium of any such bond. The council may enter into agreement with the Central Appraisal District or any other local district for the assessment and collection of city taxes. 
(Ord. No. 87-3, § 13, 2-9-87) 
Sec. 84. - Property subject to tax; method of assessment; rate limit. 
(a)  The city council shall have power to assess, levy and collect an annual tax upon taxable property within the city not to exceed the maximum provided by the constitution and applicable laws of the State of Texas. All real, personal or mixed property within the city not expressly exempted by law shall be subject to annual taxation by the city. 
(b)  Each person, partnership, association or corporation owning, holding or controlling property within the limits of the city shall, between the first day of January and the first day of April of each year, hand to the city assessor and collector, on forms supplied by him, a full and complete sworn inventory of the property possessed or controlled by him, her or them, within said limits on the first day of January of the current year. All assessments of real property, whether rendered or unrendered, shall list the value of the real property; and shall describe such property sufficiently to identify it, naming the last known owner, and if unknown, such fact shall be noted. 
(c)  The city assessor and collector shall review all renditions made to him and determine the value of the property so rendered and indicate his value for tax purposes on the inventory or rendition forms for the use and benefit of the board of equalization. In all cases of failure to obtain a statement of real and personal property from any cause, the assessor and collector shall ascertain the amount and value of such property and assess the same; and such assessment shall be as valid and binding as if such property had been rendered by the owner thereof. 
(d)  The city assessor and collector shall assess all property which has been omitted from assessment in prior years upon a current supplemental assessment roll. The taxes on such supplemental assessments shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to the same penalty and interest as other delinquent taxes. 
(e)  In addition to the powers granted by subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d) of this section, in those instances where property has been judicially determined to be erroneously assessed, the city assessor and collector shall have the same power as county tax assessors and collectors in Texas to make reassessments, all at the same value and tax rates as such property should have been assessed and taxed for past years and indicating the year or years for which it is assessed. 
State Constitution reference- Equality and uniformity of taxes, art. VIII, § 1; tax rate limited, art. VIII, § 9, art. XI, § 5. 
State Law reference- Appraisal and assessment, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 21.01 et seq. 
Secs. 85-88. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sections 14-17 of Ord. No. 87-3, adopted on February 9, 1987 amend the charter by repealing former §§ 85-88 in their entirety. Such former sections pertained to the board of regulation and derived from the original charter provisions adopted on January 20, 1970. 
Sec. 89. - Taxes; when due and payable. 
    The council upon adoption of the budget as provided in Article VI shall levy the annual tax for the ensuing tax year. All ad valorem property taxes for each tax year shall become due on the first day of October each year. All such taxes due the city shall be payable at the office of the city assessor and collector, or at a place designated by the council, and may be paid at any time after the tax rolls for the year have been completed and approved, which completion and approval shall be not later than the first day of October of that same year, or as soon thereafter as practicable. Taxes shall be paid before the first day of February of the next following calendar year, and all such taxes not paid prior to such date shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to a penalty of eight (8) percent, and in addition shall bear interest at the rate of six (6) percent per annum to be calculated to the last day of the month preceding the month in which the collection is made. The council may by ordinance provide that all current taxes due the city may be paid in installments over a period of time not to exceed twelve (12) months from October first, and by such ordinance fix the due and delinquent dates on such installments and the manner of applying the penalty and interest on delinquent installments. 
(Ord. No. 87-3, § 18, 2-9-87) 
Sec. 90. - Seizure and sale of personal property. 
    The assessor and collector of taxes shall, by virtue of his tax rolls, have power and authority to seize and levy upon all personal property, or so much thereof as may be necessary, and sell the same to satisfy the city's lien for all taxes, together with all penalty, interest and costs due on said personal property. When he seizes personal property for such purposes he shall keep the same at the expense of the owner until the same is made, and shall give notice of the time and place of sale of same by publication in the official newspaper at least one time and by posting a written notice at the city hall door and one at another public place within the city, at least ten (10) days before the date of sale. Such notice shall also contain a brief description of the property. He shall sell the same to the highest bidder for cash for all taxes, penalty, interest, cost and expense of caring for said property, and shall make an entry in the book of sales of the amount realized. All such sales shall be made at the front door of the city hall. A sale of personal property for delinquent taxes shall convey with it an absolute title, and the owner shall have no right to redeem the same. 
Sec. 91. - Tax liens and liability of owners. 
    All property, real, personal and mixed, situated in the city on the first day of January of each year shall stand charged with a special lien in favor of the city from said date for the taxes due thereon. All personal property of any owner situated in the city on the first day of January of each year shall stand charged with a special lien from said date in favor of the city for all taxes on personal property owing by such owner for the year. The liens provided herein shall be superior to all other liens except liens for State and County taxes and school district taxes regardless of when such other liens were created. All persons purchasing any of said property after the first day of January in any year shall take the same subject to the liens herein provided. In addition to the liens herein provided, the owner on the first day of January of any year of property subject to taxation by the city shall be personally liable for the taxes due thereon for such year. The city shall have power to sue for and recover personal judgment for taxes, penalty, interest and costs without foreclosure, or to foreclose its lien or liens, or to recover both personal judgment and foreclosure. In any such suit where it appears that the description of any property in the city assessment rolls is insufficient to identify such property, the city shall have the right to plead a good description of the property intended to be assessed, to prove the same, and to have its judgment foreclosing the tax lien or for personal judgment against the owner for such taxes, penalty, interest and costs. 
ARTICLE IX. - ISSUANCE AND SALE OF BONDS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Finance administration, art. VII. 

Sec. 92. - Bonds, general obligation and revenue-Incontestable. 
(a)  The city shall have the power, except as prohibited by law, to borrow money by whatever method it may deem to be in the public interest. 
(b)  The city shall have the power to borrow money on the credit of the city and to issue general obligation bonds for permanent public improvements or for any other public purpose not prohibited by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and to issue refunding bonds to refund outstanding bonds of the city previously issued. All such bonds shall be issued in conformity with this charter and the laws of the State of Texas. 
(c)  The city shall have the power to borrow money for the purpose of constructing, purchasing, improving, extending or repairing of public utilities, recreational facilities or any other self-liquidating municipal function not prohibited by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and to issue revenue bonds to evidence the obligation created thereby. Such bonds shall be a charge upon and payable from the properties, or interest therein, pledged, or the income therefrom, or both. The holders of the revenue bonds shall never have the right to demand payment thereof out of monies raised or to be raised by taxation. All such bonds shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas. 
(d)  All bonds of the city, after having been authorized and issued in accordance with the provisions of this charter and the laws of the State of Texas, shall be advertised once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks, the first publication to be at least fourteen (14) days prior to the time set for the sale, and shall be sold at public sale for the best bid. Provided, that if no bid is received for at least par and accumulated interest, the council shall have the power to sell such bonds by negotiation for par value and accumulated interest, exclusive of commission. 
(e)  All bonds may contain a redemption provision making them callable at the option of the city upon or after the expiration of fifteen (15) years from the date of issuance, or such redemption provision may be for a lesser period than fifteen (15) years if such provision will not materially affect their marketability or a favorable rate of interest. 
(f)  All bonds of the city having been issued and sold and having been delivered to the purchaser thereof, shall thereafter be incontestable and all bonds issued to refund in exchange for outstanding bonds previously issued shall, and after said exchange, be incontestable. 
Sec. 93. - Election on issuance of bonds. 
    No bonds shall be issued unless authorized by a majority vote at an election in which only qualified voters who own taxable property in this city and who have duly rendered the same for taxation according to law shall be permitted to vote. The ordinance or resolution calling such election and the giving of notice thereof shall conform to the general laws relating to city bond elections. No election shall be required for the issuance of bonds for the purpose of refunding outstanding bonds. General laws relating to the issuance of city tax supported bonds and revenue bonds, their approval by the Attorney General of Texas and registration by the Comptroller of Public Accounts shall be applicable to bonds issued by the city. 
Sec. 94. - Sinking funds and bond funds. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the council to levy an annual tax sufficient to pay the interest on and provide the necessary sinking fund required by law on all outstanding general obligation bonds of the city. The interest and sinking fund shall be deposited in a separate account and shall not be diverted to or used for any other purpose than to pay the interest and principal on such bonds. The sinking fund maintained for the redemption of any debt may be invested as provided by general law. 
(b)  Any officer of the city who shall willfully or knowingly divert or use any funds arising from the issuance of any bonds or any sinking fund for any other purpose, except that for which the fund is created or is herein otherwise authorized, shall be deemed guilty of a misapplication of public funds and be subject to prosecution as provided under the laws of the State for the diversion and conversion of funds belonging to any of the municipalities of the State. 
Sec. 95. - Execution and registration of bonds. 
    All bonds, warrants and certificates of indebtedness shall be signed by the mayor or mayor pro tem, countersigned by the city secretary and sealed with the seal of the city in the manner provided by general law, and shall be payable at such times and place or places as may be fixed, not more than forty (40) years from their date. It shall be the duty of the mayor, when such bonds are issued, to forward, or have forwarded, the same to the Attorney General of the State of Texas for approval and for registration by the Comptroller of Public Accounts. 
Sec. 96. - Bond register. 
    The director of finance or another officer of the city as approved by the council shall keep, or cause to be kept, for and on behalf of the city a complete bond registry and bonds, showing all bonds, warrants and certificates of indebtedness issued, the date and amount thereof, the rate of interest, maturity, place of payment and other useful detailed records of all bonds or other indebtedness surrendered and all other transactions of the council having reference to the refunding of the indebtedness of said city. When bonds or their coupons are paid, their payment or cancellation shall be noted in said registry. The books shall be safely kept among the records of the city. 
ARTICLE X. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, AND RECALL 

Sec. 97. - Power of initiative. 
    The qualified voters of the city shall have power to propose any ordinance, not in conflict with this charter, the State constitution or laws, except an ordinance appropriating money or authorizing the levy of taxes, and to adopt or reject the same at the polls, such power being known as the initiative. Any initiative ordinance may be submitted to the council by a petition signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least twenty (20) percent of the total number of votes cast at the last regular municipal election, or three hundred (300) qualified voters, whichever is the greater. 
Sec. 98. - Power of referendum. 
    The qualified voters of the city shall have power to approve or reject at the polls any ordinance passed by the council, or submitted by the council to a vote of the qualified voters, which is subject to the initiative process under this charter, such power being known as the referendum. Ordinances submitted to the council by initiative petition and passed by the council without change shall be subject to the referendum in the same manner as other ordinances. Within twenty (20) days after the enactment by the council of any ordinance which is subject to a referendum, a petition signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least twenty (20) percent of the total number of votes cast at the last regular municipal election, or three hundred (300) qualified voters, whichever is the greater, may be filed with the city secretary requesting that any such ordinance be either repealed or submitted to a vote of the qualified voters. The right of referendum shall not apply to any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds or authorizing the making of a contract incident thereto, or any ordinance amending such ordinance, when the bond issue has been authorized by vote of the qualified voters of the city. 
Sec. 99. - Form of petitions; committee of petitioners. 
    Initiative petition papers shall contain the full text of the proposed ordinance. The signatures to initiative or referendum petitions need not all be appended to one paper, but to each separate petition there shall be attached a statement of the circulator thereof as provided by this section. Each signer of any petition paper shall sign his name in ink or indelible pencil and shall indicate after his name his place of residence by street and number, or other description sufficient to identify the place. There shall appear on each petition the names and addresses of five (5) qualified voters who, as a committee of the petitioners, shall be regarded as responsible for the circulation and filing of the petition. Attached to each separate petition paper there shall be an affidavit of the circulator thereof that he, and he only, personally circulated the foregoing paper, that it bears a stated number of signatures, that all signatures appended thereto were made in his presence, and that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be. 
Sec. 100. - Filing, examination and certification of petitions. 
    All petition papers comprising an initiative or referendum petition shall be assembled and filed with the city secretary as one instrument. Within twenty (20) days after a petition is filed, the city secretary shall determine whether each paper of the petition has a proper statement of the circulator and whether the petition is signed by a sufficient number of qualified voters. The city secretary shall declare any petition paper entirely invalid which does not have attached thereto an affidavit signed by the circulator thereof. If a petition paper is found to be signed by more persons than the number of signatures certified by the circulator, the last signatures in excess of the number certified shall be disregarded. If a petition paper is found to be signed by fewer than the number certified, the signatures shall be accepted unless void on other grounds. After completing his examination of the petition, the city secretary shall certify the result thereof to the council at its next regular meeting. If he shall certify that the petition is insufficient he shall set forth in his certificate the particulars in which it is defective and shall at once notify the committee of the petitioners of his findings. 
Sec. 101. - Amendment of petitions. 
    An initiative or referendum petition may be amended at any time within ten (10) days after the notification of insufficiency has been sent by the city secretary, by filing a supplementary petition upon additional papers signed and filed as provided in case of an original petition. The city secretary shall, within five (5) days after such an amendment is filed, make examination of the amended petition and, if the petition be still insufficient, he shall file his certificate to that effect in his office and notify the committee of the petitioners of his findings and no further action shall be had on such insufficient petition. The finding of the insufficiency of a petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
Sec. 102. - Effects of certification of referendum petition. 
    When a referendum petition, or amended petition as defined in section 101 of this charter, has been certified as sufficient by the city secretary, the ordinance specified in the petition shall not go into effect, or further action thereunder shall be suspended if it shall have gone into effect, until and unless approved by the qualified voters, as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 103. - Consideration by council. 
    Whenever the council receives a certified initiative or referendum petition from the city secretary, it shall proceed at once to consider such petition. A proposed initiative ordinance shall be read and provision shall be made for a public hearing upon the proposed ordinance. The council shall take final action on the ordinance not later than sixty (60) days after the date on which such ordinance was submitted to the council by the city secretary. A referred ordinance shall be reconsidered by the council and its final vote upon such reconsideration shall be upon the question, "Shall the ordinance specified in the referendum petition be repealed?" 
Sec. 104. - Submission to qualified voters. 
    If the council shall fail to pass an ordinance proposed by initiative petition, or shall pass it in a form different from that set forth in the petition therefor, or if the council fails to repeal a referred ordinance, the proposed or referred ordinance shall be submitted to the qualified voters not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date the council takes its final vote thereon. The council may, in its discretion, and if no regular election is to be held within such period shall, provide for a special election. Notice of such election shall be given as required in other city elections. 
Sec. 105. - Form of ballot for initiated and referred ordinances. 
    Ordinances submitted to vote of the qualified voters in accordance with the initiative and referendum provisions of this charter shall be submitted by ballot title, which shall be prepared in all cases by the city attorney. The ballot title may be different from the legal title of any such initiated or referred ordinance and shall be a clear, concise statement, without argument or prejudice, descriptive of the substance of such ordinance, and, if a paper ballot, shall have below the ballot title the following propositions, one above the other, in the order indicated: "FOR THE ORDINANCE" and "AGAINST THE ORDINANCE." Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election and may be submitted on the same ballot, but any paper ballot used for voting thereon shall be for that purpose only. If voting machines are used, the ballot title of any ordinance shall have below it the same two propositions, one above the other or one preceding the other in the order indicated, and the qualified voter shall be given an opportunity to vote for either of the two propositions and thereby to vote for or against the ordinance. 
Sec. 106. - Results of election. 
    If a majority of the qualified voters voting on a proposed initiative ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon be an ordinance of the city. A referred ordinance which is not approved by a majority of the qualified voters voting thereon shall thereupon be deemed repealed. If conflicting ordinances are approved by the qualified voters at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
Sec. 107. - Repealing ordinances; publication. 
    Initiative and referendum ordinances adopted or approved by a majority of the qualified voters shall be published as provided elsewhere in this charter, and may be amended or repealed by the council, as in the case of other ordinances. 
Sec. 108. - Recall; general. 
    The mayor or any other member of the city council may be removed from office by recall. 
Sec. 109. - Recall procedure. 
    Any qualified voter of the city may make and file with the city secretary an affidavit containing the name or names of the mayor or councilman whose removal is sought and a clear and concise statement of the grounds for removal. Should the councilman subject to recall be from a single district, then and only then shall qualified voters from that councilman's district be allowed to follow the recall procedure. The secretary shall thereupon deliver to the qualified voter making such affidavit, copies of petition blanks demanding such removal. The city secretary shall keep a sufficient number of such printed blanks on hand for distribution. Such blanks when issued by the city secretary shall bear the signature of the city secretary and be addressed to the city council, and shall be numbered, dated, and indicate the name of the person to whom issued. The petition blanks when issued shall also indicate the number of such blanks issued, the name of the mayor or councilman whose removal is sought, and the statement of the grounds for removal. The city secretary shall keep a record of the name of the qualified voter to whom the petition blanks were issued and the number issued to said person. 
(Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1, 5-3-03) 
Editor's note- Approved by voters at an election held on May 3, 2003. 
Sec. 110. - Recall petitions. 
    The recall petition to be effective must be returned and filed with the city secretary within thirty (30) calendar days after filing of the affidavit required in section 109. For the removal of the mayor or any councilman at-large, said petition must be signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least thirty (30) percent of the total number of votes cast at the last contested regular city election at which the mayor or one or more councilmen were elected, or four hundred (400) qualified voters, whichever is greater. For the removal of a single district councilman said petition must be signed by qualified voters of the councilman's district equal in number to thirty (30) percent of the total number of votes cast in that district's last regular election or 75 qualified voters whichever is greater. Should there have been no election as the councilman had no opponent and the election having been canceled then a petition with 75 qualified voters from that district would qualify for a recall election. All recall petitions shall conform to the applicable provisions of section 99, and no petition paper shall be accepted as a part of a recall petition unless it bears the signature of the city secretary as required in section 109. A recall election for the mayor or a councilman at-large shall be of all qualified voters of the city while a single district councilman would be limited to that of the qualified voters of that councilman's district. 
(Ord. No. 2003-03, § 2, 5-3-03) 
Editor's note- Approved by voters at an election held on May 3, 2003. 
Sec. 111. - Recall election. 
    The city secretary shall at once examine the recall petition and if he finds it sufficient and in compliance with the provisions of this article of the charter, he shall within five (5) days submit it to the city council with his certificate to that effect and notify the officer sought to be recalled of such action. If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign within five (5) days after such notice the city council shall thereupon order and fix a date for holding a recall election. Any such election shall be held not less than thirty (30) nor more than sixty (60) days after the petition has been presented to the city council, and at the same time as any municipal election held within such period; but if no such municipal election is to be held within such period, the city council shall call a special election to be held within the time aforesaid. 
Sec. 112. - Ballots in recall election. 
    Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  With respect to each person whose removal is sought the question to be submitted shall be: "Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of (name of office) by recall?" 
(2)  Immediately below each such question there shall be printed the two following propositions, one above the other, in the order indicated: 
"For the recall of (name of person)" 
"Against the recall of (name of person)" 
Sec. 113. - Results of recall election. 
    If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against the recall of the officer named on the ballot, he shall continue in office for the remainder of his unexpired term, subject to recall as before. If a majority of the votes cast at such an election be for the recall of the officer named on the ballot, he shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office and the vacancy shall be filled as in other vacancies in the office of mayor or councilman. It shall be the duty of the city council to meet not later than one (1) week after such election, canvass the returns, declare the results and call a special election to fill any vacancies created by the recall election; and for those purposes a regular quorum of the council is not herein required. 
Sec. 114. - Limitations on recalls. 
    No recall petition shall be filed against the mayor or any councilman within six (6) months after he takes office nor in respect to an officer subjected to a recall election and not removed thereby, until at least six (6) months after such election. 
Sec. 115. - District judge may order elections. 
    Should the city council fail or refuse to order any of the elections as provided for in this article, when all the requirements for such election have been complied with by the petitioning qualified voters in conformity with this article of the charter, then it shall be the duty of the District Judge, upon proper application being made therefor, to order such elections and to enforce the carrying into effect of the provisions of this article of the charter. 
ARTICLE XI. - PUBLIC UTILITIES; FRANCHISES 

Sec. 116. - Powers of the city. 
    In addition to the city's powers granted elsewhere in this charter, the city shall have power to buy, own, acquire through condemnation, construct, maintain, and operate public service utilities of every character, within or without the city limits, and to manufacture or purchase and distribute electricity, gas, or anything else that may be needed or used by the public; and the city shall have further powers as may now or hereafter be granted under the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
Sec. 117. - Franchises; maximum life; power of council. 
(a)  The ownership, right of control and use of streets, highways, alleys, parks, public places and all other real property of the city is hereby declared to be inalienable to the city, except by ordinance passed by vote of the majority of the whole city council, as hereinafter provided; and no franchise, easement or consent involving the right to use same, either along, across, over or under the same, shall ever be valid, unless expressly granted and exercised in compliance with the terms of this charter, and of the ordinance granting the franchise or easement. No act or omission of the city, its council, officers, employees or agents shall be construed to confer or extend by estoppel or indirection, any right, franchise or easement not expressly granted by ordinance. 
(b)  The city council shall have power by ordinance to grant, amend, renew and extend all franchises of all public utilities of every character operating within the city and for such purposes is granted full power. No franchise or easement granted by the city shall ever be granted for a longer term than twenty (20) years. All ordinances granting, amending, renewing, or extending franchises for public utilities shall be considered at three (3) separate regular meetings of the city council, and shall not be finally passed within less than thirty (30) days after the first consideration; and pending such time, the full text of such ordinance shall be published once each week for four (4) consecutive weeks in the official newspaper published in the city, and the expense of such publication shall be borne by the proponent of the franchise; and no such ordinance shall take effect until sixty (60) days after its final passage. No public utility franchise shall be transferable except with the approval of the council expressed by ordinance, except in the event that a mortgage on public utility property located in the city is lawfully foreclosed, in which event such property and all rights and interests growing out of the franchise under which the same is operated in the city may be sold and assigned to any party purchasing said property and franchise under such foreclosure. 
(Ord. No. 78-3, § 6, 2-13-78; Ord. No. 1991-06, § 4, 5-7-91) 
Sec. 118. - Franchise value not be allowed. 
    In fixing reasonable rates and charges for public utility service within the city, nothing shall be included as the value of any franchise granted by the city. 
Sec. 119. - Right of regulation. 
    All grants, renewals, extensions, or amendments of public utility franchises, whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the city: 
(1)  To repeal the same by ordinance at any time for failure to begin construction or operation within the time prescribed or otherwise to comply with the terms of the franchise, such power to be exercised only after notice and hearing, and a reasonable opportunity, not to exceed ninety (90) days, to correct such failure. 
(2)  To require an adequate extension of plant and service, and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. 
(3)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates. 
(4)  To prescribe the form of accounts kept by each such utility; provided, that if the utility shall keep its accounts in accordance with the uniform system of accounts for said utility prescribed by the National Association of Railroad and Public Utility Commissioners, the Federal Power Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, the Railroad Commission of Texas, their successor, or successors, this shall be deemed sufficient compliance with this paragraph. 
(5)  At any time to examine and audit the accounts and other records of any such utility and to require annual and other reports, including reports on local operations by each such public utility. 
(6)  To impose such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may be deemed desirable or conducive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public. 
(7)  To at any time require such compensation and rental to be paid the city as may be permitted by the laws of the State of Texas. 
Sec. 120. - Consent of property owners. 
    The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be required for the construction, extension, maintenance or operation of any public utility; but, nothing in this charter or in any franchise granted thereunder shall ever be construed to deprive any such property owner of any right of action for damage or injury to his property as now or hereafter provided by law. 
Sec. 121. - Extensions. 
    All extensions of public utilities within the city limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be operated as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this charter and in any original grant hereafter made. The right to use and maintain any extension shall terminate with the original grant and shall be terminable as provided in section 119. In case of an extension of a public utility operated under a franchise hereafter granted, such right shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original grant. 
Sec. 122. - Other conditions; existing franchises. 
    All valid franchises heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between the city and the grantee, and the contractual right as contained in any such franchises shall not be impaired by the provisions of this charter, except that the power of the city to exercise the right of eminent domain in the acquisition of any utility property is in all things reserved, and except the general power of the city heretofore existing and herein provided for to regulate the rates and services of a grantee which shall include the right to require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. Every public utility franchise, extension or renewal of a franchise hereafter granted shall be held subject to all the terms and conditions contained in the various sections of this article whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchise. Nothing in this charter shall operate to limit in any way, as specifically stated, the discretion of the council or the qualified voters of the city in imposing terms and conditions as may be reasonable in connection with any franchise grant. 
Sec. 123. - Franchise records. 
    Within six (6) months after this charter takes effect every public utility and every owner of a public utility franchise, who has not previously done so, shall file with the city secretary certified copies of all franchises owned or claimed, or under which such utility is operated in the city. The city secretary shall compile and maintain a public record of public utility franchises. 
Sec. 124. - Regulation of rates and service. 
    The city council shall have the right and full power, after thirty (30) days' notice and hearing, to regulate by ordinance the rates and service of every public utility operating in the city; and the council shall have the authority to establish regulations governing the procedure to be followed in conducting such hearings, obtaining essential facts, inspecting books and records, compelling the attendance of witnesses, and in fixing rates to be charged by public utilities operating in the city. 
Sec. 125. - Accounts of municipally owned utilities. 
    Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the city, in such manner as to show the true and complete financial results of such city ownership and operation, including all assets, appropriately subdivided into different classes, all liabilities subdivided by classes, depreciation reserve, other reserves, and surplus; also revenues, operating expenses including depreciation, interest payments, rental, and other disposition of annual income. The accounts shall show the actual capital cost to the city of each public utility owned, also the cost of all extensions, additions and improvements, and the source of the funds expended for such capital purposes. They shall show as nearly as possible the cost of any service furnished to or rendered by any such utility to any other city or governmental department. The council shall annually cause to be made and published a report showing the financial results of such city ownership and operation, giving the information specified in this section or such data as the council shall deem expedient. 
ARTICLE XII. - PLANNING AND ZONING 

Sec. 126. - Powers of city. 
(a)  The city shall have the power through the city council, with the aid of the planning commission, to adopt and enforce: 
(1)  A master plan for the growth, development and beautification of the city; 
(2)  ordinances establishing rules and regulations governing the platting or subdividing of land within the city and within all of the area extending one (1) mile beyond the corporate limits; 
(3)  ordinances dividing the city into zones or districts for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare through the regulation and control of land use, the size, height, bulk and use of buildings within such zones or districts; 
(4)  building setback lines; 
(5)  and any other ordinances, not in conflict with the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, which are needed to make fully effective the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Without any intent of limitation, but for the purpose of greater certainty the following described laws are hereby adopted as completely as if embodied herein: 
(1)  Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 974a, which authorizes the city to regulate and control the platting and subdividing of land within the city and for one (1) mile beyond the corporate limits. 
(2)  Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 1011a-1011j, which authorize the city to adopt zoning ordinances. 
(3)  Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1105a, which authorizes the city to establish building lines on any street or highway in the city. 
(Ord. No. 78-3, § 7, 2-13-78) 
Editor's note- Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 974a has been replaced by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq. Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 1011a through 1011j have been replaced by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq. Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1105a has been replaced by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 213.001 et seq. 
Sec. 127. - The planning commission; organization. 
    There is hereby created, and there shall continue to be, a planning commission, which shall be composed of five (5) or more citizens of the city who are qualified voters of the city. The city council shall appoint the members of the planning commission for two-year staggered terms. The city council shall also appoint the chairman of the planning commission. The chairman shall hold the office for one year, after which time the city council shall appoint or reappoint a chairman each and every year. Whenever the planning commission is considering the approval of a proposed subdivision or a resubdivision that falls within the precinct of a county commissioner, the planning commission may appoint that county commissioner as a nonvoting member of the planning commission for the limited purpose of considering the approval of the proposed subdivision or resubdivision. The planning commission shall elect a vice-chairman and a secretary as well as any other officers that the commission may deem necessary, for terms of one year. The planning commission shall adopt any such rules for the transaction of its business as it may deem necessary. The commission shall keep a record of all of its meetings, resolutions, findings, and determinations. These records shall be open to the public, in accordance with the Texas Open Records Act (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6252-17a), as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. The planning commission may establish regular meeting dates and shall hold meetings as often as necessary, upon call of the chairman. It shall be the duty of the planning commission to file with the city manager a written report consisting of the minutes of each meeting, as well as a list of the members present and those absent. Members of the commission, when appointed, shall subscribe to the oath of office required of other officers of the city. 
(Ord. No. 87-3, § 19, 2-9-87) 
Sec. 128. - The planning commission; powers and duties. 
(a)  The planning commission shall: 
(1)  Make and amend a master plan for the physical development of the city. 
(2)  Report to the council proposed zoning regulations and land use plan, and its approval or disapproval of proposed future changes in the zoning plan. 
(3)  Exercise control over platting and the subdividing of land within the corporate limits of the city and within an area extending one (1) mile beyond the corporate limits. 
(4)  Submit annually to the city manager, not less than ninety (90) days prior to the beginning of the budget year, a list of recommended capital improvements which in the opinion of the commission are necessary or desirable during the forthcoming five (5) year period. 
(5)  Require information from the other departments of the city government in relation to its work. 
(6)  Within its budget appropriation, contract with city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. 
(b)  The commission shall be responsible to and act as an advisory body to the council and shall perform such additional duties and exercise such additional powers as may be prescribed by ordinance of the council not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter. 
(Ord. No. 78-3, § 7, 2-13-78) 
Sec. 129. - Director of planning. 
    The council is hereby authorized to make provision for the appointment of a director of planning or the council may impose the duties of the director of planning upon some other officer or employee of the city. If a director of planning is provided for, his appointment shall be made by the city manager. The director of planning shall be qualified by special training and experience in the field of city planning or general municipal engineering, as may be specified by the city manager. The director of planning shall serve as the regular technical advisor of the planning commission and shall have such other duties and responsibilities as the council may establish by ordinance. 
Sec. 130. - The master plan. 
    The master plan for the physical development of the city shall contain the planning commission's recommendations for growth, development and beautification of the city. A copy of the master plan, or any part thereof, shall be forwarded to the city manager who shall thereupon submit such plan, or part thereof, to the council with his recommendations thereon. The council may adopt this plan as a whole or in parts and may adopt any amendment thereto, after at least one public hearing on the proposed action. The council shall act on such plan, or part thereof, within sixty (60) days following its submission by the city manager. If such plan, or part thereof, should be rejected by the council the commission may modify such plan, or part thereof, and again forward it to the city manager for submission to the council. All amendments to the master plan recommended by the commission shall be submitted in the same manner, as that outlined above, to the council for approval, and all recommendations to the council from any city department affecting the master plan must be accompanied by a recommendation from the planning commission. 
Sec. 131. - The legal effect of master plan. 
    Upon adoption of the master plan by the council, no subdivision, street, park, nor any public way, ground or space, public building or structure and no public utility, whether publicly or privately owned, which is in conflict with the master plan, shall be constructed or authorized by the city until and unless the location and extent thereof shall have been submitted to and approved by the planning commission. In case of disapproval, the commission shall communicate its reasons to the council, which shall have the power to overrule such disapproval and upon such overruling the council or the appropriate office, department or agency shall have power to proceed. The widening, narrowing, relocating, vacating or change in the use of any street, watercourse, or other public way or ground or the sale of any public building or real property shall be subject to similar submission and approval, and failure to approve may be similarly overruled by the council. The failure of the planning commission to act within fifteen (15) days after the date of official submission to the commission shall be deemed approval, unless a longer period be granted by the council or the submitting official. 
ARTICLE XIII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 132. - Publicity of records. 
    All public records, as defined by the Texas Open Records Act (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6252-17a), as it now exists or may hereafter be amended, shall be available for public inspection at such reasonable times and places that the city council may establish. The city shall also furnish, upon request, copies of any such public records, in accordance with the provisions of the Texas Open Records Act (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6252-17a), as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 87-3, § 20, 2-9-87) 
Sec. 133. - Oath of office. 
    The mayor and each of the councilmen shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe to the oath of office based upon the one prescribed for elective officers of the State in the constitution of the State of Texas, and appointive officers of the city shall take and subscribe to the oath of office based upon the one prescribed for appointive officers of the State; provided that the city attorney shall prepare the form of the oath of office for elective and appointive officers of the city, which form shall contain all of the essential and applicable elements of the oath of office prescribed for State officers. 
Sec. 134. - Personal interest in city contracts. 
(1)  The city shall not purchase from, do business with or engage the services of any business entity in which the mayor, a councilman, a department head or any person in the first degree of either affinity or consanguinity to any of them has a substantial interest, without prior council approval. 
(2)  If a mayor or city councilman, or a person related to such official in the first or second degree by either affinity or consanguinity, has a substantial interest in a business entity that would be peculiarly affected by an official action taken by the governing body, then the mayor or councilman, before a vote or decision on the matter, shall file an affidavit on the matter stating the nature and extent of the interest and shall abstain from further participation in the matter. The affidavit must be filed with the city secretary. 
(3)  A mayor or city councilman shall be deemed to have a substantial interest in a business if: 
(a)  The interest is ownership of ten (10) percent or more of the voting stock or shares of the business entity or ownership of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or more of the fair market value of the business entity; or 
(b)  Funds received by the mayor or councilman from the business entity exceed ten (10) percent of the mayor or councilman's gross income for the previous year. 
(4)  A mayor or councilman shall be deemed to have a substantial interest in real property if the interest is an equitable or legal ownership with a fair market value of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or more. 
(5)  An interest of a person related in the first or second degree by either affinity or consanguinity to the mayor or councilman shall be deemed to be a substantial interest. 
(6)  A business entity shall be deemed to mean a sole proprietorship, partnership, firm, corporation, holding company, joint-stock company, receivership, trust, or any other entity recognized in law. 
(7)  The city council may contract for the purchase of services or personal property with a business entity in which a member of the governing body has a substantial interest if the business entity is the only business entity that provides the needed service or product within the city's jurisdiction or is the only business entity that bids on the contract. 
(8)  The city council must take a separate vote on any budget items specifically dedicated to a contract with an entity in which the mayor or city councilman has a substantial interest. The affected mayor or city councilman must abstain from that separate vote. The mayor or city councilman who has complied in abstaining in such vote under these procedures may vote on a final budget only after the matter in which he is concerned has been resolved. 
(Ord. No. 87-3, § 21, 2-9-87; Ord. No. 1991-06, § 5, 5-7-91; Ord. No. 1994-06, § 9, 2-14-94; Ord. No. 1994-14, § 9, 5-23-94) 
Sec. 135. - Personal interest in franchises. 
    Neither the mayor nor any other member of the city council, nor any elective or appointive officer of the city, shall be directly or indirectly in the employ of any person, company or corporation, holding or seeking to hold any franchise from the city, or shall receive directly or indirectly any wage, commission, fee, gift, favor or payment from such franchise holder, and any violation of this section shall ipso facto render vacant the office held by the person so violating it. 
Sec. 136. - Improper activities in city elections. 
    Any officer or employee of the city who by solicitation or otherwise, shall exert his influence directly or indirectly to influence any other officer or employee of the city to favor any particular person or candidate for office in the city, or who shall in any manner contribute or promise to contribute money, labor, time, or other valuable thing to any person for election purposes pertaining to any city office or appointment, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall forfeit his office or employment and be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
Sec. 137. - Emergency interim office succession. 
    The city council shall, by ordinance or resolution, adopt a plan for emergency interim successors to offices based upon and not inconsistent with the applicable provisions of the Emergency Interim Public Office Succession Act (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6252-10a), which Act was adopted by the Legislature pursuant to powers granted to it by section 62 of Article III of the constitution of the State of Texas. Such plan shall be consistent with the council-manager form of city government as established by this charter; however, the plan may provide for emergency interim successors to the office of city manager. The plan for emergency interim successors to offices shall provide that it shall only be placed into operation by a proclamation of the mayor or acting mayor during an "attack" as defined by Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6252-10a. 
Sec. 138. - Parks and recreation facilities. 
    The city shall have the authority, either singly or jointly with the public school district or the county, to acquire, establish and own, either by purchase, donation, bequest or otherwise all property that may be useful or necessary for the purpose of establishing and maintaining parks and recreation facilities, within or without the city limits, as authorized by law. Such facilities may be operated by a board or commission. 
Sec. 139. - Housing authority; standards; urban renewal. 
    The council may create a housing authority under the housing authorities laws of the State of Texas. The city council shall have the power to establish by ordinance regulations providing minimum standards for all buildings which are used, or intended for use, as places of human habitation; which standards shall be based upon the proposition of making it reasonably certain that all such buildings or dwelling places shall be constructed, or reconstructed, or repaired, and maintained so as to protect the safety, health and general welfare of the community, its citizens and the persons who reside in such buildings or dwelling places. The city shall have the power to undertake and engage in programs and projects for urban renewal or redevelopment as authorized by laws of the State of Texas and the Federal government. 
State Law reference- Urban renewal in municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 374.001 et seq.; housing authorities established by municipalities and counties, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 392.001 et seq. 
Sec. 140. - Provisions relating to liens, assignment, execution and garnishment. 
    The property, real and personal, belonging to the city shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ of execution or cost bill; and no lien of any kind shall ever exist against any such property owned by the city except that the lien be created or authorized by this charter or State law. The funds belonging to the city, in the hands of any person, firm or corporation, shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment, or sequestration; nor shall the city be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the city nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ of garnishment on any account whatever. The city shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents, or contractors. 
Sec. 141. - City not required to give security or execute bond. 
    It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the city is a party, for any bond, undertaking or security to be demanded or executed by or on behalf of said city in any of the State courts, but in all such actions, suits, appeals or proceedings same shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been given as required by law, and said city shall be just as liable as if security or bond had been duly executed. 
Sec. 142. - Power to settle claims. 
    The city council shall have the power to compromise and settle any and all claims and lawsuits of every kind and character in favor of or against the city, including claims and suits by the city to recover delinquent taxes or paving assessments. 
Sec. 143. - Sale or lease of real property. 
(a)  Any real property owned by the city and not needed by the city may be sold or leased by the city council when in its judgment such sale or lease will be for the best interest of the city and its citizens. Before the city makes any sale or lease or contract for sale or lease of any such real property, the property shall be advertised for sale or lease, and bids invited, in the official newspaper once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks. The time of the first publication shall be at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date and time set for receiving the bids for the sale or lease of such property. The contract of sale or lease shall be awarded to the bidder who submits the highest and best bid, provided the council shall have the authority to reject all bids and advertise again. 
(b)  Provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to city-owned public utility property, swimming pool, golf course, golf course clubhouse, ball park, fairgrounds, exposition buildings, airport, nor to property purchased by the city at tax sales; the restrictions on such sales or leases being set out in the State laws which generally require a majority vote of the qualified voters before such sale or lease may be made, or such laws specify the procedure to be used in making certain sales or leases. 
Sec. 144. - Retirement system and social security; group insurance. 
    The city council shall have the power to provide for coverage of its appointed officers and employees under the workmen's [workers'] compensation, retirement and social security systems provided by laws of the State of Texas for such officers and employees of the city; and for group insurance coverage of such officers and employees, with the city council having power to provide for the payment of all or any part of the cost. 
State Law reference- Texas Municipal Retirement System, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001 et seq.; federal old age and survivors insurance coverage for county and municipal employees, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 695g; workers' compensation, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8307c et seq. 
Sec. 145. - Effect of charter on existing ordinances, contracts, property, etc. 
(a)  All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations now in force under the government of the City of Wharton and not in conflict with the provisions of this charter, shall remain in force under this charter until altered, amended or repealed by the council after this charter takes effect; and all rights and obligations of the city under existing franchises and contracts are preserved in full force and effect. 
(b)  All suits, taxes, penalties, forfeitures and all other rights, claims and demands, which have accrued under the laws heretofore in force governing the City of Wharton, shall belong to and be vested in and shall be prosecuted by and for the use and benefit of the municipal corporation hereby created, and shall not in anywise be diminished, affected or prejudiced by the adoption and taking effect of this charter. 
(c)  All real estate owned in fee simple title, or held by lease, sufferance, easement or otherwise, and all public buildings, parks, streets, avenues and alleys, and all other property, whether real or personal of whatever kind, character, or description now owned or controlled by the city shall belong to and be vested in the City of Wharton as established and continued under this charter. 
Sec. 146. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 22 of Ord. No. 87-3, adopted on February 9, 1987, amended the charter by repealing former § 146 in its entirety. Such former section pertained to an interim municipal government and derived from the original charter provisions adopted on January 20, 1970. 
Sec. 147. - Amending the charter. 
    Amendments to this charter may be framed and submitted to the qualified voters of the city by a charter commission in the manner provided by law for framing and submitting a new charter. Amendments may also be proposed and submitted by ordinance, passed by a majority vote of the full membership of the council, or by a petition as provided in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1174f et seq. Statutes enacted into law by the Texas Legislature and decisions of the Supreme Court of Texas and United States Supreme Court, when in conflict with any provision of this charter, shall control. 
(Ord. No. 82-2, 2-8-82; Ord. No. 87-3, § 23, 2-9-87) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 82-2 was approved at election on April 3, 1982. Charter amendments are now provided for in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 9.004. 
Sec. 148. - Separability clause; construction. 
    If any section or part of section of this charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this charter nor the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of section to which such holding shall directly apply. 
Sec. 149. - Judicial notice. 
    This charter shall be deemed a public act, may be read in evidence without pleading or proof, and judicial notice shall be taken thereof in all courts and places. 
Sec. 150. - Use of masculine and feminine genders; singular and plural number. 
    Whenever the context requires, the gender of all words used herein shall include the masculine and feminine, and words used in a singular, plural, or collective sense shall include the singular and plural. 
(Ord. No. 1991-06, § 6, 5-7-91) 
Editor's note- Section 24 of Ord. No. 87-3, adopted on February 9, 1987, amended the charter by repealing former § 150 in its entirety. Such former section pertained to the submission of the original charter to the qualified voters of the city and derived from the original charter provisions adopted on January 20, 1970. A new § 150 was enacted by Ord. No. 1991-06, § 6, 5-7-91. 
Sec. 151. - [Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 252.002.] 
    Chapter 252 supersedes requirements in the city's charter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-18, 9-10-07) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2007-18, adopted September 10, 2007, did not specifically amend the Charter. Inclusion herein was the request of the city. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
 Date Section  Section 
this Charter  4- 4-72 (Prop. No. 1) 32  4- 4-72 (Prop. No. 2) 38  4- 4-72 (Prop. No. 3) 9 78-3  2-13-78 1, 2 13, 14 3 25 4 38 5 76, 77 6 117 7 126 128 82-2  2- 8-82 147 85-3  2-25-85 1 12 87-3  2- 9-87 1 9 2 13 3, 4 16, 17 5 25 6 27 7 32 9 38 10 52 11, 12 76, 77 13 83 18 89 19 127 20 132 21 134 23 147 1991-06  5- 7-91 1 4 2 29 3 32 4 117 5 134 6 150 1994-06  2-14-94 1 14 2 17(2), (3) 3 18 4 20 5 66 6 69(4) 7 76 8 77 9 134(1) 1994-14  5-23-94 1 14 2 17(2), (3) 3 18 4 20 5 66 6 69(4) 7 76 8 77 9 134(1) 2003-03  2-10-03 1 109 2 110 2007-18  9-10-07 151  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  

Sec. 1-1. - Code designated and cited. 
(a)  The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the Code of Ordinances, City of Wharton, Texas, and may be so cited. 
(b)  This Code shall not be deemed to repeal any preamble, recital or finding of fact contained in any ordinance included in this Code, but all such matters shall be deemed incorporated in the sections in this Code derived from such respective ordinances. 
(Code 1978, § 1-1) 
Charter reference- Codification authority, § 29. 
State Law reference- Authority to publish a code of civil and criminal ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001 et seq. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
    City. The term "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Wharton, in Wharton County, Texas. 
    City secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The words "city secretary," "chief of police" or other city officers or departments shall be construed to mean the city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Wharton, Texas, and may include their duly authorized deputies, assistants, and representatives, unless otherwise provided. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
    Council. Whenever the term "council" or "city council" is issued, it shall mean the city council of the City of Wharton, Texas. 
    County. The term "county," "the county" or "this county" shall mean Wharton County, Texas. 
    Gender. Words of one gender include the other genders. 
    Highway. The term "highway" shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Joint authority. A grant of authority to three or more persons as a public body confers the authority on a majority of the number of members fixed by statute or ordinance. 
    May. The term "may" is permissive. 
    Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" includes an individual, firm, company, corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association and any other legal entity. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Roadway. The term "roadway" shall mean that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean that portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature, subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" shall include any symbol executed or adopted by a person with present intention to authenticate a writing. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Texas. 
    Statutory citations. The abbreviations "Vernon's Ann. Civ. St.," "V.A.T.S.," "Vernon's Ann. C.C.P." and "V.T.C.A." shall mean Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, Vernon's Annotated Texas Statutes, Vernon's Annotated Code of Criminal Procedure and Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated, respectively, as amended. 
    Street. The term "street" shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
    Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters, symbols or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" shall mean 12 consecutive months. 
(Code 1978, §§ 1-2, 9-40) 
State Law reference- Code Construction Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.001 et seq.; definitions relating to traffic, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1978, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing sections or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1978, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - General penalty for violations of Code; continuing violations. 
(a)  The maximum fine for violating any ordinance, rule or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, shall not exceed $2,000.00; for all other violations, the maximum fine shall not exceed $500.00. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  All other ordinances of the city containing fines and penalties for violating any ordinance, rule or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, are amended to provide for a maximum penalty not to exceed $2,000.00, and all other fines and penalties for other violations are increased to provide for a maximum fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Code 1978, § 1-5; Ord. No. 1991-21, § 1-5, 10-8-91) 
Charter reference- Maximum punishment, § 17(25). 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt appropriate penalties for violations of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001; municipal court jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003. 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    Unless expressly provided otherwise, if any provision of this Code or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this Code that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Code are severable. 
(Code 1978, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Miscellaneous ordinances, agreements, etc., not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of such Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with the state; 
(7)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the city; 
(8)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget; 
(9)  Any ordinance relating to local improvements and assessments therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city or regulating subdivisions; 
(12)  Ordinances not inconsistent with this Code prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets, such as ordinances establishing speed limits or designating one-way streets, no parking areas, truck routes, stop intersections, intersections where traffic is to be controlled by signals, etc.; 
(13)  Any urban renewal ordinance; 
(14)  Any zoning ordinance; 
(15)  Any ordinance prescribing personnel policies and procedures; 
(16)  Any special ordinance; 
(17)  Any temporary ordinance; 
and all such ordinances and other actions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1978-16, § 3, 8-14-78) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Aircraft and airports, ch. 6; airport board, § 6-36 et seq.; building official, § 18-36 et seq.; building standards commission, § 18-101; electrical board created, § 18-138; appointment of electrical inspectors, § 18-141; elections, ch. 22; emergency management, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; fire marshal, § 30-36 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 54; personnel, ch. 58; police, ch. 62; police reserve force, § 62-36 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and public ways, ch. 70; taxation, ch. 74; utilities and services, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Home rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 9.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Department of community development-Created and established; supervisory officers; enforcement function. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established the department of community development. 
(b)  The department of community development shall fall under the general direction of the city manager and under the direct supervision of the director of public works and/or the building official. The areas of responsibility of the community development department shall be the enforcement of the city building codes and other codes relating to the health and safety responsibilities entrusted to municipalities in the state. 
(Code 1978, § 2-1) 
Cross reference- Buildings and construction, ch. 18; duties of building official, § 18-37; substandard buildings and structures, § 18-96 et seq.; building standards commission, § 18-101; fire prevention code, § 30-70 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 34. 
State Law reference- Community development in municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 373.001 et seq. 
Sec. 2-2. - Same-Appeals; report, fee. 
(a)  Any person having been refused a permit of any kind or having a grievance brought on by the decision of city officials connected with the department of community development may seek relief through one of the following boards or commissions, as directed by the director of public works or the city manager: 
(1)  Planning commission. 
(2)  Plumbing and mechanical board. 
(3)  Electrical board. 
(b)  Any person wishing to appeal a decision shall first fill out a report detailing the alleged problem, giving a copy of the report to the building official. There shall be an appeal fee of $10.00 and a minimum of a 15-day waiting period to enable the proper notices to be mailed and published. 
(Code 1978, § 2-2) 
Cross reference- Abatement of substandard buildings, § 18-103. 
Sec. 2-3. - Interlocal police assistance. 
(a)  The chief of police is authorized to provide the assistance of the regularly employed law enforcement officers of the city to any municipality, county or joint airport requesting such assistance when there exists in the opinion of the mayor or other officer authorized to declare a state of civil emergency in such other county, municipality or joint airport a need for the services of additional law enforcement officers to protect health, life and property in such other county, municipality or joint airport because of disaster, riot, threat of concealed explosives or unlawful assembly characterized by force and violence or the threat of force and violence by three or more persons acting together or without lawful authority. 
(b)  The assistance offered pursuant to this section shall be in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 362.001 et seq. 
(Code 1978, § 2-3) 
Cross reference- Emergency managemenet, ch. 26; police, ch. 62. 
State Law reference- Interlocal cooperation contracts, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 791.001 et seq. 
Secs. 2-4-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNCIL MEETINGS 

Sec. 2-31. - Deciding questions of order. 
    All questions of order at council meetings shall be decided by the presiding officer, subject to an appeal to the council, a majority vote of which may reverse his decision. 
(Code 1978, § 2-21) 
Sec. 2-32. - Procedures for motions. 
    All motions at council meetings must be seconded before being put by the chair, and, if demanded to be in writing by any member, the motion shall be reduced to writing or withdrawn. 
(Code 1978, § 2-22) 
Sec. 2-33. - Motion to adjourn. 
    A motion to adjourn a council meeting shall always be in order and shall have precedence over all other matters and shall not be debatable. 
(Code 1978, § 2-23) 
Sec. 2-34. - Calling for vote. 
    In voting by the city council upon any pending question, any member may call for the ayes and noes; and, upon such call being made, it shall be entered upon the journal. 
(Code 1978, § 2-24) 
Sec. 2-35. - Smoking prohibited in council chambers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or carry lighted tobacco in any form in the city council chambers of the city hall. 
(b)  The city secretary shall cause to be placed in the council chambers a sign to contain lettering not less than three inches in height stating "Smoking prohibited by city ordinance," which sign shall be located to be clearly visible to the public. 
(Code 1978, § 2-25) 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 34. 
State Law reference- Smoking tobacco, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 48.01. 
Secs. 2-36-2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MUNICIPAL INSURANCE COVERAGE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal liability insurance, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 101.027. 

Sec. 2-51. - Insurance advisory committee. 
(a)  Established; composition; appointment and qualifications of members. There is hereby established an insurance advisory committee to be composed of three members appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. No person shall be appointed to membership on the committee unless he is an insurance agent participating in the city's insurance coverage program under this article. 
(b)  Terms of members; filling vacancies. All members of the insurance advisory committee shall hold office for a term of three years. At the expiration of the term of a member of the committee, an agent from among the agents participating in the city's insurance program, who is not serving on the committee, shall become a member of the committee, so that no member shall succeed himself in service on the committee. All participating agents in the city's insurance program shall serve on the committee from time to time. 
(c)  Liaison member. The insurance advisory committee shall select one of its members to serve as liaison between the city council and the committee. 
(d)  Duties. It shall be the duty of the insurance advisory committee to annually undertake a complete, thorough and exhaustive survey of insurance exposures occasioned by the operation of municipal facilities and municipal services offered by the city and to survey all buildings and structures owned by the city. Upon completion of the survey, the committee shall meet and determine the best insurance program suitable to the city's needs and shall make its recommendations to the city council. In determining the city's needs and in recommending the insurance coverage to be purchased, the committee shall consider only the coverage necessary to give the taxpaying citizens of the city full, complete and adequate protection. It shall further be the duty of the insurance advisory committee to meet with the city council and furnish information and assistance concerning insurance problems of the city at times when so requested by the council. 
(Code 1978, § 2-30) 
Sec. 2-52. - Review of policy endorsements. 
    All endorsements to insurance policies purchased by the city shall be reviewed by the full insurance advisory committee. 
(Code 1978, § 2-31) 
Sec. 2-53. - Qualifications of participating agents. 
(a)  No insurance agent shall participate in the city's insurance coverage program by writing or soliciting such insurance or receiving commissions therefrom, unless he meets the following qualifications: 
(1)  He must be a licensed fire and casualty insurance agent who has been doing business in the city for at least three years. 
(2)  He must be principally engaged in the general insurance business and must solicit fire and casualty insurance from the public in general. He must write a minimum of $30,000.00 in fire and casualty insurance premiums annually; provided, however, that this shall not apply to bona fide fire and casualty agents doing business prior to January 1, 1961. 
(3)  The agent must represent capital stock insurance companies which can legally write municipal insurance. 
(4)  He must be a taxpayer who maintains a residence within the city and has his principal full-time office within the city. 
(b)  Any agent who meets the qualifications set out in subsection (a) of this section shall be eligible for participation in the city's insurance program upon application to participate filed with the insurance advisory committee. Upon receipt of the application of a prospective participant, the insurance advisory committee shall investigate his qualifications and make its recommendation to the city council within 30 days. 
(Code 1978, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-54. - Selection and qualifications of insurance companies. 
    The insurance advisory committee shall determine the companies with which the city's insurance coverage shall be placed. Any company with which the city's insurance coverage is placed must have a financial rating of AA or better in Best's Insurance Guide and must maintain facilities within the state for servicing the coverage, including engineering, inspection and claims adjustment facilities. 
(Code 1978, § 2-33) 
Sec. 2-55. - Distribution of premiums among participating agents. 
    Within 30 days after receipt, the agents who write the insurance coverage for the city shall make an accounting and distribute in equal parts all of the premium commissions earned under the city insurance program to the agents qualified to participate in the city insurance program as provided in this article. 
(Code 1978, § 2-34) 
Secs. 2-56-2-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RECORDS AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT PROGRAM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Preservation and management of local government records, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 441.151 et seq.; local government records, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 201 et seq. 

Sec. 2-71. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City records means all documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law, including an ordinance, or in the transaction of public business. Such records shall be created, maintained and disposed of in accordance with this article or procedures authorized by this article and in no other manner. Material acquired solely for reference, exhibit or display and stocks of publications shall not constitute records for purposes of this article. 
(b)  Other specific definitions of records and information management terminology shall be provided in the appropriate policies and procedures of the program. 
(Ord. No. 1990-21, § 1, 12-11-90) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-72. - City records declared public property. 
    All city records are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No city official or employee has, by virtue of his position, any personal or property right to such records even though he may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1990-21, § 2, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 2-73. - Policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Local Government Records Act (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq.) and accepted records management practice. 
(Ord. No. 1990-21, § 3, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 2-74. - Designation of records management officer. 
    The city secretary and the successive holders of this office shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his name with the director and librarian of the state library within 30 days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1990-21, § 4, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 2-75. - Records management committee. 
    A records management committee, consisting of the mayor, city manager, city attorney, director of finance, chief of police, city secretary and secretary to the city manager, is hereby established. The committee shall: 
(1)  Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program; 
(2)  Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements if needed; 
(3)  Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer; 
(4)  Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records and control schedules; and 
(5)  Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 1990-21, § 5, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 2-76. - Duties of records management officer. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city; 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all city departments by preparation of a manual of procedure and policy and by onsite consultation; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and archives commission to determine if the records management program and the city records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program; 
(11)  Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article; 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, destruction or other disposition of city records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records stored electronically and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  Report annually to the city council on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (13) of this section; and 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the city council noncompliance by department heads or other city personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 1990-21, § 6, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 2-77. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs and duties for which the department head and his staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in his care and carry out their preservation, destruction or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1990-21, § 7, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 2-78. - Records liaison officers-Designated. 
    Each department head shall designate a member of his staff to serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer determines that in the best interests of the records management program more than one records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by the department. If the resignation, retirement, dismissal or removal occurs by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his department. 
(Ord. No. 1990-21, § 8, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 2-79. - Same-Duties and responsibilities. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules; 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in their departments; and 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(Ord. No. 1990-21, § 9, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 2-80. - Records control schedules-Development; approval; filing with state. 
(a)  The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a department-by-department basis, listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of city records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city. 
(c)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the records management committee. 
(d)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian of the state library as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian of the state library. 
(Ord. No. 1990-21, § 10, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 2-81. - Same-Implementation; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted shall be implemented by department heads and record liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit or the department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the records management committee. 
(Ord. No. 1990-21, § 11, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 2-82. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
    A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian of the state library an approved destruction authorization request. 
(Ord. No. 1990-21, § 12, 12-11-90) 
Sec. 2-83. - Records center. 
    A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by the records management program, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan. 
(Ord. No. 1990-21, § 13, 12-11-90) 
Secs. 2-84-2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND SIMILAR ENTITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-101-2-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BEAUTIFICATION CITY COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1998-09, Attachment A, adopted June 22, 1998, amended former Div. 2, §§ 2-121-2-129, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2 pertained to the Clean City Commission and derived from the Code of 1978, §§ 2-51-2-59. 
Cross reference- Cleanliness and sanitation of premises, § 34-46 et seq.; solid waste disposal, § 86-91 et seq. 
State Law reference- Litter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 365.001 et seq. 

Sec. 2-121. - Created. 
    A beautification city commission is hereby created for the purpose of assisting the city council in establishing a citywide policy for beautification of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1998-09, Attachment A, 6-22-98) 
Sec. 2-122. - Membership. 
(a)  The beautification city commission shall be comprised of seven members to be appointed by the city council and shall be residents of the city or shall have businesses in the city. 
(b)  Members of the commission shall serve for two-year staggered terms. 
(Ord. No. 1998-09, Attachment A, 6-22-98; Ord. No. 2019-04, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 2-123. - Organization; meetings. 
(a)  Four members of the beautification city commission shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. The members of the commission shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the commission and shall serve without compensation except for reimbursement for authorized expenses attendant to the performance of their duties. 
(b)  The commission shall hold an organizational meeting in July of each year and shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from among its members before proceeding to any other matters of business. The commission shall meet regularly and shall designate the time and place of its meetings. 
(c)  The commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings in accordance with the provisions of this division and the Charter of the city. Newly appointed members shall be installed at the first regular meeting after their appointment. 
(d)  Each month a report shall be submitted to the city council showing the cumulative attendance of each member with notation of members who have been absent from three consecutive meetings. 
(Ord. No. 1998-09, Attachment A, 6-22-98; Ord. No. 2019-04, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 2-124. - Responsibilities. 
(a)  The beautification city commission shall recommend beautification and environmental management policies to the city council so all city refuse and beautification city activities may follow a common purpose. The commission shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  Develop citywide beautification and environmental policy plans; 
(2)  Evaluate city actions in light of the policy stated in subsection (a)(1) of this section; 
(3)  Determine and recommend to the city council management and program priorities on a citywide basis; 
(4)  Recommend enforcement policies and additional program alternatives; 
(5)  Monitor city performance from data collected and examined under the Keep America Beautiful, Inc., beautification community system guidelines and make an annual report to the city council; 
(6)  Develop programs which stimulate all segments of the community to do positive things to improve the physical appearance of the city; and 
(7)  Carry out such other tasks as the city council may designate. 
(b)  To accomplish the responsibilities stated in subsection (a) of this section, the commission shall establish subcommittees, including but not limited to the areas of business and industry, communications, community organizations, municipal operations, budgetary, schools and beautification. 
(c)  Each subcommittee will be chaired by a beautification city commission member with an unspecified number of community volunteers chosen by the commission as working subcommittee staff. 
(Ord. No. 1998-09, Attachment A, 6-22-98) 
Sec. 2-125. - Limitations of enforcement. 
    The beautification city commission shall not be charged with enforcing the antilittering, housing or other ordinances of the city. Enforcement responsibilities of these ordinances shall remain in the other departments of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1998-09, Attachment A, 6-22-98) 
Sec. 2-126. - Executive director-Generally. 
    The executive director of the beautification city commission shall be the nonvoting secretary of the beautification city commission. He/she shall be custodian of all minutes and records of the commission and shall perform such other duties as the commission may deem necessary and consistent with both the responsibilities of the commission and his responsibilities to the city through the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1998-09, Attachment A, 6-22-98) 
Sec. 2-127. - Same-Office space, supplies and support. 
    Office space, supplies, telephone, postage and secretarial support, as well as travel and training, shall be furnished by the city within the budgetary appropriations within the community services department budget. 
(Ord. No. 1998-09, Attachment A, 6-22-98) 
Sec. 2-128. - Voluntary contributions to commission. 
(a)  Voluntary contributions may be made to the city by citizens or other interested persons or organizations to be applied toward projects of the beautification city commission. Any direct solicitation programs must have prior approval of the city council. The Finance Director shall place these funds in a separate account to be considered apart from the normal budgetary appropriation by the council. An accounting of this special fund shall be available to the commission and to the city council at all regular meetings. 
(b)  The commission shall have the authority, upon approval of the city manager, to expend up to $200.00 of these voluntary contribution funds for any one project of the commission. Any expenditure on a project of over $200.00 shall require city council approval. In order to fund commission expenses, the council hereby appropriates an initial sum of $200.00 out of the general fund of the city to be charged to the budget of the community services department. Any additional appropriation out of the city budget shall require council approval. 
(Ord. No. 1998-09, Attachment A, 6-22-98) 
Sec. 2-129. - Bylaws, rules, regulations. 
    The beautification city commission is authorized to adopt bylaws, rules and regulations, subject to council approval, to aid in carrying out its duties and responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 1998-09, Attachment A, 6-22-98) 
Secs. 2-130-2-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CIVIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-146. - Created; purpose. 
    A civic development commission is hereby created for the purpose of assisting the city council in establishing a citywide policy for promoting and developing the city and establishing and recommending to the city council a budget for the appropriation of revenues derived from the city hotel occupancy tax levied in section 74-101 et seq. 
(Code 1978, § 2-71) 
Sec. 2-147. - Membership. 
    The civic development commission shall be comprised of five members to be nominated by the mayor and approved by the city council and shall be residents of the city or shall have businesses in the city. Members of the commission shall serve for two-year staggered terms. No commission member shall serve more than two successive terms; provided, however, that a commission member appointed to complete the term of another commission member shall, at the completion of such term, be eligible for appointment for two full terms. 
(Code 1978, § 2-72) 
Sec. 2-148. - Organization; meetings. 
(a)  Three members of the civic development commission shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. The members of the commission shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the commission and shall serve without compensation except for reimbursement for authorized expenses attendant to the performance of their duties. 
(b)  The commission shall hold an organizational meeting in December of each year and shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from among its members before proceeding to any other matters of business. The commission shall meet regularly and shall designate the time and place of its meetings. 
(c)  The commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings in accordance with this division and the Charter of the city. Newly appointed members shall be installed at the first regular meeting after their appointment. 
(Code 1978, § 2-73) 
Sec. 2-149. - Responsibilities; subcommittees. 
(a)  The civic development commission shall hold hearings, hear requests for funds, prepare a proposed budget for the use of the hotel occupancy tax and submit recommendations to the city council as to projects and appropriations involving the expenditures of the hotel occupancy tax. The commission shall consider and make recommendations for the use of the tax only to promote tourism and the convention and hotel industry, and that use is limited to the following: 
(1)  The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation and maintenance of convention center facilities; 
(2)  The furnishing of facilities, personnel and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants; 
(3)  Advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to attract tourists and convention delegates or registrants to the city or its vicinity; 
(4)  The encouragement, promotion, improvement and application of the arts, including instrumental and vocal music, dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture, design and allied fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, radio, television, tape and sound recording and other arts related to the presentation, performance, execution and exhibition of these major art forms; and 
(5)  Historical restoration and preservation projects or activities or advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to encourage tourists and convention delegates to visit preserved historic sites or museums: 
a.  At or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities; or 
b.  Located elsewhere in the city or its vicinity that would be frequented by tourists, convention delegates or other visitors to the city. 
(b)  The commission chairman may establish subcommittees to meet, hold hearings and make recommendations as to the use of the funds for the various purposes outlined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Each subcommittee will be chaired by a civic development commission member with an unspecified number of members chosen by the commission chairman from the other commission members. 
(Code 1978, § 2-74) 
State Law reference- Use of tax revenue, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.101. 
Sec. 2-150. - Voluntary contributions to commission. 
    Voluntary contributions may be made to the city by citizens or other interested persons or organizations to be applied toward projects of the civic development commission. All hotel occupancy taxes, as well as all contributions to this fund, shall be placed in the city treasury in a separate account to be considered apart from the normal budgetary appropriation by the council. An accounting of this special fund shall be available to the commission and to the city council at all regular meetings. No expenditures shall be made except within budget guidelines approved by the city council and as otherwise authorized by law. 
(Code 1978, § 2-75) 
Sec. 2-151. - Bylaws, rules, regulations. 
    The civic development commission is authorized to adopt bylaws, rules and regulations, subject to council approval, to aid in carrying out its duties and responsibilities. 
(Code 1978, § 2-76) 
Secs. 2-152-2-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 

Sec. 2-156. - Created; purpose. 
(a)  City council hereby finds and determines that cooperative action with the corporation will provide means of financing needed public improvements within the city, consistent with the Development Corporation Act of 1979. 
(b)  The city council hereby approves the articles of incorporation (the "articles") for the corporation in substantially the form attached hereto as Exhibit A and authorizes the filing of the articles with the Secretary of State of Texas in accordance with the Act. 
(c)  The city council hereby appoints those persons named in the articles, each of whom on the date of his or her appointment is duly qualified in accordance with the Act, to serve as the initial members of the board of directors of the corporation, such service to be at all times subject to the powers of the city council under the articles. 
(d)  It is intended that the corporation be a duly constituted authority and instrumentality of the city, with the power to accomplish the public purposes of the city within the meaning of regulations and revenue rulings of the Treasury Department of the Internal Revenue Service of the United States promulgated under Sections 103 and 115 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1998-04, §§ 2-5, 3-9-98) 
Editor's note- Exhibit A, attached to catchline unchanged 1998-04, has not been set out at length herein but is available in the office of city secretary. 
Secs. 2-157-2-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - COMMUNITY CENTER[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2005-002, adopted Feb. 28, 2005, amended former Art. VI, Divs. 1, 2, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1990-19, 10-23-90; Ord. No. 1991-03, 2-12-91; Ord. No. 1996-11, 7-8-96. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-171. - Fee schedule. 
    All persons contracting with the city regarding the use of the Civic Center, located at 1924 North Fulton, shall pay the security deposit and rental fees in accordance with the following schedule: 
(a)  Available rental rooms/areas and deposit schedule. 
Room Max Occupancy Deposit Main Hall 700 $500.00 Pre-Function 120 $200.00 O'Quinn Room 100 $200.00 Duncan Auditorium 60 $200.00 Meeting Room A 30 $100.00 Meeting Room B 30 $100.00  
Monday - Thursday (weekday rates)   Friday - Sunday (weekend rates) Room Government and Nonprofit Commercial/Private Minimum Fee*   Room Government and Nonprofit Commercial/Private Minimum Fee* Meeting A, Meeting B, Duncan Auditorium $20.00 per hour $25.00 per hour $80.00/ 
$100.00   Meeting A, Meeting B, Duncan Auditorium $30.00 per hour $35.00 per hour $120.00/ 
$140.00 Pre-Function, O'Quinn Room $25.00 per hour $30.00 per hour $100.00/ 
$120.00   Pre-Function, O'Quinn Room $35.00 per hour $40.00 per hour $140.00/ 
$160.00 Main Hall Day of Event (includes kitchen) $700.00 for up to 12 hours (over 12 hours $75.00/hour) $800.00 for up to 12 hours (over 12 hours $100.00/hour) $700.00/ 
$800.00   Main Hall Day of Event (includes kitchen) $900.00 for up to 12 hours (over 12 hours $75.00/hour) $1,000.00 for up to 12 hours (over 12 hours $100.00/hour) $900.00/ 
$1000.00 Main Hall Set-up Day before Event 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. - no charge 
4:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m. - $75.00/hour 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. - $75.00/hour 
4:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m. - $100.00/hour N/A   Main Hall Set-up Day before Event 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. - no charge 
4:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m. - $75.00/hour 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. - $75.00/hour 
4:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m. - $100.00/hour N/A * Minimum fee is quoted for nonprofit minimum and commercial/private minimum.  
(b)  Tablecloth and skirting rental. All persons contracting with the city regarding use of the Civic Center who wish to use tablecloths provided by the center shall pay an additional fee of $7.00 per cloth per table, per day. This fee covers the cost of laundering, placing and removing table coverings from the tables. 
(c)  The Wharton Civic Center, upon approval of the current city council, can sponsor or partner with a local organization or business for an event. Each event would need to have city council approval regarding rental rates and/or income and expense allocations. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Secs. 2-172-2-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RENTAL POLICIES 

Sec. 2-191. - Scope. 
    All persons contracting with the city regarding the use of the Civic Center shall be governed and shall abide by the rules and guidelines set forth in this division of the City of Wharton Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-192. - Making reservations. 
    All reservations for the Civic Center must be made through the main office of the Civic Center at 1924 N. Fulton between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon and 1:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday except holidays. Reservations cannot be confirmed until the rental application and the letter of acceptance of the Civic Center City Ordinance are signed and the security deposit is received by the office of the Civic Center. No oral agreements will be valid. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-193. - Familiarity with facility and equipment. 
    Applicants for use of the Civic Center shall familiarize themselves with the facility and available equipment before making application. Applicants should be aware of the fact that the Civic Center is a multi-use facility where several events may be scheduled simultaneously. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-194. - Age of applicants; transferability of reservations. 
(a)  Applicants for use of the Civic Center must be 21 years of age or older. 
(b)  Reservations for use of the Civic Center are nontransferable. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-195. - Priority of city programs; cancellation of reservations by city. 
(a)  Programs conducted by the city at the Civic Center will be given priority at all times. 
(b)  The city council reserves the right to cancel any reservation for use of the Civic Center due to a national or natural disaster or emergency need. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-196. - Reservation policy; security deposits. 
(a)  Reservations for use of the Civic Center are on a first-come, first-served basis. 
(b)  All rental applications must be accompanied by a security deposit as stipulated in section 2-171. Reservations will not be considered confirmed until the appropriate security deposit, rental application and letter of acceptance of the Civic Center City Ordinance have been signed by the applicant and received by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-197. - Fee payment date. 
(a)  Rental fees for use of the Civic Center main hall are due 60 days prior to the event. If the event is scheduled within 60 days of the event, the rental fees are due with the application and security deposit. 
(b)  Rental fees for use of rooms other than the main hall are due 30 days prior to the event. If the event is scheduled within 30 days of the event, the rental fees are due with the application and security deposit. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-198. - Cancellations. 
(a)  Cancellations may be made for the main hall up to 60 days prior to the event. Cancellations made in the main hall less than 60 days prior to the event, shall be as follows: 
31 - 60 days prior to the event: Forfeit deposit. 
Less than 30 days prior to the event: Forfeit deposit and forfeit 50 poercent of the rental fee. 
(b)  Cancellations made in any room other than the main hall within 30 days of the event will forfeit their security deposit. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-199. - Applicant's responsibility during hours of use. 
    Requested hours for use of the Civic Center must include the time it will take to set up, hold the function and clean up. Applicants are solely liable for the building and must secure the building and its equipment at all times during the reserved time. All property missing during this time will be charged against the reserving party. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-200. - Limitation on hours. 
    Applicants renting the Civic Center facility are limited to the hours specified on their applications. Additional hours will be billed an hourly rate as stated in the fee schedule in section 2-171. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-201. - Closing hours. 
    No reservation for use of the Civic Center will continue later than 12:00 a.m., Monday through Thursday, or 1:00 a.m. Friday through Sunday. The building and parking area must be cleaned and completely vacated no later than this time. Vehicles (occupied or unoccupied) shall not be left in the parking area for overnight parking. Tenants of the Civic Center shall be exempt from the overnight parking restriction. Failure to leave the premises will be grounds for refusal of future rentals of the facility. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-202. - Furnishing equipment or supplies. 
    The city provides only the equipment that is listed on the application for use of the Civic Center. The applicant must furnish any other equipment or supplies. The Civic Center does not provide any supplies such as: scissors, staplers, scotch tape, extension cords, paper plates, forks, knifes, napkins and cups. The city will not be responsible for any personal equipment during reserved usage. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-203. - Storing equipment or supplies; lost or stolen articles. 
(a)  Applicants are not allowed to store equipment or supplies at the Civic Center other than during the hours that are specified on the application. If applicant receives prior approval from the Civic Center manager to store items overnight the day before and/or the day after a scheduled event, the applicant agrees to hold harmless the city and Civic Center management and personnel for any losses or damages that may occur during the period of time applicant leaves any equipment or supplies unattended in the Civic Center. 
(b)  The city is not responsible for lost or stolen articles. Lost and found articles are kept for one week only. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-204. - Decorations; use of rice, confetti, birdseed or flammable materials; red dye. 
(a)  No decorations of any kind are allowed to be nailed, taped or tacked to any part of the Civic Center. 
(b)  The use of rice, confetti, birdseed or any flammable material is prohibited inside the Civic Center. The throwing of birdseed is allowed, but must be restricted to the outside areas only. 
(c)  No crepe paper may be used to decorate tables and only "dripless" candles on nonflammable trays or in nonflammable containers may be used. 
(d)  Any kind of beverages containing red dye are not allowed in the Civic Center. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-205. - Cleanliness of premises. 
(a)  An applicant for use of the Civic Center agrees to leave the premises in as good as or better condition than that which existed prior to their usage. The user must: 
(1)  Clear tables of any debris or food. 
(2)  Remove all decorations and personal belongings. 
(3)  Clean up all obvious spills on tables, chairs and floor. 
(4)  Pick up garbage and trash in the parking lot. 
(b)  If extra clean up is required by Civic Center staff, applicants will be billed at a rate of $100.00 per hour; or the charges for clean up will be deducted from the deposit. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-206. - Damage to property; insurance. 
    Applicants for use of the Civic Center assume liability for the cost of repairing damage to property or equipment. The city reserves the right to require applicants, when it is deemed necessary, to provide public liability and/or property damage insurance policies and any other coverage to protect the property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-207. - City staff present for emergencies. 
    City staff will be in the facility at all times during the rental and will be available should an emergency occur during the use of the Civic Center facility (e.g., plumbing problems, and nonfunctioning equipment). 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-208. - Billing for additional services. 
    If someone other than a staff employee is needed for an emergency in the Civic Center that is not the fault of the city, the applicant will be billed a minimum of $50.00 for the first hour, with a rate of $20.00 per hour thereafter if a city maintenance employee is able to correct the problem. If outside professionals (e.g., state-qualified electrician, audio and/or video technologist) are required to repair the facility/equipment, applicants will be charged the actual cost of repair. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-209. - Exits and doorways. 
    In accordance with city fire codes, all exits and doorways of the Civic Center must remain clear and unlocked during functions. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-210. - Smoking. 
    Smoking is prohibited inside the Civic Center. Smoking outside the building shall occur at a distance of 20 feet from entrances, exits, windows, and ventilation intakes. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-211. - Persons under influence; gambling. 
(a)  Persons under the influence of drugs or alcohol will be asked to leave the Civic Center premises or surrounding areas. 
(b)  Illegal gambling is strictly prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-212. - Alcoholic beverages. 
    See Ordinance No. 2011-14 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2011-14, 9-12-11; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-213. - Security officers. 
    See Ordinance No. 2011-14 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2011-14, 9-12-11; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Cross reference- Cross references; Police, ch. 62. 
Sec. 2-214. - Youth functions. 
    Youth functions, defined as a function attended by persons 18 years of age or younger, at the Civic Center must have at least one adult chaperon for each ten guests. Chaperons must be present throughout the duration of the function, setup and cleanup time included. Names and telephone numbers of the designated chaperons must be provided with the rental application. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-215. - Refusal of use. 
    The city has full authority to refuse the Civic Center to any person, group or organization who, in their opinion, will or has previously misused or damaged the facility; refused to cooperate; or otherwise violated the center rules and policies. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-11, adopted Oct. 24, 20016 deleted the former § 2-215 and renumberd §§ 2-216-2-223 as §§ 2-215-2-222. Former § 2-215 was entitled "Designated area for nonprofit use" and derived from: Ord. No. 2005-002, adopted Feb. 28, 2005; and Ord. No. 2007-11, adopted June 25, 2007. 
Sec. 2-216. - Nonprofit organizations-Qualifying for rates. 
    Nonprofit organizations using the Civic Center are required to show their previous year's 990 IRS form or 501(c)3 designation by the IRS in order to qualify for the nonprofit rental rate or to be exempt from the security deposit. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-217. - Nonprofit organization-Damages and extra fees. 
    A nonprofit organization will be invoiced for any damages or extra cleanup fees within ten working days of the function. A nonprofit organization that fails to pay for damaged equipment or furniture will forfeit the right to further use the facility. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-218. - Dates closed. 
    No rooms in the Civic Center will be available for rental for any reasons on the following days: 
(1)  New Year's Day. 
(2)  Martin Luther King, Jr. Day. 
(3)  Easter Weekend (including Good Friday). 
(4)  Memorial Day. 
(5)  Independence Day. 
(6)  Labor Day. 
(7)  Thanksgiving and Thanksgiving weekend (including Thursday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday). 
(8)  Christmas Eve. 
(9)  Christmas Day. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-219. - Return/forfeit of deposit. 
(a)  The security deposit will be returned to the applicant within 14 days of the event if the applicant complies with all policies as stated above, no damages are noted and all fees are paid in full. 
(b)  The security deposit may be forfeited or only partially refunded for the following reasons: 
(1)  The applicant cancels the event as noted in section 2-198. 
(2)  The premises are not cleaned as noted in section 2-205. 
(3)  There are damages found to the property after the event. 
(4)  The applicant required additional services or equipment during the event. 
(5)  The applicant used the Civic Center for more hours than originally agreed upon. 
(6)  The total fees for the event have not been paid in full including additional items that may have been added at the time of the event. 
(7)  Alcohol was found during the event and was not noted in the application. 
(8)  The applicant materially misstates the number of people as determined by the security officers present during the event and additional security officers were called. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-220. - Compliance by applicant. 
    An applicant using the Civic Center will comply with all city ordinances and federal and state laws. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-221. - Exceptions to rental policy. 
    Any exception to policy stated in section 2-171, Fee Schedule, must be approved by vote of city council at its regularly scheduled meeting time. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-222. - Right to change, alter, amend or cancel the regulations. 
    The Wharton City Council reserves the right to change, alter, amend or cancel any or all of the regulations and rental rates contained herein at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2005-002, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-11, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2016-11, 10-24-16) 
Secs. 2-223-2-250. - Reserved. 
Chapter 6 - AIRCRAFT AND AIRPORTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; occupational licenses, taxes and regulations, ch. 42; personnel, ch. 58; taxicabs, ch. 78. 
State Law reference- Aeronautics, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 46c-1 et seq.; Municipal Airports Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 46d-1 et seq.; municipal and county zoning authority around airports, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Operation of heavy vehicles on airport entrance road. 
(a)  Prohibition. No person may drive, operate or move nor may the owner cause or permit to be driven, operated or moved on the Wharton Municipal Airport entrance road which runs between U.S. Highway 59 and the airport operations building any vehicle or combination of vehicles having a greater gross weight than 50,000 pounds. 
(b)  Vehicle defined. The word "vehicle" as used in this section shall mean every mechanical device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, including motor vehicles, commercial motor vehicles, truck tractors, trailers and semitrailers. 
(c)  Exception. Vehicles transporting fuel or other supplies and equipment to the municipal airport shall be exempt from this section. 
(Code 1978, § 3-1) 
Cross reference- Truck routes, § 82-58. 
Secs. 6-2-6-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIRPORT BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Airport board, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 46d-6. 

Sec. 6-36. - Created. 
    There is hereby created an airport board to be known as the City of Wharton Airport Board. 
(Code 1978, § 3-20) 
Sec. 6-37. - Composition; appointment of members. 
    The airport board shall be composed of six members, all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Code 1978, § 3-21) 
Sec. 6-38. - Terms of members. 
    All members of the airport board shall serve for a term of two years. 
(Code 1978, § 3-22) 
Sec. 6-39. - Election of officers. 
    The airport board shall organize itself by electing a chairman and a secretary and any other officers necessary to carry on its business. 
(Code 1978, § 3-23) 
Sec. 6-40. - Powers and duties. 
    The airport board shall have full power and authority to carry out all of the duties imposed upon it by this article and further shall have all of the powers and duties given to a municipality in the operation of an airport or other air navigation facility by Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 46d-1-46d-22, subject to the express consent and approval of the city council. 
(Code 1978, § 3-24) 
Sec. 6-41. - Acquisition of land for airport. 
    The airport board shall acquire lands by purchase, gift, devise, lease or otherwise, suitable for the establishment, development, construction, enlargement, improvement, maintenance, equipment, operation, regulation, protection and policing of an airport or other air navigation facility, subject to the express consent and approval of the city council. 
(Code 1978, § 3-25) 
Sec. 6-42. - Establishment, regulation, operation of airport. 
    The airport board shall establish, develop, construct, enlarge, improve, maintain, equip, operate, regulate, protect and police an airport or other air navigation facility, to be known as the City of Wharton Airport, subject to the express consent and approval of the city council. 
(Code 1978, § 3-26) 
Sec. 6-43. - Responsibility of city for expenses incurred. 
    The expense of placement, establishment, development, construction, enlargement, improvement, maintenance, equipment, operation, regulation, protection and policing of an airport incurred by the airport board in performing its duties under this article shall be a responsibility of the city. 
(Code 1978, § 3-27) 
Sec. 6-44. - Reports to council. 
    The chairman and the secretary of the airport board shall report to the city council each month, by the tenth of the month, detailing all income received from the operation of the airport and all expenses incurred in such operation. Such report shall be signed by both the chairman and the secretary. 
(Code 1978, § 3-28) 
Secs. 6-45-6-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AIRPORT ZONING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal and county zoning authority around airports, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.001 et seq. 

Sec. 6-66. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as Wharton Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance. 
(Code 1978, § 3-30) 
Sec. 6-67. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Airport means the City of Wharton Airport. 
    Airport elevation means the established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area. 
    Airport hazard means a structure or object of natural growth that obstructs the airspace required for the taking off, landing and flight of aircraft or that interferes with visual, radar, radio or other systems for tracking, acquiring data relating to, monitoring or controlling aircraft. 
    Airport reference point means the point established as the approximate geographic center of the airport landing area and so designated. 
    Height. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this article and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation, unless otherwise specified. 
    Joint airport zoning board means a board consisting of five members, two appointed by the city council and two appointed by the county commissioners court; the four so appointed shall appoint a fifth, the chairman. 
    Landing area means the surface area of the airport used for the landing, takeoff or taxiing of aircraft. 
    Nonconforming use means any structure, tree or use of land which is lawfully in existence at the time the regulation is prescribed in this article or an amendment to this article becomes effective and does not then meet the requirements of the regulation. 
    Runway means a defined area of an airport prepared for the landing and taking off of aircraft along its length. 
    Structure means an object constructed or installed by one or more persons and includes a building, tower, smokestack and overhead transmission line. 
    Tree means any object of natural growth. 
(Code 1978, § 3-31) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-68. - Zones. 
    In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transition surfaces, horizontal surface and conical surface. Such areas are shown on the municipal airport zoning map consisting of one sheet, prepared by Texas Aeronautics Commission and dated May 21, 1974, which is attached to Ordinance No. 74-17 and made a part of this article. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Approach zone. The approach zone is established beneath the approach surface at each end of all runways on the airport for nonprecision landings and takeoffs. The approach zone shall have a width of 500 feet at a distance of 200 feet beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,200 feet beyond each end of the runway, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(2)  Transition zones. Transition zones are hereby established beneath the transition surface adjacent to each runway and approach surface as indicated on the zoning map. Transition surfaces, symmetrically located on either side of runways, have variable widths as shown on the zoning map. Transition surfaces extend outward from a line 250 feet on either side of the centerline of the runway, for the length of such runway plus 200 feet on each end. The line is parallel to and level with the runway centerlines. The transition surfaces along such runways slope upward and outward one foot vertically for each seven feet horizontally to the point where they intersect the horizontal surface. Further, transition surfaces are established adjacent to approach surfaces for the entire length of the approach surfaces. These transition surfaces have variable widths, as shown on the zoning map. Such transition surfaces flare symmetrically with either side of the runway approach surfaces from the base of such surfaces and slope upward and outward at the rate of one foot vertically for each seven feet horizontally to the points where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. 
(3)  Horizontal zone. The horizontal zone is the area beneath a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. 
(4)  Conical zone. The conical zone is the area beneath the conical surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20:1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
(Code 1978, § 3-32) 
Sec. 6-69. - Height limitations. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow or maintained in any zone created by this article to a height in excess of the height limit established in this article for such zone. Such height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones as follows: 
(1)  Approach zones. One foot in height for each 34 feet in horizontal distance beginning at a point 200 feet from and at the elevation of the end of the runway and extending to a point 10,200 feet from the end of the runway. 
(2)  Transition zones. One foot in height for each seven feet in horizontal distance beginning at any point 250 feet normal to and at the elevation of the centerline of runways extending 200 feet beyond each end thereof, extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation or a height of 250.09 feet above mean sea level. In addition to such height limits, there are established height limits of one foot vertical height for each seven feet horizontal distance measured from the edges of all approach zones for the entire length of the approach zones and extending upward and outward to the points where they intersect the horizontal or conical surfaces. 
(3)  Horizontal zone. That area beneath the horizontal surface which is located 150 feet above the airport elevation or a height of 250.09 feet above mean sea level. 
(4)  Conical zone. That area beneath the conical surface which is one foot in height for each 20 feet of horizontal distance beginning at the periphery of the horizontal surface extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation. 
(5)  Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or structure to a height up to 25 feet above the surface of the land. 
(b)  Where an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive limitations shall prevail. 
(Code 1978, § 3-33) 
Sec. 6-70. - Use restrictions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use may be made of land within any zone established by this article in such a manner as to: 
(1)  Create electrical interference with radio communication between the airport and aircraft; 
(2)  Make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airport lights and others; 
(3)  Result in glare in the eyes of flyers using the airport; 
(4)  Impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport; or 
(5)  Otherwise endanger the landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft. 
(Code 1978, § 3-34) 
Sec. 6-71. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  The regulations prescribed by this article shall not be construed to require: 
(1)  Changes in nonconforming land use existing on the date of the adoption of the regulations; 
(2)  The removal, lowering or other change of a structure that does not conform to the regulations on the date of their adoption, including all phases or elements of a multiphase structure, regardless of whether actual construction has commenced, that received a determination of no hazard by the Federal Aviation Administration under 14 CFR 77, before the regulations were adopted; 
(3)  The removal, lowering or other change of an object of natural growth that does not conform to the regulations on the date of their adoption; or 
(4)  Any other interference in the continuation of a use that does not conform to the regulations on the date of their adoption. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this article shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of the regulation and is diligently prosecuted. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) or (b) of this section, the owner of any nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the joint airport zoning board to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the city. 
(Code 1978, § 3-35) 
State Law reference- Nonconforming uses and structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.019. 
Sec. 6-72. - Enforcement. 
    The joint airport zoning board shall administer and enforce this article. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the joint airport zoning board through the office of the city secretary upon a form furnished by him. Applications required by this article to be submitted to the joint airport zoning board shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. Applications for action by the board of adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted by the chairman of the joint airport zoning board. 
(Code 1978, § 3-37) 
Sec. 6-73. - Permits. 
(a)  Except as specifically provided in subsections (a)(1), (2) and (3) of this section, no material change shall be made in the use of land and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise established in any zone created in this article unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to determine whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform to this article. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. 
(1)  In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and the conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features, such tree or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zone. 
(2)  In the areas lying within the limits of the approach zones but at a horizontal distance of not less than 5,200 feet from each end of the runways, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zone. 
(3)  In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for such transition zones. 
(b)  Nothing contained in any of the exceptions in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(3) of this section shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, alteration or growth of any structure or tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this article, except as set forth in section 6-69(a)(5). 
(c)  A permit shall be obtained before: 
(1)  A nonconforming structure may be replaced, rebuilt or substantially changed or repaired; or 
(2)  A nonconforming object of natural growth may be replaced, substantially changed, allowed to grow higher or replanted. 
(d)  A permit may not allow: 
(1)  The establishment of an airport hazard; 
(2)  A nonconforming use to be made; 
(3)  A nonconforming structure or object of natural growth to become higher than it was at the time of the adoption of the airport zoning regulations relating to the structure or object of natural growth or at the time of the application for the permit; or 
(4)  A nonconforming structure, object of natural growth or use to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was at the time of the adoption of the airport zoning regulations relating to the structure, object of natural growth or use or at the time of the application for the permit. 
(e)  Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted. 
(f)  Whenever the joint airport zoning board determines that a nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more than 80 percent torn down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
(g)  Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure or permit the growth of any tree or use his property not in accordance with this article may apply to the board of adjustment for a variance from this article. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of this article would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest but will do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of this article. 
(h)  Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this article and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to permit the city at its own expense to install, operate and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of an airport hazard. 
(Code 1978, § 3-36) 
State Law reference- Permits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.020. 
Sec. 6-74. - Board of adjustment. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of adjustment to have and exercise the powers to hear and decide: 
(1)  Appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the joint airport zoning board in the enforcement of this article. 
(2)  Special exceptions to the terms of this article upon which such board of adjustment under this article may be required to pass. 
(3)  Specific variances. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall consist of five members appointed by the airport zoning board as prescribed in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.032, and each shall serve for a term of two years and shall be removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges, after a public hearing. 
(c)  The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure in harmony with this article. Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the board of adjustment may determine. The chairman or in his absence the acting chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the board of adjustment shall be public. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact; and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions. The minutes and records shall immediately be filed in the office of the city secretary and shall be a public record. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming or modifying any order, requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under this article. 
(e)  The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board of adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the joint airport zoning board or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this article or to effect any variation in this article. 
(Code 1978, § 3-38) 
Sec. 6-75. - Appeal to board of adjustment. 
(a)  A decision of the joint airport zoning board made in its administration of this article may be appealed to the board of adjustment by: 
(1)  A person who is aggrieved by the decision; 
(2)  A taxpayer who is affected by the decision; or 
(3)  The governing body of a political subdivision or a joint airport zoning board that believes the decision is an improper application of the airport zoning regulation. 
(b)  The appellant must file with the board of adjustment and the joint airport zoning board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The appeal must be filed within a reasonable time as determined by the rules of the board of adjustment. On receiving the notice, the joint airport zoning board shall immediately transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record of the action that is appealed. 
(c)  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action that is appealed unless the joint airport zoning board certifies in writing to the board of adjustment facts supporting the agency's opinion that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case, the proceedings may be stayed only by an order of the board of adjustment, after notice to the joint airport zoning board, if due cause is shown. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall set a reasonable time for the appeal hearing and shall give public notice of the hearing and due notice to the parties in interest. A party may appear at the appeal hearing in person or by agent or attorney. The board of adjustment shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. 
(e)  The board of adjustment may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the joint airport zoning board's order, requirement, decision or determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision or determination; and for that purpose the board of adjustment has the same authority as the joint airport zoning board. 
(Code 1978, § 3-39) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.036. 
Sec. 6-76. - Judicial review. 
    A person who is aggrieved or a taxpayer who is affected by a decision of the board of adjustment or the governing body of a political subdivision or a joint airport zoning board that believes a decision of the board of adjustment is illegal may present to a court of record a verified petition stating that the decision of the board of adjustment is illegal in whole or in part and specifying the grounds of the illegality, as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.041. 
(Code 1978, § 3-40) 
Sec. 6-77. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this article and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict is with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
(Code 1978, § 3-41) 
Sec. 6-78. - Penalties. 
    Each violation of this article or of any regulation, order or ruling promulgated under this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-5. 
(Code 1978, § 3-42) 
Secs. 6-79-6-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AIRPORT RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-91. - Use of airport restricted. 
    No person, partnership, firm, association, corporation or entity, incorporated or otherwise, shall use the airport for any commercial activity unless approved by a written permit from the city council or its duly authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 1997-06, § 1, 3-24-97) 
Sec. 6-92. - General rules and regulations-Rules 1 through 17. 
    The following rules and regulations shall be observed in the use, operation and conduct of the airport: 
    Rule 1. [FAA air traffic rules adopted.] Federal Air Traffic Rules of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) for aircraft operated anywhere in the United States, and presently or hereafter effective, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as though fully set forth and incorporated herein. 
    Rule 2. Safeguard of persons and property. The city manager shall at all times have authority to take necessary and legal actions to safeguard any person, aircraft, equipment, or property at the airport. 
    Rule 3. [Rental of city-owned structures.] Hangars and other buildings or structures owned by the city may be rented to private individuals, companies, or corporations on a monthly or yearly basis for the storage of aircraft and ancillary aircraft equipment only, or to conduct a commercial fixed base operation (FBO). 
    Rule 4. Lease of airport property. The city may lease property within the building area or other portions of the airport for the construction of hangars, buildings, lean-tos, aprons, taxiways, and auto parking lots in accordance with the approved airport master plan. All leased property and all buildings or structures erected on the leased property must be utilized for aviation-related activity only. Storage of nonaviation equipment or conduct of nonaviation business in any privately-owned hangar or structure is prohibited. 
A.  No leases will be written for a primary period in excess of 20 years without the written approval of the city council, and then only for the length of a mortgage in excess of 20 years obtained from a lending institution by the mortgagee/FBO to construct such building(s) or hangar(s) on the airport for which the mortgage was obtained. 
B.  Any private structure or hangar not in use for aviation purposes for a period in excess of 90 days or not available for rent or subleased for aviation purposes, unless so authorized by the city, must be removed after due notice to the owner in writing by registered mail or the city will consider such structures or hangars abandoned and title will pass to the city. 
C.  Leased land from which any building, hangar, or structure is removed after due notice or expiration of the lease will be cleared, cleaned, and put back in its original condition. 
D.  Leased property on the airport may be subleased by the lessee only with written approval of the city. 
E.  No hangars or structures may be erected beyond the building restriction line or in conflict with the FAA and/or Texas Department of Transportation, Division of Aviation approved airport layout plan. 
F.  All construction must be authorized by the city council and must be of a compatible standard capable of withstanding winds of 85 mph, with doors open or closed. Furthermore, all structures must comply with the city building codes and airport hazard zoning (and compatible land use) ordinance(s). 
G.  Through-the-fence-operations prohibited. No private individual, partnership, FBO, company, corporation, or body politic shall be permitted direct ground access to the airport by their aircraft, customers' aircraft, or private vehicle from private property adjacent to or in the immediate area of the airport. Further, no private individual, partnership, company, corporate, body politic, or customers' aircraft or vehicle shall be permitted direct ground access to private property from the airport, a practice commonly known as a "through the fence operation." 
    Rule 5. Lien for charges. To enforce the payment of any charge made for repairs, improvements, storage, or care of any personal property, made or furnished by the city or its agents, in connection with the operation of the airport, the city shall have a lien upon such personal property, which shall be enforceable as provided by law. 
    Rule 6. Lien possessory right. To enforce the payment of any such charge, the airport manager may retain possession of such personal property until all reasonable, customary, and usual compensation shall have been paid in full. 
    Rule 7. Unauthorized signs. No signs, nonaeronautical equipment, portable buildings, or house trailers may be erected, moved-in, or installed on the airport property except as may be specifically authorized by the city manager. 
    Rule 8. Surreptitious activities. Any person observing suspicious, unauthorized or criminal activities should report such activities immediately to the airport manager, police, officers of the department of public safety, or other peace officers. 
    Rule 9. Wrecked aircraft. Every aircraft owner, his/her pilot, or agents, shall be responsible for notifying FAA and promptly removing disabled or wrecked aircraft from the operational areas of the airport, under the direction of the airport manager. 
    Rule 10. Repairs to aircraft. No aircraft shall be repaired on any part of the landing or takeoff area, and all outside repairs shall be made at the places designated by the airport manager for such purpose. Commercial or repair maintenance operations shall be conducted within a hangar or building rented, leased, or owned for commercial aircraft engine, airframe, avionics, etc., maintenance or repair purposes. 
    Rule 11. Agricultural spraying operations. Agricultural spraying operations are limited to short-term usage periods of time within the property confines of the city municipal airport. The short-term usage is defined as less than 15 calendar days during the year which may occur due to inclement weather conditions at the operator's normal base of operations. The operator shall contact the airport manager or city manager at least 24 hours before conducting operations on the municipal airport and have written approval from the city before conducting operations. This written approval will be provided only if the city has the appropriate certificate of insurance on hand and the city and the fixed base operator at the airport is named as additional insured. 
    The city shall develop forms, guidelines and distribute to aerial spraying applicators. The forms will also be provided to the operator at a requested time. 
    Operations shall be conducted on designated areas of the airport as determined by the airport manager and/or the city. Careless handling of chemicals and unsafe flying will not be tolerated. 
    Chemicals used in agricultural flying operations shall be dispersed, maintained, the dispensing area cleaned, and empty chemical containers stored, and promptly disposed of in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the Environmental Protection Agency, Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission, Texas Department of Agriculture, Texas Department of Health, and the city airport board. Washing of agricultural (Ag) aircraft and flushing of Ag aircraft spray tanks or hoppers will not be allowed on the airport. No agricultural chemicals shall be stored overnight on airport property. 
    The agricultural aircraft operator/pilot must hold an appropriate FAA commercial certificate and be properly rated for the aircraft being used in the operations. The aircraft must have an air worthiness certificate and meet all the requirements of the FAA. The aircraft shall be owned or leased as evidenced in writing. 
    The municipal airport traffic pattern may be deviated from (FAA Part 137.45) only if: 
(a)  Prior coordination is made with the airport manager; 
(b)  Deviations are limited to the agricultural aircraft; 
(c)  Except in an emergency, landings and takeoffs are not made on ramps, taxiways, or other areas of the airport not intended for such use; and 
(d)  The aircraft at all times remains clear of, and gives way to, aircraft conforming to the traffic pattern. 
    Agricultural aircraft operators shall not exceed the maximum gross hopper weight as "stamped" on the aircraft hopper by the aircraft manufacturer or listed in the aircraft's specifications, corrected for field elevation and current temperature. 
    The agricultural aircraft operator shall carry a minimum of liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 payable to the city for cleanup of any hazardous chemical spills on the airport property caused by the operator. The operator is to post a bond of which the bond amount would be determined by the city considering its financial risk and exposure resulting from the agricultural aircraft operations. 
    The operator shall inform the airport fixed base operator when operations have been completed and the city shall inspect the area used by the operator, and if the inspection is satisfactory, the city will provide approval in writing to the operator. 
    Rule 12. Damage to airport. Any person, individual, corporation, or the owner of any aircraft causing damage of any kind to said airport, whether through violation of any of these rules or through vandalism or any act of negligence, shall be liable therefor in and to the city. 
    Rule 13. Injury to person. Persons entering upon the airport ground side property by automobile, other vehicular conveyance, or pedestrian traffic (does not include persons in aircraft using approved air side facilities, i.e. runways or taxiways) do so at their own risk and with no liability incurring to the city, the airport authority, the city manager, or any airport employee for any injury or damage to person or property. Further, any person desiring to use the airport shall observe and obey all valid laws, resolutions, orders, rules, and regulations promulgated and enforced by the city or by any other authority having jurisdiction over the conduct and operation of the airport including the FAA and the Texas Department of Transportation, Division of Aviation. 
    Rule 14. Licensed pilots. Only properly registered aircraft and persons holding current airman and medical certificates issued by the FAA shall be authorized to operate aircraft on the airport. This limitation shall not apply to students in training under licensed instructors nor to public aircraft of the federal government or of a state, territory, or political subdivision thereof, or to aircraft licensed by a foreign government with which the United States has a reciprocal agreement covering the operation of such licensed aircraft. 
    Note: Use of the airport by ultralight vehicles shall be subject to approval by the airport authority and shall be in accordance with FAR Part 13 and any other rules established by the city or airport authority. 
    Rule 15. Registration. Every person owning an aircraft based at the airport employed or receiving instructions at the airport shall register at the office of the airport manager with their name, address, telephone number, aircraft model, aircraft registration "N" number in accordance with the municipal airport hangar lease agreement. 
    Rule 16. Intoxicants and narcotics prohibited. No person under the influence of an intoxicant, narcotic, or other illicit drugs shall operate or fly in any aircraft upon, from, or over the airport; provided, however, such prohibition shall not apply to a passenger when accompanied by a nurse or caretaker in an aircraft apart from the pilot. 
    Rule 17. Foreign objects. No foreign objects, including bottles, cans, scrap, nuts, bolts, nails, or any object that may cause damage to an aircraft, shall be left upon the floor of any building or upon any part of the surface area of the airport. Individuals are encouraged to pick up such foreign objects when observed and place them in a trash receptacle. 
(Ord. No. 1997-06, § 2, 3-24-97) 
Sec. 6-93. - Ground operations-Rules 18-25. 
    Rule 18. Air and ground traffic-Vehicular traffic. All vehicular traffic shall be confined to streets, roads, and avenues of passage designated and provided for that purpose by the airport authority and shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 30 miles per hour. Official vehicles only will be driven on the landing area. Such vehicles will have a ground to air radio transceiver tuned to the local UNICOM frequency and a flashing yellow beacon light mounted on the roof of the car or a checkered orange and white flag mounted on the front bumper of the vehicle. Special use vehicles such as an ambulance, hearse, delivery van, or pickup vehicle may be driven on the apron with the permission of the airport manager to load or unload a patient, body, or special cargo. An aircraft owner that rents, leases, or owns his/her private hangar may park his/her automobile in the hangar while on a trip in his/her airplane. 
    Rule 19. Fueling of aircraft: 
A.  Aircraft shall not be fueled while the engine is running or while in a hangar or other enclosed place, except that an Ag spray aircraft on a fast turnaround may be fueled and loaded with chemicals with the aircraft engine idling if the airport authority has provided written authority to the Ag operator, that the Ag aircraft's wheels are chocked, that there are at least two 20B fire extinguishers within 50 feet of the Ag aircraft being serviced, and that a qualified ground crew member is present during the fueling operation. 
B.  Bonding. Prior to making any fueling connection to an aircraft, the fueling equipment (fuel pump, hydrant service, fuel truck) shall be bonded to the aircraft by use of a cable, thus providing a conductive path to equalize static electrical potential between the fueling equipment and the aircraft. The bonding cable resistance shall not exceed 10,000 ohms. The bond shall be made prior to fueling and maintained until fueling is completed and fuel connections have been removed, thus permitting the reuniting of separated static electrical charges that could be generated during the fueling operation. In addition, when fueling over wing, the fueling nozzle shall be bonded with a nozzle bond cable having a clip or a male plug to a metallic component of the aircraft that is metallically connected to the aircraft fuel tank filler port or a female receptacle designed to accommodate the male plug. If there is no plug receptacle or means for attaching a clip, the operator shall touch the filler cap with the nozzle spout before removing the cap so as to equalize the static electrical potential between the nozzle and the filler port. The nozzle spout shall be kept in contact with the filler neck until the fueling is completed. When a funnel is used in aircraft fueling, it shall be kept in contact with the filler neck as well as the fuel spout or the fuel supply container to avoid the possibility of a spark at the fill opening. Only metal funnels shall be used for fueling. Bonding and fueling connections shall be disconnected in the reverse order of connection after fueling is completed. Grounding during aircraft fueling is no longer required because National Fire Protection Association testing has disclosed that no amount of bonding or grounding will prevent static electrical discharges from occurring inside of a fuel tank. 
C.  All aircraft shall be fueled clear of all hangars, other buildings, and aircraft by at least 50 feet. 
D.  Fueling trucks shall not be parked within any buildings or hangar or within 50 feet distance of a building, hangar, or parked aircraft. Fuel trucks shall be parked with at least ten feet separation between vehicles. 
E.  Aircraft fuel storage tanks for belowground or aboveground use will be constructed and installed according to federal and state standards, registered with the state, monitored, checked for leakage, operated, and maintained in accordance with the federal and state statutes, rules, and regulations promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency and the Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission. 
F.  Aviation or auto fuels shall not be stored within a hangar or building. 
G.  Persons or aviation businesses wishing to supply and dispense aviation fuel for their private use must first obtain permission from the airport board. 
H.  Public sale of automobile gas for use in aircraft will not be permitted on the airport without written approval of the city. Aircraft authorized by the FAA to use auto gas may be privately fueled by their owner in a location designated by the airport manager in accordance with all rules appertaining to aircraft fueling and fire safety contained in these rules and regulations. 
I.  All aviation fuel storage tanks, aviation fuel pumps, hydrant fuel services, aircraft fuel service vehicles, whether publicly or privately owned, shall have the type of aviation fuel dispensed printed in large block letters upon them, including octane if aviation gasoline, the aviation fuel code, and "No Smoking." This information shall be printed on all sides of the fueling tanks, pumps, etc., so the information is visible from any direction. 
J.  All aircraft fueling, fuel equipment, and procedures will be in accordance with Manual 407 "Aircraft Fuel Servicing, 1990," or as revised, published by the National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, P.O. Box 9101, Quincy, Massachusetts 02269-9101, telephone 1-800-735-0100. 
    Rule 20. Tie down of aircraft: 
A.  All aircraft not hangared should be tied down and the wheels chocked at night and during inclement weather. 
B.  All aircraft owners or their agents are responsible for the tie down or security of their aircraft at all times and particularly during inclement weather. 
    Rule 21. Running aircraft engines: 
A.  Aircraft not equipped with adequate brakes shall not be started until the wheels have been set with chocks attached to ropes or other suitable means for removing them. 
B.  No airplane will be hand propped, started, or left running without qualified personnel at the controls. 
C.  No aircraft engine shall be started or run inside any building or hangar. 
D.  No engine shall be started, run up, or warmed up until and unless the aircraft is in such position that the propeller stream or jet blast will clear all buildings, other aircraft, and groups of people. 
    Rule 22. Damage to runway lights. Any person damaging any runway or taxiway light or fixture by operation of an aircraft or otherwise shall immediately report such damage to the airport manager. Persons causing damage to runway or taxiway lights as a result of negligent operation of an aircraft or willful acts will be liable for replacement cost of the light(s) and/or fixture(s) and may be charged with a misdemeanor as provided in section 6-98(b) herein. 
    Rule 23. Taxiing aircraft: 
A.  No person shall taxi an aircraft until he/she has ascertained there will be no danger of collision with any person or object in the immediate area. 
B.  Aircraft will be taxied at a safe and prudent speed, and in such manner as to be under the control of the pilot at all times. 
C.  Aircraft not equipped with adequate brakes will not be taxied near buildings or parked aircraft unless an attendant (wing-walker) is at a wing of the aircraft to assist the pilot. 
D.  Aircraft shall not taxi onto the runway from the ramp and taxiway area if there is an aircraft approaching to land or on the ground in takeoff position. Aircraft waiting on the taxiway for another aircraft to takeoff or land will remain behind the runway holding position markings. 
E.  Aircraft shall not be taxied by engine power into or out of a hangar. 
    Rule 24. Parking aircraft: 
A.  Unoccupied aircraft shall not be parked or tied down within ADGp I, 200 feet of the centerline of the runway or 44.5 feet from the centerline of the runway or 44.5 feet from the centerline of a parallel taxiway. All aircraft not hangared shall be parked in the areas designated by the airport board for that purpose. 
B.  Aircraft shall not be parked within 50 feet of an aircraft fuel pump or fuel service truck parking area. 
C.  Aircraft shall not be parked in such a manner as to hinder the normal movement of other aircraft and traffic unless specifically authorized by the city manager as an emergency measure. 
D.  It is the responsibility of the pilot when leaving a parked aircraft unattended to see that the brakes are set and/or that the plane is properly chocked and/or tied down. 
    Rule 25. Loading/unloading aircraft. Pilots are prohibited from loading or unloading aircraft with the engine running. 
(Ord. No. 1997-06, § 3, 3-24-97) 
Sec. 6-94. - Landing and takeoff rules-Rules 26-38. 
    Rule 26. Authority to suspend operations. The airport manager may suspend or restrict any or all operations whenever such action is deemed necessary in the interest of safety, provided operations under instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) may be continued by properly instrument-rated pilots following appropriate flight rules. 
    Rule 27. Clearing street. No aircraft shall land or takeoff in such manner as to clear any public street or highway at an altitude of less than 15 feet, or 17 feet over an interstate highway, 23 feet over a railroad, or 27 feet over a coastal water way, or the clearance height of the tallest bridge over the water way, nor land or takeoff on the taxiway or over hangars or other structures, automobile parking areas, or groups of spectators. 
    Rule 28. UNICOM. All pilots with radio-equipped aircraft shall call on the local UNICOM frequency 122.8 kHz to determine the active runway and to announce their position and intentions for takeoff or landing. Pilots of radio-equipped aircraft taking off or landing at the airport when the local UNICOM radio is not being monitored (or if the facility does not have a UNICOM radio) should report their traffic intentions on the MULTICOM frequency 122.8 kHz. 
    Rule 29. Emergency locator transmitter (ELT): 
A.  Immediately after takeoff and after landing, prior to engine shut down, pilots should tune their aircraft radios to the emergency frequency (121.5 kHz or 243.0 MHz) and listen to determine if their aircraft's emergency locator transmitter (ELT) has accidentally turned on as the result of a rough takeoff or landing. If the ELT turned on and transmitted after a takeoff or landing, as soon as possible after turning it off, [pilots should] advise the FAA automated flight service station for the area at telephone number 1-800-WX-BRIEF that their ELT accidentally turned on at the approximate time and coordinates, if known, and the time and coordinates it was turned off. This should prevent the USAF Rescue and Coordination Center from directing the Civil Air Patrol to commence a search and rescue operation resulting from the false ELT transmissions for an airplane that has not crashed. 
B.  If a pilot lands his/her aircraft at Wharton Municipal Airport, parks and locks or hangars his/her aircraft with the ELT transmitting and the airport manager determines such has occurred, the airport manager shall take immediate action to telephone and/or locate the pilot of the aircraft, advise him/her of the situation, and request that he/she return to the airport immediately and turn off the ELT. Should the airport manager be unable to locate the pilot or if the pilot is unable to return to the airport within a reasonable time to turn off the ELT, the airport manager, accompanied by a local peace officer, a Civil Air Patrol officer, or an FAA representative, shall take the necessary action to turn off the ELT, provided the action does not result in damage to the aircraft. The aircraft owner shall be responsible for all charges associated with turning off the ELT. 
    Rule 30. Takeoffs on apron. Takeoffs or landings shall not be made on the apron, parking ramp, or taxiway by fixed-wing, rotary-wing, or ultralight aircraft except by special permission of the airport manager. 
    Rule 31. Takeoffs allowed. Touch-and-go landings may be made at the discretion of the pilot. Pilots remaining in the pattern making touch-and-go landings should broadcast on the common traffic advisory frequency (CTAF) their pattern turns and their touch-and-go intentions after turning final. All aircraft shall clear for landing and takeoff traffic before taxiing into takeoff position. 
    Rule 32. Takeoff climb. On takeoff, all aircraft shall climb straight out to a level of five-hundred (500) feet above ground level (AGL) 600 (MSL), clear the airport boundary, and execute a 90-degree turn to the left. To leave traffic, the aircraft shall climb to 600 feet (AGL), 700 (MSL) then execute a 45-degree climbing turn to the right out of traffic. [For] straight out departure, the aircraft shall climb to 1,000 feet (AGL), 1,100 (MSL) then execute a 45-degree climbing turn to the right out of traffic. 
    Rule 33. Traffic pattern altitude. Traffic pattern elevation at Wharton Airport is 1,000 feet above ground level (AGL), which is 1,100 feet mean sea level (MSL) altitude for the municipal airport. 
    Rule 34. Common courtesy. Aircraft entering the traffic pattern shall exercise caution and practice courtesy so as not to cause aircraft already in the pattern to deviate from their course. 
    Rule 35. Aircraft turn. Any aircraft within three nautical miles of the airport at an altitude less than 1,500 feet AGL shall conform to the flow of traffic. All aircraft shall establish their pattern altitude (except in an emergency) until descent for landing is necessary. 
    Rule 36. Student training and practice flying: 
A.  Flight instructors shall inform students and themselves on all rules and regulations in effect at the airport. 
B.  Aircraft shall not be permitted to remain on the landing or takeoff areas for the purpose of instruction. 
    Rule 37. Special procedures: 
A.  The airport board may, in the interest of safety, designate special traffic procedures for certain operations, such as helicopters, air shows, agricultural operations, gliders, ultralights, etc. 
B.  Parachute jumping on to the municipal airport property shall not be permitted without the recommendations of the city airport board and the written approval of the city council. The sponsor of an approved parachuting event shall be required to provide proof to the city of liability insurance for the event in the amount of at least $1,000,000.00, with the city [as] additional named insured. A copy of the insurance policy shall be provided to the airport manager. 
    Rule 38. Flying of model airplanes. Model, gasoline-engine-powered airplanes, free flight or radio controlled, or model gliders shall not be permitted to be operated or controlled, takeoff or launched from, flown over, flown in the terminal area of, or land at the municipal airport except with the approval of the airport board during special events. 
(Ord. No. 1997-06, § 4, 3-24-97) 
Sec. 6-95. - Fire regulations-Rule 39. 
    Rule 39. Fire regulations: 
A.  Every person going upon or using the airport or its facilities in any manner shall exercise the greatest care and caution to avoid and prevent fire. 
B.  Smoking or open flame within 50 feet of any aircraft, aboveground fuel tank, fuel pump, or fuel truck is prohibited. 
C.  Compressed flammable gas shall not be kept or stored upon the airport, except at such place as may be designated by the city manager. 
D.  No flammable substance shall be used in cleaning motors or other parts of an aircraft inside a hangar or building. 
E.  No one shall smoke or ignite a match or lighter in any building or hangar, except in posted "Designated Smoking Areas" identified by the airport manager. 
F.  Hangar entrances shall be kept clear at all times. 
G.  The floors in all buildings shall be kept clean and free from oil. Volatile, flammable substances shall not be used for cleaning the floors. 
H.  No boxes, crates, cans, bottles, paper, tall grass, weeds, unusable airplane parts or wreckage, scrap wood or metal, discarded airplane or automobile tires, trash, or other litter shall be permitted to accumulate in or about a hangar or building. If such trash and litter is permitted to accumulate around a private owned, rented, or leased hangar/building, the airport manager shall notify the hangar/building owner, renter, or lessee by registered letter to remove the offending litter. If within ten working days after receipt of the letter the hangar/building owner, renter, or lessee has not removed the trash and litter as directed, the airport manager may have the area cleaned and the cost for such cleaning shall be charged to the hangar/building owner, renter, or lessee. 
I.  Prior to the fueling of any aircraft, the aircraft shall be bonded to the fuel pump, hydrant service, or fuel truck to equalize the static electrical potential between the fueler and the aircraft. Bonding shall be accomplished in the interest of fire safety as described in section 6-93, Rule 19, paragraph B, "Bonding." 
J.  At least two 20B portable extinguishers will be available within 50 feet of the fuel pumps where the open hose discharge capacity of the fuel pump is not more than 200 gallons per minute. Where open hose discharge capacity of the aircraft fueling system or equipment is more that 200 gallons per minute at least one listed wheeled extinguisher having a rating of not less than 80B and a minimum capacity of 125 pounds of agent shall be provided. 
K.  Aircraft fuel service trucks shall have two 20B fire extinguishers located at the rear of and on each side of the fuel service truck. 
L.  Aircraft fuel service trucks shall have an "Emergency Cutoff" valve, clearly identified and painted red. 
M.  All aviation fuel nozzles shall have "dead man" controls which will shut off the fuel flow when the nozzle hand is released. Automatic fuel cut off nozzles will not be permitted for fueling aircraft. 
N.  The pilot and passengers will exit the aircraft and the aircraft will be unoccupied during fueling operations. 
O.  In all matters related to airports, heliports and helistops, the provisions of the Standard Fire Prevention Code, chapter 30, 1994 edition, or as revised and adopted by the city, shall prevail. Any regulation not specifically contained in the Standard Fire Prevention Code, chapter 30, pertaining to airports, aircraft hangars and airport operations shall comply with the latest provisions of the National Fire Protection Association, Standard 407, Aircraft Fuel Servicing, published and available from the National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, P.O. box 9101, Quincy, Massachusetts 02269-9101, telephone 1-800-735-0100. 
(Ord. No. 1997-06, § 5, 3-24-97) 
Sec. 6-96. - Knowledge of rules implied. 
    By publication of this ordinance/order as required by law, all persons shall be deemed to have knowledge of its contents. However, the airport manager is directed to have copies of the ordinance/order printed and posted where appropriate. Copies shall be available at all times in the airport manager's office, and copies shall be furnished to all owners and operators of aircraft based on the airport. 
(Ord. No. 1997-06, § 6, 3-24-97) 
Sec. 6-97. - Conflict of rules and regulations. 
    If and where there is conflict in the rules and regulations promulgated by this article and the Federal Aviation Regulations (FARs), the latter shall prevail. Where there exists a conflict between any of the rules or regulations prescribed in this ordinance/order and any other city/county rules applicable to the same area, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1997-06, § 7, 3-24-97) 
Sec. 6-98. - Penalty for violation of rules and regulations. 
(a)  Any person operating, using, or handling an aircraft in violation of any of these rules or refusing to comply therewith may, at once, be ejected from the airport or may for any period of time not exceeding 15 days be denied use of the airport by the airport manager, and upon a hearing by the airport board may appeal to the city council of the city and may be deprived of the further use of the airport and its facilities for such period of time as may appear necessary for the protection of life and property. 
(b)  Any violation of this ordinance/order shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by fine not exceeding $200.00 dollars, and each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate violation. This section is cumulative of all other penalties for violation of federal, state, and local laws, rules, regulations, ordinances, and orders. Citation of violation or issuance of a violation ticket of any of these rules and regulations shall be made by any local authorized city police officer. Payment of such fine imposed or "plea of not guilty" shall be made at the city municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 1997-06, § 8, 3-24-97) 
Chapter 10 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND RESTRICTED SMOKING MATERIALS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Occupational licenses, taxes and regulations, ch. 42; signs and advertising, ch. 66. 
State Law reference- Local regulation of alcoholic beverages, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 11.38, 61.36, 109.31 et seq. 

Sec. 10-1. - Licenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling, distributing, manufacturing or otherwise dealing in alcoholic beverages within the city, without first obtaining a license to do so. For the purpose of this section, such businesses shall be classified and defined as provided in V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code chs. 11 et seq. and 61 et seq., and the annual license fee for each such business shall be one-half of the amount of the permit fee paid to the state under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 11.38 and 61.36. 
(b)  Upon the payment of the applicable fee to the city and exhibition to the licensing officer of a permit duly issued by the state to the applicant or person paying such fee, the licensing officer shall, in the name of the city, issue and deliver to such applicant a license to engage in business in the city of the character described in and authorized by the permit from the state held by such applicant. The license so issued in the name of the city shall authorize the conduct of such business upon the premises described in the permit from the state and shall remain in force only so long as such permit from the state remains in force. 
(Code 1978, § 4-1) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to impose fee not to exceed one-half of amount imposed by state, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 11.38, 61.36; payment to city of gross receipts tax on mixed beverage permittees, etc., V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 205.03. 
Sec. 10-2. - Hours of consumption and sale; levy of late hour permit fees. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to consume any alcoholic beverages in any public place or for any person to possess any alcoholic beverage in any public place for the purpose of consuming the alcoholic beverage in such public place at any time on Sunday between the hours of 2:15 a.m. and 12:00 noon and on all other days at any time between the hours of 2:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(b)  The penalties provided for by state law for violation of this section shall be the penalties prescribed by the city for violation of this section. 
(c)  All fees provided for any permits under state law pertaining to sales and consumption of beer and/or liquor during late hours to the extent permitted by state law to be collected by cities shall be applicable in the city and are hereby levied. 
(Code 1978, § 4-2) 
State Law reference- Mixed beverage late hours permit, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 29.01 et seq.; private club late hours permit, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 33.01 et seq.; hours of sale, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.01 et seq.; hours of consumption, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.06; municipal regulation of beer, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.32. 
Sec. 10-3. - Sale near church or school. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any dealer to sell alcoholic beverages where such dealer's place of business is within 300 feet of any church, school or other educational institution. 
(b)  The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door and in direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the school or other educational institution shall be from the nearest property line of the school or other educational institution to the nearest doorway by which the public may enter the place of business, along street lines and in a direct line across intersections. 
(Code 1978, § 4-3) 
State Law reference- Sales near school, church or hospital, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33. 
Sec. 10-4. - Public consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume any beer, liquor, wine or other alcoholic beverage upon any public street, alley, roadway, highway or sidewalk in the city. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any person drinking or consuming any beer, liquor, wine or other alcoholic beverage sold as a part of an organized activity open to the public during the hours of any such organized public activity, provided the organization sponsoring such activity has received permission from the appropriate local governmental authority to conduct the activity. 
(Code 1978, § 4-4; Ord. No. 1988-28, 9-12-88) 
Sec. 10-5. - Alcoholic beverages in public parks. 
(a)  Possession or consumption in public parks. It is unlawful for any person to consume an alcoholic beverage or to possess an alcoholic beverage in a park owned, operated or controlled by the city. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person in possession of an alcoholic beverage in an open container intends to consume the beverage. 
(b)  Defense to prosecution. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1)  The person consumed the alcoholic beverage or possessed the alcoholic beverage at a time and place allowing for the consumption or possession under a permit issued by the city; or 
(2)  The person consumed the alcoholic beverage or possessed the alcoholic beverage within a city-owned building when the serving of alcoholic beverages was permitted by the city. 
(c)  Permits for special events generally. A person may request a temporary permit to consume and possess alcoholic beverages at city parks by filing a written application with the city. The application must be filed at least 30 days prior to the date of the event, be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $20.00 and shall contain: 
(1)  The dates, times and the park where the alcoholic beverages will be possessed and consumed; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the sponsoring organization and whether the organization is a not-for-profit organization; 
(3)  The estimated number of people who will attend; 
(4)  Any arrangements that have been or will be made for traffic control, security, additional restroom facilities, medical care and other services or facilities to support the event; and 
(5)  Any other information the city determines is reasonably necessary to administer this section. 
(d)  Review of application by police department. The application shall be reviewed by the parks and recreation division and the police department to verify the information provided on the application. The police department shall make a recommendation to city council on whether adequate arrangements for support services and facilities will be provided by the applicant. 
(e)  Grant of permit. The application shall be submitted to the city council along with the recommendation of the police department as to whether the permit should be granted. The city council may grant the permit if it finds: 
(1)  The event is sponsored by a not-for-profit organization or group; 
(2)  The event will be open to the public, with or without charge; 
(3)  Adequate arrangements have been made for traffic control, security, restroom facilities, medical care and other services or facilities to support the event; 
(4)  The person has obtained all required state permits for the alcoholic beverages; and 
(5)  Enforcement of the ban on the possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages is not in the best interest of the public. 
(f)  Penalty for violation. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be fined not more than $500.00. Each day a violation occurs is a separate offense. 
(Code 1978, § 4-5; Ord. No. 2002-22, 9-23-02) 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 54. 
Sec. 10-6. - Definitions. 
    Restricted smoking material means any substance, however marketed, and whether labeled for such purposes or not, which can reasonably be converted for smoking purposes whether it is presented as incense, tobacco, herbs, spices or any blend thereof if it includes any of the following chemicals or a comparable chemical: 
(1)  Salvia divinorum or salvinorin A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; 
(2)  2-[(1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-y1)phenol (also known as CP47,497) and homologues; 
(3)  (6aS,1OaS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-y1)6a,7,10,IOa- 
tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-o1)  also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol); 
(4)  1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-018); 
(5)  1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-073); or 
(6)  1-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-081). 
    Products containing some of the above substances are currently being marketed under the following commercial names: 
"K-2", "K-2 SUMMIT", "K-2 SEX", "GENIE", "DASCENTS", "ZOHAI", "SAGE", "SPICE", "KO KNOCK-OUT 2", "SPICE GOLD", "SPICE DIAMOND", "YUCATAN FIRE", "SOLAR FLARE", "PEP SPICE", "FIRE N ICE", AND "SALVIA DIVINORUM". 
    It is anticipated by the council that new products will be marketed under different names but will be subject to this definition if they contain any of the chemical components set forth above. 
    Restricted smoking material paraphernalia means any paraphernalia, equipment or utensil that is used or intended to be used in ingesting or inhaling illegal or restricted smoking materials, whether labeled for such purpose or not, and may include: 
(1)  A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl; 
(2)  A water pipe; 
(3)  A carburetion tube or device; 
(4)  A smoking or carburetion mask; 
(5)  A chamber pipe; 
(6)  A carburetor pipe; 
(7)  An electric pipe; 
(8)  An air-driven pipe; 
(9)  A chillum; 
(10)  A bong; or 
(11)  An ice pipe or chiller. 
(Ord. No. 2010-17, § 1, 11-22-10) 
Sec. 10-7. - Restricted smoking materials; purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to prohibit the sale or delivery of restricted smoking materials as defined herein within the city limits of the City of Wharton and to prohibit the possession of restricted smoking materials by any individual within the city limits of the City of Wharton. Any form of delivery to include a simple gift constitutes a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-17, § 1, 11-22-10) 
Sec. 10-8. - Sale, delivery, offer, gift or use. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, deliver to or to give any restricted smoking material, whether labeled for such purposes or not, to anyone or to use same. 
(Ord. No. 2010-17, § 1, 11-22-10) 
Sec. 10-9. - Use or possession of restricted smoking material. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession or to use restricted smoking materials, whether labeled for such purposes or not, within the corporate limits of the City of Wharton. 
(Ord. No. 2010-17, § 1, 11-22-10) 
Sec. 10-10. - Use or possession of restricted smoking paraphernalia. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession any restricted smoking paraphernalia with the intent to use it, to ingest, inhale or otherwise consume restricted smoking material, whether labeled for such purposes or not. If an individual is found in possession of this type of paraphernalia it will be a violation of this chapter if appropriate forensic testing is done on the paraphernalia and traces of restricted smoking material are present on the device. 
(Ord. No. 2010-17, § 1, 11-22-10) 
Sec. 10-11. - Defenses to prosecution. 
(a)  It shall be a defense to the prosecution for violation of this section if the use of the restricted smoking material, whether labeled for such purposes or not, is at the direction or under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to prescribe controlled substances within the State of Texas. 
(b)  It shall be a defense to prosecution under the terms of this section if an individual charged with a violation can provide proper and complete historic documentation that the use of such materials is a portion of a religious undertaking or activity of a religious denomination in which they have long-standing historic membership supported by documentation from clergy or spiritual leader recognized by the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2010-17, § 1, 11-22-10) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2002-07, adopted April 8, 2002, amended former ch. 14, arts. I-IV, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 14 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1978 and the following: Ord. No. 1991-19, 9-24-91; Ord. No. 1993-02, 1-25-93. 
Charter reference- Authority of city to regulate animals, § 17(17). 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 34; prohibited noises, § 34-7; occupational licenses, taxes and regulations, ch. 42; traffic, ch. 82; disposal of heavy animals, § 86-101. 
State Law reference- Regulation of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal control authority means the City of Wharton animal control office with regulatory authority over the area within the city limits in which animals are kept. 
    Animal control officer means the person(s) appointed by the chief of police to administer the animal control office. 
    Cat means a domestic feline of either sex, including one neutered or sterilized. 
    Chief of police means the City of Wharton's highest-ranking peace officer appointed by the city manager to enforce the laws within the city's jurisdiction. 
    City facility means the permanent or temporary city-owned and operated animal shelter or vehicle utilized by the city to transport animals. 
    City veterinarian means the independent contractor, professional consultant appointed by the city council to serve a two-year term, who is licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the State of Texas, and provides the chief of police or his designee advisory assistance in developing, implementing and revising protocols for the humane treatment, management and control of animals by the city within the city limits. The city veterinarian shall be generally knowledgeable about laws, regulations, and practices governing the safe management of animals. 
    Dog means a domestic canine of either sex, including one neutered or sterilized. 
    Domestic animal includes all species of animals commonly and universally accepted as being domesticated, including cows, horses, mules, jacks, jennets, goats, sheep, hogs, pigs, swine, or Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs or other livestock. The term includes the male and young of such species. 
    Fowl includes but is not limited to chickens, turkeys, guineas, ducks, and pigeons. 
    Handicapped person means a person who has a mental or physical handicap, including mental retardation, hardness of hearing, deafness, speech impairment, visual handicap, being physically challenged or any other health impairment, which requires special ambulatory devices or services. 
    Harboring means the act of keeping and caring for an animal or of providing a premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter or care. 
    Owner means any person who has right of property in an animal or who harbors an animal or allows an animal to remain about his premises. 
    Pet animal includes all dogs, cats, rabbits, rodents, birds, reptiles and any other species of animal which is sold or retained as a household pet, but shall not include skunks, non-human primates and any other species of wild, exotic or carnivorous animal that may be further restricted in this chapter. 
    Rabies vaccination means the vaccination of a dog, cat or other domestic animal with an anti-rabies vaccine approved by the Texas Department of Health and administered by a veterinarian licensed by the state. 
    Running at large or to run at large means: 
(1)  Any dog, cat or other domestic animal shall be termed "running at large" if it is not controlled by a leash, or is not within the confines of a house, building or fence, or is not otherwise under the immediate restraint or immediate control of a person capable of controlling the dog, cat or other domestic animal, on or off the premises of the owner; provided, however this section shall not apply to any dog or other animal that is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance of his or her duties. 
(2)  Any domestic fowl that is off the premises of its owner, not within the confines of a fence or one that is otherwise intruding upon the property of another. 
    Serious bodily injury means an injury characterized by severe bite wounds or severe ripping and tearing of muscle that would cause a reasonably prudent person to seek treatment from a medical professional and would require hospitalization without regard to whether the person actually sought medical treatment. 
    Stray animal means any animal for which there is no identifiable owner or harborer. 
    Support dog means a dog that is specially trained or equipped to help a handicapped person and that: 
(1)  Is used by a handicapped person who has satisfactorily completed a specific course of training in the use of the dog; and 
(2)  Has been trained by an organization generally recognized by agencies involved in the rehabilitation of the handicapped as reputable and competent to provide dogs with training of this type. 
    Wild animal includes all species of animals which exist in a natural unconfined state and are usually not domesticated. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-2. - Bird sanctuary. 
    The entire area embraced within the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
State Law reference- Treatment of live birds, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.003; birds generally, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 64.001 et seq. 
Sec. 14-3. - Trapping or shooting birds and wild fowl; nuisance birds. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to trap, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob any bird nest or wild fowl nest. 
(b)  If European starlings, English sparrows, grackles, ravens, red-winged blackbirds, cowbirds, feral rock doves (Columba livia) or crows are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property in the opinion of the chief of police or his designee, the chief of police or his designee shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird Club, Garden Club or Humane Society or any of such clubs as are found to exist in the city, after having given at least three days' actual notice of the time and place of such meeting to the representatives of such clubs. 
(c)  If, as a result of such meeting, no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, such birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the health authorities under the supervision of the chief of police or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-4. - Supervision and enforcement; supervision of animal shelter. 
    The chief of police or his designee shall supervise the administration and enforcement of this chapter and shall supervise the operation of the city animal shelter. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-5. - Compliance date. 
    All persons so affected by this chapter and the articles contained therein shall have six months from date of passage [April 8, 2002] by the City of Wharton City Council enabling Ordinance to meet all compliance requirements of this chapter and these articles. Prior to the passage of the six-month grace period, any existing Wharton laws and regulations affecting animal ownership shall remain applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-6. - Hindering enforcement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, hinder or prevent the chief of police, animal control officer or his authorized representatives in the discharge of their duties as prescribed in this article. For the purposes of this article, pursuant to the issuance of any license under this article, or the issuance of an administrative search warrant by a court of competent jurisdiction, the chief of police, animal control officer and/or city veterinarian shall be permitted to enter and inspect any premises where a domestic animal and/or fowl are kept or harbored, during the daylight hours of any day. The refusal to permit such entry to inspection shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-7. - Space and fence requirements and sanitary condition of enclosures. 
(a)  No person shall maintain livestock or fowl within the city, unless the following space and fence requirements are met. 
(1)  Horses, cattle, sheep and goats. There shall be a minimum space of 8,000 square feet for each horse, cow, sheep or goat kept within the city limits. Any building, barn or shed used for protection of the animal against the elements must be located on this plot. An additional space of 8,000 square feet must be provided for each additional horse, cow, sheep or goat kept on the premises. No part of the enclosure for such animal shall be located within 100 feet of any hotel, motel, apartment house or other human lodging place or of any residence, other than the animal owner's residence. 
(b)  Fowl. No roosters or chickens, except laying hens and pullets, may be kept or maintained in this city. No person shall keep, harbor, possess or allow to remain on any premises under his control within the corporate limits of the city more than 25 grown fowl. Any property maintained in the city limits for keeping, maintaining or possessing fowl must be large enough to provide five square feet per fowl. A chicken house or house for other fowl must be located within this area. Chicken wire shall be used as the fence material for chickens and other fowl. Such enclosure shall not be located within 100 feet from any hotel, motel, apartment house or other lodging place or residence, other than the animal owner's residence. 
(c)  Rabbits. No person shall keep, harbor, or possess or allow to remain upon his premises or upon premises under his control in the corporate limits of this city more than six grown rabbits or more than 18 fryer rabbits. All rabbit hutches or enclosures must be kept clean in a sanitary manner. There shall be a minimum space of five square feet per rabbit. No rabbit hutches shall be located within 100 feet from any hotel, motel, apartment house or other lodging place or any residence, other than the rabbit owner's residence. 
(d)  Any area wherein any animals or fowl are penned, housed, caged, cooped, stabled or otherwise contained shall at all times be kept in a sanitary condition so that no foul or offensive odors shall emanate therefrom. 
(e)  Upon the receipt of a complaint that any area is being maintained in violation of this section or upon his own volition, the animal control officer may make an investigation of the conditions complained of and, if such investigation shows, after consultation with the city veterinarian, that an unsanitary condition exists, the animal control officer shall so notify the person owning the premises or his agent in charge of the premises. Any person failing to remedy the existing condition within the time prescribed in such notice shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(f)  Fowl and livestock exceptions for 4-H and FFA projects: When kept by a participant in an agricultural program under the supervision of a vocational instructor or the county agricultural agent, for exhibition and sale at stock shows and fairs, the following shall be met: 
(1)  Steer, horses, and dairy heifers. There shall be a minimum of one-half acre for keeping one or two head of livestock, along with a covered area consisting of 100 square feet per animal. No part of the enclosure for such animals shall be located within 100 feet of any residence, other than that of the participant. 
(2)  Sheep and goats. A maximum of two animals per participant. A covered area consisting of 30 square feet shall be maintained for each animal. In addition, an open area of 150 square feet may be maintained, however an open area is not required. No part of the enclosure shall be located within 25 feet, for up to one animal, and 50 feet, for two animals, of any residence, other than that of the participant. 
(3)  Roasters. An enclosure consisting of two square feet per roaster shall be maintained. Such enclosure shall not be located within 25 feet of any residence, other than that of the participant. No more than 25 adult birds may be raised in such enclosure. 
(4)  Broilers. An enclosure consisting of one (1) square foot per broiler shall be maintained. Such enclosure shall not be located within 25 feet of any residence, other than that of the participant. No more than 30 adult birds may be raised in such enclosure. 
(5)  Turkeys. An enclosure consisting of five (5) square feet per turkey shall be maintained. Such enclosure shall not be located within twenty-five feet of any residence, other than that of the participant. No more than twenty-five adult birds may be raised in such enclosure. 
(6)  Rabbits. An enclosure consisting of four square feet per adult rabbit and her young shall be maintained. Such enclosure shall not be located within 25 feet of any residence, other than that of the participant. 
(7)  Additional general requirements. In addition to the specific species requirements addressed above, the following conditions shall also be met: 
a.  Number of projects. Each participant may raise as many project animals as space allows on the property. Each project's spacing requirements and minimum distance from neighboring residences is independent of other projects on site and is not cumulative. 
b.  Construction requirements. The outer confining restraint must be constructed of an approved material that will allow airflow and be capable of confining the livestock or fowl. 
c.  Sanitation. All barns, sheds and enclosures shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary manner and no accumulations of animal excreta or filth shall be permissible. All poultry and rabbit houses and yards shall be kept in a clean, sanitary manner. 
d.  Notification. The agricultural supervisor of Wharton High School or any successor to that position and the county extension agent will be required by the chief of police or his designee to provide a list of 4H or FFA participants within the city limits, their locations, the number of project animals, and project commencement and termination date to the chief of police or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-8. - Ownership. 
    The only persons who may place animals on private property are the actual owners and their relatives in permanent residence at the real property according to the real property records as reflected on the real property records of the County of Wharton, or a person possessing a written leasehold interest in the real property where the animals are placed. No person may otherwise rent or give any other person a license right to use the owner's property to keep for any period of time any animal. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-9. - Keeping swine. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing or controlling any premises in the city to keep, or cause to be kept, or permit to be kept thereon, any live hogs, pigs or swine of any description, including but not limited to Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs, except as listed in subsection (b) of this sub-chapter. 
(b)  The keeping of swine shall be permitted only to certain public school facilities for the limited purpose of fostering a 4H or FFA program, and any enclosure shall not be located within 100 feet of any hotel, motel, apartment house, or other human lodging place or of any residence, except for the school facility. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-10. - Exhibiting livestock for sale. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, herd or assemble at any place within the city any horses, mules, cows or other livestock for the purpose of sale or for exhibition for the purpose of sale. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-11. - Staking livestock. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause livestock or horses to be temporarily or permanently tethered to a stake or a similar fixture on unpenned or unfenced lots within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-12. - Running at large. 
(a)  No owner or keeper of any dog, cat, domestic animal, other animal or domestic fowl shall permit or allow such dog, cat, domestic animal, other animal or domestic fowl to run at large within the city limits. 
(b)  Certain dogs prohibited from running at large; criminal penalty. 
(1)  The owner, keeper, or person in control of a dog that the owner, keeper, or person knows is accustomed to run, disturb, or kill other dogs, goats, sheep, or poultry may not permit that dog to run at large. 
(2)  A person who violates this section commits an offense. An offense under this subsection is punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(3)  Each time a dog of this nature runs at large in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-13. - Guard dogs. 
    It shall be unlawful to place or maintain any dog, which has been specifically trained to attack, in a public or private area for the protection of persons or property, unless the dog is physically confined to a specific portion of the private area or is under the complete and absolute control of its owner. The specific private area on the private premises in which a guard dog is confined must be conspicuously defined and posted with warning signs bearing letters not less than two inches high. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-14. - Nuisance animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner to harbor any dog, cat or other pet animal which by any activity shall disturb the peace, comfort or property of the inhabitants of the neighborhood possessing normal and average sensitivities, and such disturbance is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-15. - Injured animals. 
    Animals injured on public property may be impounded at the city facility and given minimal basic veterinary medical treatment pending notification of the animal's owner. If the injured animal is treated and/or impounded, the owner of such animal shall be liable for all expenses of any treatment and/or impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-16. - Fighting animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, instigate or encourage any animal to fight with another of its own species, or with another of a different species. It shall be unlawful for any person to train or keep any animal for the purpose of fighting. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a place where any animal is permitted to fight for exhibition, wager, or for sport. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-17. - Display or sale of dyed or immature animals. 
    It is hereby prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any person to possess, display, sell, barter or give away dyed, colored or in any way artificially treated baby chicks, ducklings, fowl, rabbits or any animals as pets, playthings, novelties, gifts or for any other purpose. This section shall not be construed to prohibit their display by hatcheries, stores, animal owners, dealers or persons engaged in the business of selling such immature animals to be raised for food, but no such hatcheries, stores, animal owners, dealers or persons shall sell or give away baby chicks, ducklings or any other immature domestic fowl as pets, playthings, novelties or gifts. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Secs. 14-18-14-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 14-46. - Animals in violation. 
    Animals owned or harbored in violation of this chapter or any other city ordinance, or law of the state shall be taken into custody by the chief of police or his designee and impounded. Stray animals shall be similarly impounded. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-47. - Animal shelter. 
    A suitable city animal shelter shall be provided for the purpose of temporarily boarding and caring for any animal impounded under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-48. - Removal of animal from shelter without consent. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any impounded animal from the city animal shelter without the consent of the chief of police or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-49. - Disposition of licensed dogs and cats. 
    As soon as practicable and after impoundment, notice of impoundment shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the City Hall for three days. If the owner of the impounded dog or cat is known, reasonably prompt notice shall be given to him. Any impounded dog or cat may be redeemed by the owner upon payment of the city impoundment fee, care and feeding charges and such other costs as set by the city council. If such animal is not redeemed within three days, it shall be considered abandoned and may be placed for adoption subject to payment of the city impoundment fee, care and feeding charges, any veterinary charges and such other costs as set by the city council; or the animal control officer may humanely euthanize the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-50. - Disposition of animal held upon complaint. 
    If a complaint has been filed in the municipal court against the owner of an impounded animal for a violation of this chapter, the animal shall not be released except on the order of the court, which may also direct the owner to pay any penalties for violation of this chapter in addition to all impoundment fees. The court may, upon making a finding that such animal is vicious or that it represents a clear and present danger to Wharton citizens or other animals in the community, order the animal to be euthanized in a humane manner. Surrender of an animal by the owner thereof to the chief of police or his designee does not relieve or render the owner immune from the decision of the court, nor to the fees and fines which may result from a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-51. - Fees. 
    The impoundment fee shall be, an initial pick-up fee of $15.00 and a $5.00 daily boarding fee and thereafter a fee of $5.00 for each day or part thereof that the animal is impounded. A second pick-up from the same premises or attributable to the same owner shall be $30.00 and a $5.00 daily boarding fee and thereafter a fee of $5.00 for each day or part thereof that the animal is impounded. The third and any subsequent pick-up fees from the same premises or attributable to the same owner shall be $60.00 and a $5.00 daily boarding fee and thereafter a fee of $5.00 for each day or part thereof that the animal is impounded. Adoption fees shall be $16.00 per dog and $5.00 per cat. The initial pick-up fee and daily boarding fees shall be waived in lieu of payment of an adoption fee by somebody other than the animal's owner. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-52. - Requirements for release. 
(a)  The owner of any dog or cat impounded under this section shall be allowed to take such dog or cat from the place where impounded upon the following conditions: 
(1)  Payment of any impoundment and daily boarding fees as established by city council action and set forth in this code for each day or fractional part thereof which such dog or cat has been impounded. 
(2)  If the dog or cat is not wearing a collar with a valid rabies and license tags attached, the owner must present a veterinarian certificate showing that the dog or cat has been vaccinated within 12 months from that day, or have the dog or cat vaccinated prior to its release from impoundment and must further produce or secure a valid license tag for such dog or cat. 
(3)  Provide the dog or cat with a collar or harness to which the license and rabies tags are attached. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-53. - Adoption requirements. 
(a)  An unclaimed dog or cat shall be released from the city shelter for adoption under this section upon the following conditions. 
(1)  Payment of adoption and licensing fees as prescribed in Sections 14-51, and 14-111. 
(2)  The dog or cat must receive a rabies vaccination from a veterinarian licensed by the State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners, prior to release. 
(3)  No dog or cat may be released unless the dog or cat has been sterilized (spayed or neutered), or the new owner has signed an agreement to have the animal sterilized (spayed or neutered). 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-54. - Limitation on number of dogs and cats. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or combination of persons to keep, harbor, possess, maintain, or allow to be kept, harbored, possessed, or maintained within the City of Wharton more than four dogs or four cats, or a combination of more than four of these animals per residential premises, which animals are over four months old, upon or within any premises owned, occupied, or under the control of such person or persons. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or combination of persons to keep, harbor, possess, maintain, or allow to be kept, harbored, possessed, or maintained, more than four dogs or four cats or a combination of more than four of these animals per residence, which animals are over four months old, upon any premises or within any apartment of a multiple dwelling structure within the City of Wharton. 
(c)  The provision of this section limiting the number of animals shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Veterinary hospitals or clinics; 
(2)  Pet shops; 
(3)  Kennels; and 
(4)  Licensed or regulated animal shelters. 
(d)  Any owner of more than four animals as defined in this section shall be considered to be unlawfully operating a kennel. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Secs. 14-55-14-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 14-76. - Harboring unvaccinated cat or dog. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor any dog or cat which has not been vaccinated against rabies, as provided in this article, or which cannot be identified as having a current vaccination certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-77. - Vaccination of dogs and cats required. 
    Every owner of a dog or cat four months of age or older shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian. All dogs or cats vaccinated at four months of age or older shall be re-vaccinated at one year of age and annually thereafter. Any person moving into the city from a location outside of the city shall comply with this article within 30 days after having moved into the city. If a dog or cat has inflicted a bite on any person or another animal within the previous ten days, the owner of the dog or cat shall report such fact to the chief of police or his designee and no rabies vaccine shall be administered until after the ten-day observation period. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-78. - Certificate of vaccination. 
    Upon vaccination of a dog or cat, a veterinarian shall execute and furnish to the owner of the dog or cat, as evidence thereof, a certificate. The private veterinarian shall retain a duplicate copy. Such certificate shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the vaccinated dog or cat. 
(2)  The date of vaccination. 
(3)  The type of rabies vaccine used. 
(4)  The year and number of the rabies tag. 
(5)  The breed, age, color, weight and sex of the vaccinated dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-79. - Tags. 
    Concurrent with the issuance and delivery of the certificate of vaccination referred to in section 14-78, the owner of the dog shall cause to be attached to the collar or harness of the vaccinated dog a metal tag which conforms to the veterinary uniform code of tags. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-80. - Proof of vaccination. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or harbors a vaccinated dog or cat to fail or refuse to exhibit his copy of the certificate of vaccination upon demand by any person charged with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-81. - Duplicate tags. 
    If the original tag provided in Section 14-79 is lost or destroyed, the owner of the dog shall obtain a duplicate tag within ten days of discovering such loss. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-82. - Reports of rabies. 
(a)  A person who knows of an animal bite or scratch to an individual that the person could reasonably foresee as capable of transmitting rabies, or who knows of an animal that the person suspects is rabid, shall report the incident or animal to the chief of police or his designee. The report must include: 
(1)  The name and address of the victim and of the animal's owner, if known; and 
(2)  Any other information that may help in locating the victim or animal. 
The chief of police or his designee shall investigate a report filed under this subsection. 
(b)  Every physician or other medical practitioner who treats a person for such bites shall within 12 hours report such treatment to the chief of police or his designee, giving the name, age, sex and precise location of the bitten person and such other information as the chief of police or his designee may require. 
(c)  Human-received bites from rodents, rabbits, birds and reptiles are excluded from the reporting requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-83. - Other animal bites. 
    Procedures concerning bites from other animals shall be discussed with the city veterinarian, animal control officer, a city health officer or the city police department for proper disposition. Any wild animal which has bitten a person should be caught and killed and the brain immediately submitted to a qualified laboratory for rabies examination. Rodents, rabbits, birds and reptiles are not considered to be transmitters of the rabies virus and should not be submitted for laboratory examination for rabies. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-84. - Confinement of dogs and cats. 
(a)  Any dog or cat, which has bitten a person, shall be observed for a period of ten days from the date of the bite. The procedure and place of observation shall be designated by the state department of health or other responsible agency. If the dog or cat is not confined on the owner's premises, confinement shall be by impoundment in a local, private veterinary hospital of the owner's choice. Such confinement shall be at the expense of the owner. Stray dogs or cats whose owners cannot be located shall be confined by the city veterinarian at the initial expense of the city. The owner of any dog or cat that has been reported to have inflicted a bite on any person shall, on demand, produce the dog or cat for impoundment, as prescribed in this article. Refusal to produce the dog or cat constitutes a separate and individual violation. 
(b)  The impoundment of dogs and cats that have inflicted bites on humans shall be for a period of ten (10) days for observation and shall not be terminated until consent from the private or city veterinarian is secured. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-85. - Removal of dogs and cats from confinement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from any public or private place of confinement any dog or cat which has been confined as authorized under this article, without the consent of the Texas Department of Health, or private or city veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-86. - Reports of suspected rabies. 
    Any veterinarian who clinically diagnoses rabies or any person who suspects rabies in a dog, cat or other domestic or wild animal shall immediately report the incident to the city police department or the animal control officer or to the city veterinarian, stating precisely where such animal may be found. If a known or suspected rabid animal bites or attacks a domestic animal, such incident shall also be reported as required in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-87. - Killing animals with rabies or suspected of rabies. 
    It is hereby made the duty of the chief of police and his full-time salaried officers, or the animal control officer, to kill all animals at large when the animals are or appear to be affected with rabies, provided that the animal suspected of rabies shall be killed in such a manner as not to damage the brain. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Secs. 14-88-14-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LICENSING 

Sec. 14-111. - License required, application, term, exemptions, fees, tags, revocation. 
(a)  Required. Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of any animal over four months of age within this city must obtain a license as provided in this section. This subsection will not apply to the keeping of small caged birds or aquatic and amphibian animals solely as pets. 
(b)  Application. A written application for a license, containing the name and address of the applicant, a description of the animal, including its sex, weight, breed, color and name, the appropriate fee and a rabies certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian or anti-rabies clinic shall be submitted to the city secretary within ten days after the date of issuance of the rabies certificate. 
(c)  Term. Licenses for the keeping of dogs and cats shall remain in effect for a period of one year, unless revoked before the expiration of this period. 
(d)  Time limits for obtaining license. An application for a license must be made within 30 days after obtaining a dog or cat over four months of age, except that this subsection will not apply to a nonresident keeping a dog or cat within the city for a period of time not to exceed 60 days. 
(e)  Exemptions. Support dogs and governmental police dogs shall be exempt from the fees of this section. 
(f)  Issuance of tag or identification collar. Upon acceptance of the license application and fee, the city secretary shall issue a durable tag or identification collar, stamped with an identifying number and the year riveted to the animal's collar or harness. 
(g)  Wearing tag or identification collar. Persons owning or harboring dogs and cats must make certain that animals securely wear identification tags or collars at all times. 
(h)  Record of tags. The city secretary shall maintain a record of the identifying numbers of all tags issued. 
(i)  Late fee. A person who fails to obtain a license as required within the time period specified in this section will be required to pay a late fee of $10.00. 
(j)  Fees. A license shall be issued after payment of the applicable fee or registration as follows: 
(1)  For each unneutered male dog ..... $5.00 
(2)  For each unneutered male cat ..... 5.00 
(3)  For each unspayed female dog ..... 5.00 
(4)  For each unspayed female cat ..... 5.00 
(5)  For each neutered male dog ..... No Fee 
(6)  For each neutered male cat ..... No Fee 
(7)  For each spayed female dog ..... No Fee 
(8)  For each spayed female cat ..... No Fee 
(k)  Duplicate license. An applicant may obtain a duplicate license upon payment of a replacement fee of $2.00. 
(l)  Use of license or tag for other animal. No person shall use any license or tag for any animal other than the animal for which it was issued. 
(m)  Revocation. The city secretary shall revoke any license if the person holding the license refuses or fails to comply with this article, any administrative regulations promulgated by the chief of police or his designee, or any law governing the protection and keeping of animals. 
(n)  Effect of revocation. Any person whose license is revoked shall, within ten days after the revocation, remove from the city or humanely dispose of all animals owned, kept or harbored by such person, and no part of the license fee shall be refunded. 
(o)  Inspections authorized. It shall be a condition of the issuance of any license under this article that consent is granted to the chief of police, animal control officer and/or city veterinarian to inspect all animals and the premises where animals are kept at any reasonable time and, if permission for such inspection is refused, the city secretary shall revoke the animal license issued to the refusing owner. 
(p)  Withholding or falsifying information. If the applicant has withheld or falsified any information on an application, the city may refuse to issue a future license or may revoke the current license. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Secs. 14-112-14-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - KENNELS 

Sec. 14-200. - Definition. 
    The term "kennel" shall be construed to mean any premises, or portion thereof, wherein any person or entity engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, trading for a fee, training, or selling dogs or cats; provided, however, this definition shall not apply to animal shelters, veterinary clinics, or animal hospitals operated by veterinarians duly licensed under the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-201. - Permits. 
(a)  No person, partnership, corporation, or entity shall operate a kennel without first obtaining a permit in compliance with this section. 
(b)  The city veterinarian shall recommend that the city council promulgate regulations for the issuance of kennel permits and shall include requirements for humane care of all animals and for compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and other applicable laws. The city council may amend such regulations from time to time as deemed desirable for public health and welfare and for the protection of animals. 
(c)  Upon a showing by an applicant for a kennel permit that he is willing and able to comply with the regulations promulgated by the city council, a permit shall be issued upon payment of the applicable fee. 
(d)  At the time of applying for a kennel permit, the applicant must present current proof that all animals in the kennel have been vaccinated against rabies. The permit period shall be for one year. Renewal applications for permits shall be made 30 days prior to the date of expiration of the permit. 
(e)  If there is a change in ownership of a kennel, the new owner may have the current permit transferred to his name upon payment of a $5.00 city transfer fee. 
(f)  Annual permits shall be issued upon payment of the applicable fee as follows: 
(1)  For each kennel authorized to house less than ten dogs or cats or a combination thereof ..... $10.00 
(2)  For each kennel authorized to house 10 or more but less than 25 dogs or cats or a combination thereof ..... 25.00 
(3)  For each kennel authorized to house 25 or more but less than 50 dogs or cats or a combination thereof ..... 50.00 
(g)  It shall be unlawful to house more than 50 dogs or cats or a combination thereof in a kennel within the city limits of the City of Wharton, Texas. 
(h)  Every facility regulated by this article shall be considered a separate enterprise and must have a separate permit. 
(i)  Persons or entities operating kennels for the breeding of dogs or cats may elect to license such animals individually in addition to obtaining kennel permits. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to own or operate a kennel within the city limits unless such person or entity shall have first qualified for and have received a kennel permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-202. - Kennel plans. 
    All plans for construction of kennels shall be reviewed by the city building inspector in consultation with the city veterinarian and then submitted to and approved by the city council before any city building permit is issued or any construction is begun. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-203. - Inspection. 
(a)  Prior to approval of an application for a kennel permit, the city building inspector in consultation with the city veterinarian shall review the proposed plans or establishment to determine whether or not they are in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The city shall issue a permit to the applicant if the city building inspector's review shows that the proposed plans or establishment complies with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  If the city building inspector's review or inspection shows that the proposed plans or establishment do not comply with the requirements of this article, the applicant may request that the city veterinarian review or inspect the proposed plans or establishment a second time to determine whether or not they are in compliance with the requirements of this article. The fee for each additional review or inspection beyond the second review or inspection shall be $150.00. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-204. - Time of inspection. 
    It shall be a condition of the issuance of any permit that the city, by and through its chief of police or his designee, animal control officer and/or city veterinarian, shall be permitted to inspect at any time all animals as well as the premises where the animals are kept. If permission for such inspection is refused, the city may suspend or revoke the permit of the refusing owner. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-205. - Permit revocation. 
(a)  Any person or entity whose kennel permit is revoked shall, within ten days thereafter, remove from the city or humanely dispose of all animals owned, kept, or harbored by such person, and no part of the permit fee shall be refunded. 
(b)  If the applicant has withheld or falsified any information required on the application, the city may revoke the kennel permit issued, or may refuse to issue the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-206. - Distance from residences. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any part of any kennel authorized to house less than ten dogs or cats, or a combination thereof, to be located within 100 feet of any resident dwelling house or other building normally occupied by people, except the resident dwelling house of the owner or operator of the kennel. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any part of any kennel authorized to house ten or more but less than 25 dogs or cats, or a combination thereof, to be located within 300 feet of any resident dwelling house or other building normally occupied by people, except the resident dwelling house of the owner or operator of the kennel. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any part of any kennel authorized to house 25 or more dogs or cats but less than 50, or a combination thereof, to be located within 500 feet of any resident dwelling house or other building normally occupied by people, except the resident dwelling house of the owner or operator of the kennel. 
(d)  Existing kennels at the time of the effective date of this article (post six-month grace period) must apply for a city permit to remain in operation. The application for permit shall be filed within 60 days of the effective date of this article. A plan for any improvements to an existing kennel required to comply with this article shall be developed by the kennel owner and submitted to the city building inspector for review. Upon plan approval by the city building inspector in coordination with the city's veterinarian, the kennel owner must adhere to the schedule of any improvements proposed, or risk permit revocation. Only new portions of an existing kennel constructed after the effective date of this article must be compliant with this article. Pre-existing portions of the kennel existing prior to the effective date of this article may only be maintained or renovated and not expanded unless made compliant with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
ARTICLE VI. - KEEPING OF WILD ANIMALS 

Sec. 14-207. - Wild animal defined. 
    As used in this article, the term wild animal shall mean any mammal, amphibian, reptile or fowl of a species that is wild by nature and that, because of its size, vicious nature or other characteristics, is dangerous to human beings. Such animals shall include, but not be limited to, lions, tigers, leopards, panthers, bears, wolves, wolf-dog hybrids, cougars, coyotes, coyote-dog hybrids, raccoons, skunks (whether deodorized or not), apes, gorillas, monkeys of a species whose average adult weight is 20 pounds or more, foxes, elephants, rhinoceroses, alligators, crocodiles, caymans, fowl larger than a macaw, all forms of venomous reptiles and any snake that will grow to a length greater than eight feet. The term shall also include any animal listed as an "endangered species" under the Federal Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended, or any fowl protected by the Federal Migratory Bird Treaty Act. The term wild animal shall not include gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, mice and domesticated rabbits. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-208. - Possession prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor or be in possession of a wild animal within the city limits after the effective date of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in possession or control of any lot, tract or parcel of land within the city limits or any residence or business premises situated thereon to knowingly suffer or permit any other person to be in possession of a wild animal upon the property, residence or premises. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term to be in possession includes any harboring or keeping of a wild animal, whether on a temporary or permanent basis and includes, without limitation, holding or keeping the wild animal for the temporary and/or limited purpose of sale or transfer or offering of sale or transfer to another person. 
(d)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the wild animal is being possessed in accordance with all applicable state and federal laws and that: 
(1)  The wild animal is being kept for treatment in an animal hospital operated by a veterinarian licensed in Texas; 
(2)  The wild animal is being kept at a public zoo that is accredited by a nationally recognized zoological association; 
(3)  The wild animal is being kept at a shelter operated by a state or federally recognized humane agency for the purpose of its transfer to a refuge or sanctuary; 
(4)  The wild animal is being kept for medical research or teaching purposes at a medical school or licensed hospital or by a university or college offering an accredited degree program; 
(5)  The wild animal is in the possession of an airline, motor freight agency, rail freight agency or other carrier, and its possession in the city is incidental to transportation, provided that the wild animal is secured within a cage or other enclosure that is adequate to prevent its escape; or 
(6)  The wild animal is being kept or transported temporarily for a production in accordance with a permit or registration under section 14-211 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-209. - Vaccination. 
    No person shall vaccinate, or attempt to vaccinate, any wild animal against rabies except in strict compliance with any regulations promulgated and published by the Texas Department of Health and in accordance with the current protocol published by the American Veterinary Medicine Association for the vaccination of wild animals. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-210. - Penalty. 
    Violation of any provision of this article is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $500.00, nor more than $2,000.00. Each wild animal possessed in violation of this article and each day on which it is possessed shall constitute and be punishable as a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-211. - Temporary permit; registration for productions. 
(a)  In this section, the term production means any temporary exhibition or use of a wild animal for purposes of a television, movie or stage production, circus or carnival performance, traveling zoo or animal exposition or other similar use. 
(b)  A temporary and nonrenewable permit to possess a wild animal in the city for a period of not more than 30 days may be obtained from the chief of police or his designee for the purpose of a production. The applicant for such a permit shall demonstrate to the chief of police or his designee that: 
(1)  The wild animal is required for the production; 
(2)  The wild animal will be in the direct charge of its trainer or another person who is familiar with the wild animal and has been trained in its handling and care; 
(3)  The applicant will, consistent with the size and characteristics of the wild animal, have additional handlers available as required to control the wild animal at any time that it is not confined; 
(4)  The owner of each place where the production will take place and the owner of each place where the wild animal will be kept, if different, has consented in writing to its presence; 
(5)  The applicant holds a policy of public liability insurance issued by a carrier authorized to write the policy under Texas law in an amount of not less than $100,000.00, per occurrence, providing coverage in case of injury or death of any person or damage to any property that results from negligence in the control or handling of the wild animal; and 
(6)  The wild animal will be kept in such manner as to prevent its escape and to prevent injury to the general public and persons not associated with the production. 
(c)  Applications for such permits shall be made in writing to the chief of police or his designee upon forms promulgated for that purpose and at least 20 days before the commencement of the production. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $100.00 for five or fewer wild animals, $200.00 for six to ten wild animals or $300.00 for 11 or more wild animals. 
(d)  A permit issued under this section is valid only for the designated production and the keeping of a wild animal in the city for that limited purpose and shall only extend for the duration of the production. 
(e)  As a condition of the permit issuance, the holder consents that the chief of police or his designee and/or city veterinarian shall have the right to inspect a wild animal at any time while it is being kept under a permit issued under this article. 
(f)  In the event that the chief of police or his designee proposes to deny a permit application, the applicant shall be afforded notice of the reasons and an opportunity for a hearing. Following notice, the chief of police or his designee may revoke a permit for any violation of this article or applicable state or federal laws. The permit holder shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing before a permit is revoked. Pending the hearing, the chief of police or his designee may suspend the permit if the actions of the permit holder appear to constitute a substantial hazard to public health or safety. Hearings and proceedings shall be conducted in the same manner as provided in Article X, Administrative Hearings of this chapter. 
(g)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to require a person to obtain a city permit if the person holds a current and valid exhibitors license under the federal Animal Welfare Act (7) U.S.C. § 2131 et seq) or a current and valid circus, carnival or zoo operators license issued under chapter 824 of the Texas Health and Safety Code and is conducting the production under authority of the state or federal license, provided that the person registers his production with the chief of police or his designee and provides the following information: 
(1)  A description of each wild animal to be kept; 
(2)  A copy of the state or federal license or other evidence that the person holds a current and valid state or federal license to keep and use the wild animals for the production; 
(3)  Evidence that each person on whose property the production will be presented or the wild animals will be kept has consented in writing to the presence of the wild animals on the person's property; and 
(4)  The name, local address and local telephone number of a person or persons who may be contacted for inspections conducted or notices given by the chief of police or his designee or in case of any escape, attack or other incident involving the wild animal(s). 
(5)  The chief of police or his designee and/or city veterinarian may conduct inspections of wild animals kept pursuant to registrations filed under this article and, in cooperation with responsible state and federal regulatory authorities, may take action as appropriate to ensure that wild animals are kept and exhibited in accordance with applicable state and federal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-212. - Impoundment. 
(a)  The chief of police or his designee shall seize any wild animal possessed in violation of this article and impound the animal at the city animal control center or another suitable place. The chief of police or his designee, or any police officer of the city may enter any building or property to seize a wild animal therein that is possessed in violation of this article upon the consent of an adult occupant of such building or property or one having the right of possession of such building or property, or under an administrative search warrant issued by a magistrate. 
(b)  The chief of police or his designee shall impose a fee for the impoundment of a wild animal in the amount of not less than $50.00 nor more than $250.00, per animal, and a daily boarding fee of not less that $5.00 nor more than $75.00, per animal. The amounts of the fees shall be predicated upon the cost of impoundment, care and feeding of the type of wild animal impounded, and the city council may promulgate a schedule of applicable fees for various types of wild animals. 
(c)  A wild animal that has been impounded for the first time may be redeemed within seven days by its owner if: 
(1)  The owner demonstrates that he holds any state or federal license or permit enabling ownership or possession of the animal; 
(2)  The animal is not believed to be infected with rabies or any other infectious disease; and 
(3)  The owner provides a sworn affidavit setting forth that the wild animal will immediately be removed from the city and will be kept at an identified place where its possession is not unlawful. 
(4)  The chief of police or his designee may require that a wild animal that is released under this subsection be tattooed or otherwise made identifiable in the event that it is again impounded. 
(d)  Consistent with applicable state and federal laws and regulations, the chief of police or his designee shall dispose of any wild animal that is not timely redeemed following its first impoundment and of any wild animal that is again impounded by placing the wild animal in a public zoo, or at a reserve, sanctuary or shelter operated by or under the auspices of a recognized humane organization. If such a placement is not practicable and cannot be made within thirty (30) days following the date of impoundment, the wild animal may be destroyed if destruction is not prohibited by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-213-14-214. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PROHIBITED AND EXOTIC ANIMALS 

Sec. 14-215. - Definition of prohibited animals. 
    Prohibited animal shall mean: 
(1)  Class Mammalia: 
a.  Order Carnivora: 
1.  Family Mustelidae (such as weasels, skunks, otters, badgers, mink and martens) EXCEPT ferrets; 
2.  Family Procyonidae (such as raccoons and coati); 
3.  Family Ursidae (bears); 
4.  Family Felidae (such as bobcats, lions, and tigers), EXCEPT cats; 
(2)  Class Reptilia: 
a.  Family Helodermatidae (venomous lizards); 
b.  Family Hydrophiidae (venomous marine snakes); 
c.  Family Crotalidae (rattlesnakes, fer-de-lance, water moccasins, copperheads) 
d.  Family Viperidae (old world vipers); 
e.  Family Elapidae (coral snakes, cobras, and mambas); 
f.  Family Colubridae: 
1.  Dispholidus typus (boomslang); 
2.  Cyclasgras gigas (false water cobra); 
3.  Boiga dendrophila (mangrove snake); and 
4.  Thelotomis kirtlandii (bird snake); 
g.  Order Crocodilia (crocodiles, alligators and gavials); 
h.  Family Chelydridae; 
1.  Macroclemys temmincki (alligator snapping turtle); and 
2.  Chelydra serpentina (common snapping turtle); 
(3)  Class Amphibia: 
a.  Family Dendrobatidae: Phyllobates terribilis; and 
(4)  Any hybrid of an animal listed in this section. 
(5)  All parentheticals references in this section are presented merely as examples, and shall not be deemed as a limitation of the class, order, family, subfamily, genus or species described. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-216. - Ownership of prohibited animal. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Institution shall mean an established society or corporation, public or private, that utilizes animals in medical or scientific research, testing or experimentation, or for educational programs. The term shall include; public or private hospitals, laboratories and research facilities; public or private technical institutes, junior colleges, senior colleges or universities or any medical or dental unit thereof "any other agency of higher education" as defined in Section 61.003 of the Texas Education Code; and public and private elementary and secondary schools. The term shall exclude a dwelling, the land surrounding such dwelling, and any outbuildings belonging thereto. 
(2)  Being transported shall mean the act of being conveyed within a vehicle upon a public street. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he owns, possesses or harbors a prohibited animal within the city limits after the effective date of this article. 
(c)  It is an exception that: 
(1)  The animal was in a medical or scientific research project, or educational program under institutional supervision, and on the premises of such institution or being transported by an employee or agent of such institution; 
(2)  The animal was on the premises of or being transported by a circus, carnival, zoo or amusement park: 
a.  That is licensed under the Federal Animal Welfare Act, and that is inspected annually; or 
b.  That is licensed under Chapter 824 of the Texas Health and Safety Code; 
(3)  The animal was on the premises of an animal rehabilitation facility licensed by the State of Texas or by the United States of America, or being transported by an employee or agent of such facility. 
(4)  The animal was being transported through Wharton from a point outside the city to a point outside the city; or 
(5)  The person was a licensed veterinarian who was providing veterinary care for a sick or injured prohibited animal. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-217. - Impoundment of prohibited animals. 
(a)  The chief of police or his designee shall immediately impound all prohibited animals found in violation of this article, and place them in the city animal control facility or other suitable facility. 
(b)  Any person owning or harboring a prohibited animal shall submit it to the chief of police or his designee immediately upon his request. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he fails to submit a prohibited animal to the chief of police or his designee after having been ordered by the chief of police or his designee to do so. 
(d)  An order under this section shall be in writing, signed by the chief of police or his designee and served in person by the chief of police or his designee upon the owner or harborer of the prohibited animal. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-218. - Maintenance and disposition of prohibited animal. 
(a)  The chief of police or his designee shall maintain any prohibited animal impounded under this chapter for five days. 
(b)  The chief of police or his designee shall either euthanize the animal or shall sell or donate it to a suitable zoo, wildlife refuge, or other institution. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-219. - Definition of exotic animals. 
    Exotic animal shall mean: 
(1)  Class Mammalia: 
a.  Order Marsupialia: Subfamily Macropodinae (wallabies, kangaroos, padmelons and wallaroos); 
b.  Order Perissodactyla: 
1.  Family Tapiridae (tapirs); 
2.  Family Equidae (zebra, wild asses and wild horses) except domestic equine; 
3.  Family Rhinocerotidae (rhinoceros); 
c.  Order Artiodactyla (such as hippopotamus, camels, giraffes, bison, antelope and deer) except domestic goats, oxen, sheep, cattle, pigs and llama; 
d.  Order Chiroptera (bats); 
e.  Family Ailuridae (Pandas and lesser pandas); 
f.  Family Viverridae (such as civets, mongoose and binturongs); 
g.  Family Protelidae (aardwolves); 
h.  Family Hyaenidae (hyenas); 
i.  Family Canidae (such as jackals, foxes and wolves), EXCEPT dogs; 
j.  Order Proboscidea (elephants); 
k.  Order Primates (such as apes, monkeys and lemurs), EXCEPT: 
1.  Family Cebidae: 
(i)  Genus Cebus (Capuchin monkeys); 
(ii)  Genus Ateles (Spider monkeys); 
(iii)  Genus Brachyteles (Wooly spider monkeys); 
2.  Family Callimiconidae: Genus Callimico (Goeldi's monkey); 
3.  Family Callithricidae: 
(i)  Genus Callithrix (marmoset); 
(ii)  Genus Leontideus (maned tamarin); 
(iii)  Genus Saguinus (tamarins); 
(iv)  Genus Oedipomidas (crested barefaced tamarind); 
(2)  Class Aves: 
a.  Order Rheiformes (such as the rhea); 
b.  Order Struthioniformes (such as the ostrich); 
c.  Order Casuariiformes (such as the emu); and 
(3)  Any hybrid of an animal listed in this section; 
(4)  All parenthetical references in this section are presented merely as examples, and shall not be deemed as a limitation of the class, order, family, subfamily, genus or species described. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-220. - Application of other laws. 
    The requirements in this chapter regarding exotic animals shall be in addition to any federal laws and regulations, and any Texas laws and regulations governing ownership of these animals. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-221. - Offense. 
    A person commits an offense if he/she owns, possesses or harbors an exotic animal within the city limits after the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-222. - Transportation of exotic animals. 
    A person commits an offense if he transports an exotic animal unless such animal is transported in an appropriate cage. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-223. - Impoundment of exotic animals. 
(a)  The chief of police or his designee shall immediately impound all exotic animals that are at large or that are being owned, maintained, harbored or transported in violation of this article, and place them in the city animal control facility or other suitable facility. 
(b)  A person owning, maintaining, harboring or transporting an exotic animal in violation of this chapter shall submit it to the chief of police or his designee immediately upon his request. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he fails to submit an exotic animal to the chief of police or his designee after having been ordered by the chief of police or his designee to do so. 
(d)  An order under this section shall be in writing, signed by the chief of police or his designee and served in person by the chief of police or his designee or a peace officer upon the owner or harborer of the exotic animal. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-224. - Maintenance and disposition of exotic animal. 
(a)  The chief of police or his designee shall maintain any exotic animal impounded under this chapter for five (5) days. 
(b)  The chief of police or his designee shall either euthanize the animal or shall sell or donate it to a suitable zoo wildlife refuge, or other institution. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DANGEROUS ANIMALS 

Sec. 14-226. - Knowledge of dangerous animal. 
    For purposes of this article, a person learns he is the owner or harborer of a dangerous animal when: 
(1)  The owner or harborer knows of an attack by his animal resulting in serious bodily injury as defined herein. 
(2)  The owner or harborer is notified by the chief of police or his designee that the animal is a dangerous animal. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-227. - Reporting of dangerous animal. 
(a)  The chief of police or his designee may receive a report concerning a dangerous animal. Such report and supporting witness statements shall be in writing and sworn to on a form prescribed by the chief of police or his designee. 
(b)  The chief of police or his designee shall investigate all reports filed under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-228. - Notification and appeal. 
(a)  If, after investigating a report of a dangerous animal, the chief of police or his designee, in consultation with the city veterinarian, determines the animal is a dangerous animal, he shall notify the owner or harborer in writing of the determination. 
(b)  The notice required in subsection (a) shall be in writing, shall contain a statement that the owner or harborer has a right to appeal, and shall be attached to a copy of this article. 
(c)  The chief of police or his designee shall utilize a known owner or harborer mailing address, or deliver written notice in person. A notice that is mailed is deemed received five days after it is placed in a mail receptacle of the United State Postal Service. 
(d)  An owner or harborer, not later than the 30th day after the date the owner or harborer is notified that an animal owned by him/her is a dangerous animal, may appeal the determination of the chief of police or his designee to the Wharton Municipal Court. An owner or harborer may appeal the decision of the municipal court to a county court-at-law, in the same manner as an appeal of a civil case. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-229. - Requirements for owners and harborers of dangerous animals. 
    Not later than the 30th day after a person learns that he is the owner or harborer of a dangerous animal, he shall: 
(1)  Register the dangerous animal with the chief of police or his designee; 
(2)  Restrain the animal at all times in a secure enclosure; and 
(3)  Acquire and maintain special liability insurance coverage in an amount of at least $100,000.00 to cover any damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous animal. 
(4)  An appeal of a dangerous animal determination shall not act to stay these requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-230. - Registration. 
(a)  The chief of police or his designee shall annually register a dangerous animal if the owner or harborer: 
(1)  Presents proof of current liability insurance for the permit period as required by section 14-229; 
(2)  Presents proof of a current rabies vaccination of the dangerous animal if it is a dog or cat; 
(3)  Presents proof satisfactory to the chief of police or his designee that the enclosure in which the animal will be kept is a secure enclosure; and 
(4)  Pays an annual city registration fee of $50.00. 
(b)  The chief of police or his designee shall provide to the owner or harborer registering a dangerous animal, a dangerous animal registration tag. Such tag shall be of a bright distinguishing color, shall contain the year of registration engraved on its face and shall be larger than a normal license tag issued to dogs and cats. A dangerous animal registration shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. 
(c)  The owner or harborer of a registered dangerous animal shall attach the tag to the animal's collar, or similar device, and shall place such collar or device on the animal. 
(d)  If the owner or harborer of a registered dangerous animal sells or gives away the animal or moves the animal to a new address, the owner or harborer, not later than the 14th day after the date of the sale, gift or move, shall notify the chief of police or his designee of the animal's new address and new owner or harborer if applicable. 
(e)  If a new owner or harborer keeps the animal within the city, he shall register the animal with the chief of police or his designee within 14 days after receiving it. 
(f)  When the owner or harborer of an animal registered as a dangerous animal in another jurisdiction becomes a resident of Wharton, he shall register the animal with the chief of police or his designee within 14 days after becoming a new resident. 
(g)  The chief of police or his designee shall register a dangerous animal with a new owner or harborer, or owner or harborer who is a new city resident, if such owner or harborer: 
(1)  Presents proof of liability insurance as required by section 14-229: 
(2)  Presents proof satisfactory to the chief of police or his designee that the enclosure in which the animal will be kept is a secure enclosure; 
(3)  Relinquishes the animal's unexpired dangerous animal registration tag to the chief of police or his designee; and 
(4)  Pays a re-registration fee of $25.00. 
(h)  If a dangerous animal's registration is expired when a new resident or new owner or harborer attempts to reregister it, the new owner or harborer or new resident shall follow the registration requirements of subsection (a). 
(1)  A re-registration shall be valid only for the time remaining on the prior registration. 
(2)  When the chief of police or his designee is informed that a dangerous animal has been moved to another jurisdiction, or when the chief of police or his designee reregisters a dangerous animal previously registered in another jurisdiction, he should notify his counterpart for such jurisdiction of this information. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-231. - Notification of attacks. 
(a)  The owner or harborer of a registered dangerous animal shall notify the chief of police or his designee of all attacks the animal makes on humans. 
(b)  Additionally, the owner or harborer of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the chief of police or his designee of all attacks made by the dangerous dog on domestic animals and domestic fowl. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-232. - Offenses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner or harborer of a dangerous animal and the animal makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside the animal's enclosure, and the attack causes serious bodily injury to the other person. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner or harborer of a dangerous dog and the dog makes an unprovoked attack on a domestic animal or domestic fowl while said dog is at large, and the attack causes bodily injury or death to the domestic animal or domestic fowl. 
(c)  A person who owns or harbors or keeps custody or control of a dangerous animal commits an offense if the person fails to comply with section 14.229. 
(d)  A person commits an offense if he owns or harbors or keeps custody or control of a dangerous animal without having such animal currently registered with the City of Wharton. 
(e)  The owner or harborer of a registered dangerous animal commits an offense if he fails to comply with section 14-230(d). 
(f)  The new owner or harborer of a registered dangerous animal commits an offense if he fails to comply with section 14-230(e). 
(g)  The owner or harborer of an animal registered as a dangerous animal in another jurisdiction commits an offense if he fails to comply with section 14-230(f). 
(h)  The owner or harborer of a registered dangerous animal commits an offense if he fails to comply with section 14-231. 
(i)  The owner or harborer of a registered dangerous animal commits an offense if he sells or gives the animal to another person and fails to notify the other person at the time of the sale or gift that the animal is a registered dangerous animal. 
(j)  The owner or harborer of a registered dangerous animal commits an offense if he fails to display on such animal a current dangerous animal registration tag issued by the city. 
(k)  Seizure of a dog causing death of, or serious bodily injury to a person. 
(1)  A justice court, county court, or municipal court may order an animal control authority to seize a dog and may issue a warrant authorizing the seizure: 
a.  On the sworn complaint of any person, including the county attorney, the city attorney, or a peace officer, that a dog has caused the death of, or serious bodily injury to, a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person; and 
b.  On a showing of probable cause to believe that a dog caused the death of, or serious bodily injury to, the person as stated in the complaint. 
(2)  The animal control authority may seize a dog or order its seizure and may provide for the impoundment of a dog in secure and humane conditions until the court orders the disposition of a dog. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-233. - Defenses. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 14-232 that the person is a veterinarian, a peace officer, a person employed by a recognized animal shelter or a person employed by the state or a political subdivision of the state to manage the care and custody of stray animals and has temporary ownership, custody or control of the animal in connection with that position. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 14-232 that the person is an employee of the institutional division of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice or a law enforcement agency and trains or uses dogs for law enforcement or corrections purposes. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 14-232 that the person is a dog trainer or an employee of a guard dog company under the Private Investigators and Private Security Agencies Act (Article 4413) (29bb), Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes), and is not the actual owner of the dog. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-234. - Destruction of animal. 
    If a person is found guilty of an offense under section 14-232(a) or 14-232(b), the court may order the chief of police or his designee to impound and destroy the animal immediately. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 14-235. - Disposal of dead animals. 
(a)  Dead animals, excluding those intended for human or animal consumption shall be disposed of as follows: 
(1)  Animals weighing 50 pounds or less may be buried on the owner's or harborer's premises at a depth of not less than 12 inches. 
(2)  Animals weighing 20 pounds or less may be placed for trash collection if they are first wrapped securely in newspaper and put in a bag of a type approved by the chief of police or his designee. 
(3)  Animals may be disposed of at the landfill, sold or given to a renderer, or buried in a properly registered pet cemetery. 
(4)  If requested by the owner or harborer, dogs and cats will be picked up by the chief of police or his designee and disposed of at the landfill or incinerated. There shall be a fee for this service at an amount set by resolution of the city council. 
(5)  A landfill operator shall have the right to refuse a dead animal if placing such animal in the landfill would pose a health risk or violate any state or federal regulations. 
(6)  The chief of police or his designee shall have the right to refuse to accept any dead animal if he determines that transporting such animal would cause a health risk to humans or to animals at the animal control facility. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
ARTICLE X. - ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 

Sec. 14-236. - General provisions. 
(a)  When notice is required to be given to a person under this article, it shall be in writing and mailed certified mail return receipt requested to that person's last known mailing address. 
(b)  Notice shall specify the date, time and place of any hearing. 
(c)  Notice shall be deemed received five days after it is placed in a mail receptacle of the United State Postal Service. 
(d)  For purposes of this article, the hearings examiner, as appointed by the municipal court judge, shall be empowered to administer oaths to witnesses and to promulgate procedural rules for the conduct of hearings. 
(e)  Whenever any deadline specified in this article falls upon a Saturday, Sunday or a city recognized holiday, the deadline shall be the next regular city business day. 
(f)  The date of an order or ruling required to be made under this article shall be deemed to be the date it is signed by the hearings examiner. 
(g)  The administrative remedies set forth in this article shall be in addition to any civil or criminal penalties provided in the ordinances of this city or the laws of this state. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-237. - Administrative hearing for license revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police or his designee shall apply to the municipal court clerk for an administrative hearing to determine whether a dog or cat license issued by the City of Wharton should be revoked if: 
(1)  The dog or cat has been impounded by the city three or more times during a 12-month period; 
(2)  The owner or harborer has been convicted in the Wharton Municipal Court three or more times during a 12-month period for violations of any article in this chapter involving the dog or cat; or 
(3)  There is a combination of (1) and (2) above totaling three or more incidents in the same 12-month period. 
(b)  The application for hearing shall be on a form prescribed by the municipal court clerk. A copy of all documents relating to the incidents for which revocation is sought shall be attached to the application. 
(c)  The municipal court clerk shall schedule the hearing for a time no later than ten days following the day he receives the application. 
(d)  The municipal court clerk shall send notice of the hearing to the owner or harborer, and shall inform the chief of police or his designee of the hearing date, time, and location. 
(e)  The sole issue to be decided at the hearing is whether the dog or cat license should be revoked. 
(f)  At the conclusion of the hearing the hearings examiner shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall issue a written order without undue delay stating that the license is either revoked or not revoked. A copy of such order shall be sent to the chief of police or his designee and to the owner or harborer by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(g)  Upon the license being revoked, the owner or harborer shall have ten days to remove the dog or cat from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-238. - Administrative hearing-ownership or harboring of animal with revoked license. 
(a)  After impounding a dog or cat whose license has been revoked and which has not been removed from the city, chief of police or his designee shall apply to the municipal court clerk for an administrative hearing to determine the disposition of the animal. 
(b)  The application for hearing shall be on a form prescribed by the municipal court clerk. 
(c)  The municipal court clerk shall schedule the hearing for a time no later than ten days following the day he receives the application. 
(d)  The municipal court clerk shall send notice of the hearing to the owner or harborer of the animal, and further shall inform the chief of police or his designee of the hearing date, time, and location. 
(e)  The sole issue to be determined at the hearing is whether the animal should be euthanized or placed for adoption. 
(f)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearings examiner shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall issue a written order without undue delay: 
(1)  If the hearings examiner finds that the animal should be euthanized, he shall order the animal euthanized by the chief of police or his designee. 
(2)  If the hearings examiner finds that the animal should be placed for adoption, he shall order the chief of police or his designee to place it for adoption. 
(3)  If the hearings examiner finds that the animal should be euthanized or placed for adoption, the owner or harborer may appeal to the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-239. - Administrative hearing-Prohibited animal. 
(a)  The owner or harborer of an impounded prohibited animal may request an administrative hearing before a hearings examiner to establish: 
(1)  That the animal is not a prohibited animal; or 
(2)  That the animal falls within one of the exceptions to owning or harboring prohibited animals. 
(b)  The owner or harborer of the animal shall have the burden of proof at the hearing. 
(c)  A request for a hearing shall be in writing and shall set forth with specificity the reasons for the hearing and what the owner or harborer expects to prove at the hearing. The request shall be signed and sworn to by the owner or harborer. 
(d)  A request for a hearing shall be filed with the municipal court clerk no later than 5:00 p.m. on the fifth calendar day following the impoundment of the animal. 
(e)  A hearings examiner shall hold the hearing within five business days from the date the hearing request is filed. 
(f)  The municipal court clerk shall give notice of the hearing to the owner or harborer, and shall inform the chief of police or his designee of the hearing date, time, and location. 
(g)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearings examiner shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall issue a written order without undue delay: 
(1)  If the hearings examiner finds that the animal is not an exotic animal, was not in violation of Article VII and was not at large, he shall order the animal released to the owner or harborer. 
(2)  If the hearings examiner finds that the animal was in violation of Article VII or at large, he shall order it disposed of as provided for in Article VII, Section 14-218. 
(3)  If the hearings examiner finds that the animal was in violation of Article VII or at large, the owner or harborer may appeal to the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-240. - Appeal to municipal court. 
(a)  The owner or harborer of an animal the subject of a hearing under sections 14-237, 14-238 and 14-239 may appeal an adverse ruling to the municipal court. 
(b)  Notice of appeal shall be filed with the municipal court clerk no later than 5:00 p.m. on fifth calendar day following the date of the hearing examiner's order. 
(c)  Notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. 
(d)  The hearings examiner shall immediately transmit to the municipal court clerk all papers and any other items constituting the record of the action from which the appeal is taken. 
(e)  An appeal shall be conducted no later than the tenth calendar day following the date the appeal is filed. 
(f)  The municipal judge shall make a written ruling following the appeal finding that the order of the hearings examiner is either upheld or reversed. 
(g)  If the order of the hearings examiner is reversed, the chief of police or his designee shall release the animal to the owner or harborer. If the order of the hearings examiner is upheld, the chief of police or his designee shall proceed with disposition of the animal as provided for in this chapter. 
(h)  This appeal shall exhaust all administrative remedies of the owner or harborer. 
(i)  The municipal court may set a time for a hearing to determine whether a dog caused the death of, or serious bodily injury to, a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person. The hearing may be held not later than the tenth day after the date on which the warrant is issued. 
(j)  The court shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to: 
(1)  The owner of a dog or the person from whom a dog was seized; and 
(2)  The person who made the complaint. 
(k)  Any interested party, including the county attorney, city attorney, animal control officer or city veterinarian is entitled to present evidence at the hearing. 
(l)  The municipal court may order the dog destroyed if the municipal court finds that a dog caused the death of a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person. If that finding is not made, the court may order a dog released to: 
(1)  Its owner; 
(2)  The person from whom a dog was seized; or 
(3)  Any other person authorized to take possession of a dog. 
(m)  The municipal court may order the dog destroyed if the court finds that a dog caused serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person. If that finding is not made, the court may order a dog released to: 
(1)  Its owner; 
(2)  The person from whom a dog was seized; or 
(3)  Any other person authorized to take possession of a dog. 
(n)  The court may not order a dog destroyed if the court finds that a dog caused the serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person and: 
(1)  A dog was being used for the protection of a person or person's property, the attack, bite, or mauling occurred in an enclosure in which a dog was being kept; and 
(2)  The enclosure was reasonably certain to prevent a dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and the owner provided notice of the presence of a dog; and 
(3)  The injured person was at least eight years of age, and was trespassing in the enclosure when the attack, bite, or mauling occurred; 
(4)  A dog was not being used for the protection of a person or person's property, the attack, bite, or mauling occurred in an enclosure in which a dog was being kept, and the injured person was at least eight years of age and was trespassing in the enclosure when the attack, bite, or mauling occurred; 
(5)  The attack, bite, or mauling occurred during an arrest or other action of a peace officer while the peace officer was using a dog for law enforcement purposes; 
(6)  A dog was defending a person from an assault, or defending a person's property from damage or theft by the injured person; or 
(7)  The injured person was younger than eight years of age, the attack, bite, or mauling occurred in an enclosure in which a dog was being kept, and the enclosure was reasonably certain to keep a person younger than eight years of age from entering. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
ARTICLE XI. - PENALTY 

Sec. 14-241. - Penalty. 
    Any person adjudged guilty of an offense after the effective date of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Sec. 14-242. - Culpability. 
    If the definition of an offense under this chapter does not prescribe a culpable mental state, then a culpable mental state is not required and the offense if one of strict liability. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7, 4-08-02) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to regulate buildings and construction, § 17(12), (22). 
Cross reference- Department of community development, § 2-1; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; rat control on business premises, § 34-111 et seq.; mobile homes and trailers, ch. 38; signs and advertising, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and public ways, ch. 70; utilities and services, ch. 86; disposal of construction material, § 86-102. 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Fire zone limits established. 
    The fire zone limits of the city are hereby established as follows: 
(1)  Zone one. Beginning on the centerline of Sunset Street, at a point 175 feet south of Caney Street; thence south 70 degrees east to a point 175 feet west of Richmond Road; thence north 20 degrees east to the centerline of Bolton Street; thence south 70 degrees east to the centerline of Richmond Road; thence south 20 degrees west to the centerline of the intersection of Richmond Road and Alabama Street; thence south 70 degrees east with the centerline of Alabama Street to a point 175 degrees east of the centerline of Fulton Street; thence south 20 degrees west to the centerline of Caney Street; thence south 70 degrees east to the centerline of Dennis Street; thence south 20 degrees west to a point 175 feet south of the centerline of Milam Street; thence north 70 degrees west to the centerline of Rust Street; thence south 20 degrees west to the centerline of Elm Street; thence north 70 degrees west to the west line of Richmond Road; thence with the west line of Richmond Road a distance of 200 feet to river bank; thence north 70 degrees west a distance of 200 feet; thence north 20 degrees east to a point 175 feet south of the centerline of Milam Street; thence north 70 degrees west to the centerline of Sunset Street; thence with the centerline of Sunset Street to the place of beginning. 
(2)  Zone two. Beginning on the centerline of Bolton Street, a distance of 175 feet west of the centerline of Richmond Road; thence north 20 degrees east to a point opposite the centerline of Armstrong Street; thence south 70 degrees east to a point 175 feet east of the centerline of Richmond Road; thence south 20 degrees west to the centerline of Alabama Street; also beginning on the centerline of Alabama Street, a distance of 175 feet west of the centerline of Fulton Street; thence north 20 degrees east to the centerline of Armstrong Street; thence south 70 degrees east to the centerline of Fulton Street; thence north 20 degrees east with the centerline of Fulton Street to a point opposite the centerline of Kelley Street; thence with the centerline of Kelley Street to a point 175 feet east of the centerline of Fulton Street; thence south 20 degrees west to the centerline of Alabama Street; also beginning on the centerline of Dennis Street a distance of 175 feet north of the centerline of Milam Street; thence parallel to the centerline of Milam Street to the centerline of Mahan Street; thence with the centerline of Mahan Street to the centerline of Milam, or State Road 60; thence with the centerline of Milam to the centerline of Alabama Road; thence south 20 degrees west a distance of 200 feet; thence north 70 degrees west to the centerline of Dennis Street; also thence beginning on the centerline of Sunset Street to a point opposite the centerline of Caney Street; thence north 70 degrees west a distance of 400 feet; thence south 20 degrees west to the centerline of Milam Street; thence south 70 degrees east to the west line of the T. and N.O. Railway right-of-way; thence with the west line of such right-of-way to a point opposite the centerline of Colorado Street; thence south 70 degrees east to the centerline of Sunset Street; thence with the centerline of Sunset Street to the place of beginning. 
(Code 1978, § 6-6) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30. 
State Law reference- Fire limits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.012. 
Secs. 18-2-18-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING OFFICIAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 18-36. - Qualifications. 
    The building official shall have the following qualifications: 
(1)  Education and experience. Completion of high school or the equivalent and ten years of experience in the building and construction industry. 
(2)  Knowledge and abilities. 
a.  Knowledge of pertinent local, state and national codes and ordinances. 
b.  Knowledge of proper construction methods in building, plumbing and electrical work. 
c.  Knowledge of enforcement procedures. 
d.  Ability to interpret technical codes and ordinances. 
e.  Ability to prepare reports. 
f.  Ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships with builders and the public. 
g.  Ability to read and interpret building construction plans and specifications. 
h.  Ability to plan, assign and supervise the work of others. 
(Code 1978, § 6-1) 
Sec. 18-37. - Duties. 
(a)  The building official shall supervise and coordinate the city's building inspection activities, including structural, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and health, and do related work as required. 
(b)  Typical duties of the building official are as follows: 
(1)  Supervise employees in enforcement of the laws, codes and ordinances dealing with the construction or alteration of buildings; 
(2)  Assign, supervise and review the work of structural, mechanical, electrical and plumbing inspectors; 
(3)  Interpret and make decisions on technical problems of enforcement; 
(4)  Answer inquiries and interpret ordinances; 
(5)  Inspect buildings where difficult problems arise or in the absence of the regular inspector; 
(6)  Keep informed of new building methods and materials and their effect upon existing laws; 
(7)  Prepare correspondence and reports; 
(8)  Recommend new or revised regulations; 
(9)  Assist in preparation of cases for legal action; 
(10)  Direct maintenance of files and records; 
(11)  Issue plumbing, electrical, mechanical and building permits; 
(12)  Administer tests for electrician's licenses and issue licenses; and 
(13)  Act as technical advisor to the building code board or planning commission, electrical code board and plumbing and mechanical code board. 
(c)  The building official shall be responsible for the issuance of all building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical and health permits within the city's legal jurisdictional limits. The building official may designate qualified persons to act in his absence or as his assistants, for the purposes of inspecting and issuing the types of permits listed in this subsection, but the building official will have the authority to intervene and override any decisions made by any inspector in his department. 
(Code 1978, § 6-2) 
Cross reference- Department of community development, § 2-1; enforcement of chapter pertaining to mobile homes and trailers, § 38-2. 
Sec. 18-38. - Records of building permits, certificates, inspections, reports and notices. 
(a)  The building official shall keep comprehensive records of applications for permits under this chapter, of permits issued, of certificates issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered and of notices or orders issued and shall retain on file copies of required plans and all documents relating to building work as long as he deems necessary. 
(b)  All such records so kept shall be open to public inspection for good and sufficient reasons at the stated office hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the building official without his written consent. 
(Code 1978, § 6-3) 
Sec. 18-39. - Right of entry. 
    The building official, in the discharge of his official duties and upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour for the purpose of carrying out his duties under this chapter and enforcing this chapter. 
(Code 1978, § 6-4) 
Sec. 18-40. - Interference by others. 
    No person shall interfere with the building official or any person authorized to assist him while in the performance of his duties under this chapter. 
(Code 1978, § 6-5) 
Secs. 18-41-18-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2000-18, § 1, adopted Sept. 11, 2000, amended former Art. III, §§ 18-66-18-75, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1978 and the following: Ord. No. 1989-16, 8-28-89; Ord. No. 1991-17, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 1997-02, 1-13-97. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; oil and gas wells, ch. 50. 

Sec. 18-66. - Codes adopted. 
(a)  The following International Codes, to be enforced by the building official, are hereby adopted: 
(1)  International Building Code, 2012 Edition, with the latest revisions, including Appendices C, D, E, F, H, I, J, and K. 
(2)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2012 Edition, with the latest revisions, including Appendices A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, J, and K. 
(3)  International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, with its latest revisions, including Appendix A. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, with its latest revisions including Appendices B, C, D, E, F and G. 
(5)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, with its latest revisions including Appendices A, B, C and D. 
(6)  International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, with its latest revisions including Appendix A. 
(7)  International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, with its latest revisions including Appendices B, C, D, E, F, G, H and I. 
(8)  International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 Edition, with its latest revisions. 
(9)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2012 Edition, with latest revisions. 
(b)  Within said codes, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code are concerned. 
(c)  The above codes and revisions are hereby adopted and incorporated herein as fully as they are set out at length herein, and from the date on which this action shall take effect, the provisions hereof shall be controlling and except as may hereinafter be deleted, modified or amended by further action of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2000-18, § I, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 2002-11, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-10-12) 
Sec. 18-67. - Copies filed; penalty for violation. 
(a)  One copy of the codes adopted in this article shall be filed at Wharton City Hall. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow any building or structure within the city to be constructed or altered or to continue to exist or be maintained in any manner that does not comply with the codes adopted in this article. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-5, City of Wharton Code of Ordinance for each offense. If the terms or provisions of this article are violated by any corporation or firm, the officers and agents actively in charge of the business of such corporation or firm and the person actually performing the work for such corporation or firm shall be subject to the penalties provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2000-18, § I, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06) 
Sec. 18-68. - Building permit fees and inspection fees. 
    The city provides for and establishes fees for building permits and inspection fees, which the city will provide in accordance with the fees set forth by council. These fees will be adopted by council in the form of a resolution at such times as deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2000-18, § I, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 2001-09, 5-14-01; Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06) 
Sec. 18-69. - Amendments to the International Building Code. 
    The building code adopted by reference in this article is amended as follows: 
(1)  Reference to ICC Electrical Code is hereby repealed; heretofore, substituted with the National Electrical Code. 
(2)  Section 105.1.1 Annual permit and Section 105.1.2 Annual permit records is deleted. 
(3)  Section 105.2 Work exempt from permit. Building: (1), (2) Fences not over six feet high, (3), (4) and (6) are deleted. 
(4)  Section 113 Board of Appeals is deleted. The City of Wharton, Code of Ordinances, Chapter 18, Article IV, Building Standards Commission shall administer appeals. 
(5)  Section 1907 Minimum Slab Provisions is amended as to the following subsections only, which subsections are to read as follows: 
a.  The thickness of concrete floor slabs supported directly on the ground shall not be less than four inches (4"). 
b.  Subsection 1907.1 (a) Use of Reinforcement Mesh. The use of reinforcement mesh in concrete foundations supporting structures shall be prohibited. A minimum of #3 reinforcement rods spaced twelve (12) inches on center each way shall be utilized. For reinforcement bar larger than #3, the maximum spacing shall be fifteen inches (15") on center each way. 
c.  Subsection 1907.1 (b) Steel Installation. All steel utilized in foundations shall be properly secured and arranged according to sound engineering practice according to the latest edition ACI 318. 
d.  Subsection 1907.1 (c) Post Stress-Post Tension Concrete Foundations. Use of "post stress" or "post tension" slabs in the foundation construction of shall be permitted if said foundation has been properly designed by a certified engineer legally registered under the laws of the State of Texas. Construction of same "post stress" or "post tension" foundations shall be supervised and approved by a certified engineer legally registered under the laws of the State of Texas. 
(6)  2304.11.6. Termite protection shall be amended to read as follows: In geographical areas where hazard of termite damage is known to be very heavy, soils supporting concrete foundations with wood framing shall be chemically treated. Wood floor framing shall be of naturally durable species (termite resistant) or preservative treated in accordance with AWPA U1 for the species, product preservative and end use or provided with other approved methods of termite protection. 
(7)  2308.9.1. Size, height and spacing shall be amended to read as follows: The size, height and spacing of studs shall be in accordance with Table 2308.9.1 with the exception that 2 × 4 No. 2 standard grade lumber, spaced at 16" (inches) on center, shall be the minimum requirement for all load bearing walls supporting one roof and ceiling and 2 × 4 No. 2 standard grade lumber, spaced 24" (inches) on center, shall be the minimum requirement for all non-load bearing walls. 
(8)  Table 2308.10.2(1) and 2308.10.2(2). Ceiling joist spans for common lumber species, No. 3 standard grade lumber shall be omitted from the species and grade column. 
(9)  Table 2308.10.3(1) through 2308.10.3(6). Rafter spans for common lumber species, No. 3 standard grade lumber shall be deleted from the species and grade column. 
(10)  Appendix H. Any discrepancy between requirements set forth by the City of Wharton Sign Ordinance and Appendix H shall result in the more restrictive of the two. 
(11)  Appendix K. Any discrepancy between requirements set forth by the City of Wharton Electrical Code Ordinance and Appendix K shall result in the more restrictive of the two. 
(Ord. No. 2000-18, § I, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-10-12) 
Sec. 18-69.1. - Additions to the International Building Code. 
    The following provisions are added to the International Building Code adopted in section 18-66: 
(1)  Installation and Placement of Steel Reinforcement: 
a.  A minimum of number three (#3) steel reinforcement bar shall be installed in all concrete paving. Bars, regardless of size, shall be placed at a maximum distance of sixteen (16) inches on center, or less, in all directions dependent upon application. Plastic or metal supports shall be utilized so that the steel reinforcement bars are located in the center third of the concrete. Bricks or concrete rubble shall not be used to support reinforcement bar. The use of welded wire fabric (wire mesh) and fiber reinforcement shall be prohibited unless approved by the code official. 
b.  Isolation (expansion) joints, with sleeved steel dowel bars spaced at a maximum distance of eighteen (18) inches on center, shall be placed at designed locations or a maximum distance of twenty (20) feet on center to allow relative movement in three (3) directions and avoid formation of cracks elsewhere in the concrete. 
c.  Thickness and compression strength of the concrete shall be dependent upon the application for which it is designed. Concrete paved driveways and sidewalks shall be constructed to a minimum thickness of four (4) inches. 
(Ord. No. 2001-09, 5-14-01; Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-10-12) 
Sec. 18-70. - Amendments to the International Residential Code. 
    The residential code adopted by reference in this article is amended as follows: 
(1)  Reference to ICC Electrical Code is hereby repealed; heretofore, substituted with the National Electric Code. 
(2)  Section 105.2 Work Exempt from Permit Building: (1), (2) Fences not over six feet (6') high, (3) and (5) are deleted. 
(3)  Section R112. Board of Appeals is deleted. The City of Wharton, Code of Ordinances, Chapter 18, Article IV, Building Standards Commission shall administer appeals. 
(4)  Section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems. No Provision of this article shall be contradictory to Texas State Law. 
(5)  Section R318.1 Sub-terranean Termite Control Methods shall be amended to read as follows: In areas subject to very heavy termite infestation probability as indicated by Table R301.2(1), methods of protection shall include chemical termiticide treatment as provided in Section R318.2 or termite baiting system installed and maintained according to the label, in addition to pressure-preservative-treated wood in accordance with the AWPA standards listed in Section R317.1 or; naturally durable termite-resistant wood as provided in Section R318.1 (4) or; physical barriers as provided in Section R318.3 
(6)  Section 318.2 Chemical Termiticide Treatment shall be amended to read as follows: Chemical termiticide treatment shall include soil treatment for all soils supporting concrete foundations and wood framing. The concentration, rate of application and method of treatment of the chemical termiticide shall be in strict accordance with the termiticide label. 
(7)  Section R403.1.3.2 Slabs on Ground with Turned Down Footings shall be amended as to the following subsections only, which are to read as follows: 
a.  Subsections R403.1.3.2 (a) Exterior Beams with Brick Veneer. All exterior beams of single level, one- and two-family dwellings employing concrete foundations shall have a minimum of four (4), No. 5 continuous reinforcement rods running full length of said beams. Concrete brick and/or stone exterior veneers shall require two (2) additional No. 5 reinforcement rods. 
b.  Subsections R403.1.3.2 (b) Exterior Beams on Frame Structures. All exterior beams of single level, one- and two-family dwellings employing concrete foundations and wall siding applications shall have a minimum of three (3), No. 5 continuous reinforcement rods running full length of said beams. 
c.  Subsections R403.1.3.2 (c) Interior Beams on Brick Veneer. All Interior beams of single level, one- and two-family dwellings employing concrete foundations shall have a minimum of three (3), No. 5 continuous reinforcement rods running the full length of said beams. Concrete brick and/or stone exterior veneers shall require one (1) additional No. 5 reinforcement rod. 
d.  Subsections R403.1.3.2 (d) Interior Beams on Frame Structures. All interior beams on single level, one- and two-family dwellings employing concrete foundations and wall siding applications shall have a minimum of two (2) No. 5 continuous reinforcement rods running the full length of said beams. 
e.  Subsections R403.1.3.2 (e) Use of Welded Wire Reinforcement (Mesh Wire). The use of welded wire reinforcement (mesh wire) in one- and two-family dwellings employing concrete floor slabs supported directly on ground be prohibited. A minimum of No. 3 reinforcement rods spaced a maximum of twelve inches (12") on center each way shall be utilized. A minimum thickness of a concrete floor slab supported directly on ground shall be four inches (4"). 
f.  Subsections R403.1.3.2 (f) Steel Installation. All steel reinforcement utilized in one and two family dwelling concrete foundations shall be properly secured and arranged according to sound engineering practice according to the latest edition of ACI 318. 
g.  Subsections R403.1.3.2 (g) Post Stress/Tension Concrete Foundations. Use of "post stress/tension" reinforcement for concrete foundations of one and two family dwellings shall be permitted if said foundation has been properly designed by a certified structural engineer legally registered under the laws of the State of Texas. Construction of the same "post stress/tension" foundations shall be supervised and approved by a certified engineer legally registered under the laws of the State of Texas. 
(8)  Section R502.3.1(1) and Table R502.3.1(2) Floor Joist Spans for Common Lumber Species shall be amended as follows: Delete #3 grade lumber from Species and Grade Column. 
(9)  Table R602.2 Grade shall read as follows: Studs shall be a minimum of No. 2 standard or stud grade lumber. 
(10)  Table R602.3(5) Size, height, and spacing of wood studs, bearing walls, maximum spacing for 2 × 4 when supporting roof and ceiling only, shall be 16" inches on center. 
(11)  Table R802.4(1) and Table R802.4(2) Ceiling Joist Spans for Common Lumber Species shall be amended as follows: Delete #3 grade lumber from Species and Grade Column. 
(12)  Table R802.5.1(1) through and including Table R802.5.1(8) Rafter Spans for Common Lumber Species shall be amended as follows: Delete #3 grade lumber from the Species and Grade Column. 
(Ord. No. 2000-18, § I, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-10-12) 
Sec. 18-70.1. - Additions to the International Residential Code. 
    The following provisions are added to the International Residential Code adopted in section 18-66: 
(1)  Installation and Placement of Steel Reinforcement: 
a.  A minimum of No. 3 (three) steel reinforcement bar shall be installed in all concrete paving. Bars shall be placed at a maximum distance of sixteen (16) inches on center, or less, in all directions dependent upon application. Plastic or metal supports shall be utilized so that the steel reinforcements bars are located in the center one-third of the concrete. Bricks or concrete rubble shall not be used to support reinforcement bar. The use of welded wire fabric (wire mesh) and fiber reinforcement shall be prohibited unless approved by the code official. 
b.  Isolation (expansion) joints, with sleeved dowel bars spaced at a maximum distance of eighteen (18) inches on center, shall be placed at designed locations or a maximum distance of twenty (20) feet on center to allow relative movement in three (3) directions and avoid formation of cracks elsewhere in the concrete. 
c.  Thickness and compression strength of the concrete shall be dependent upon the application for which it is designed. Concrete paved driveways and sidewalks shall be constructed to a minimum thickness of four (4) inches. 
(2)  Permits and Inspections: 
a.  Permits and inspections shall not be required for private residential concrete paving that is not used by the public if the concrete paving application is less than fifty (50) square feet. 
b.  Permits and inspections shall be required for all other concrete paving applications. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-10-12) 
Sec. 18-70.2. - Amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code. 
    The property maintenance code adopted by reference in this article is amended as follows: 
(1)  Reference to the ICC Electrical Code is hereby repealed; heretofore, substituted with the National Electric Code. 
(2)  Section 111 Means of Appeal is deleted. The City of Wharton, Code of Ordinances, Chapter 18, Article IV, Building Standards Commission shall administer appeals. 
(3)  Section 403.5 Clothes Dryer Exhaust shall be amended to read as follows: Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted in accordance with the International Mechanical Code and the manufacturer's instructions. 
(4)  Section 603.1 Mechanical Appliances shall be amended to read as follows: All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances, water heating appliances and air-conditioning/heat appliances shall be capable of performing the intended function in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and related International Codes as referenced in section 18-66 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 10-23-06; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-10-12) 
Sec. 18-71. - Plumbing Code. 
    Applicability. The provisions of the plumbing code adopted in this article shall be controlling in all plumbing contained within or without the city wherever the city water and/or sewer system is furnished. 
(Ord. No. 2000-18, § I, 9-11-00) 
Sec. 18-72. - Amendments to the International Plumbing Code. 
    The plumbing code adopted by reference in this article is amended as follows: 
(1)  Reference to ICC Electrical Code is hereby repealed; heretofore, substituted with the National Electrical Code. 
(2)  Section 109, Means of Appeal is deleted. The City of Wharton, Code of Ordinances, Chapter 18, Article VII, Division I, Plumbing and Mechanical Appeals and Advisory Board shall administer the appeals. 
(3)  Section 305.1 Corrosion. Pipes passing through concrete or cinder walls and floors or other corrosive material shall be protected against external corrosion by a protective plastic tubing that will withstand any reaction from the lime and acid of concrete, cinder or other corrosive material. Poly wrap sleeves are prohibited. 
(4)  Section 605.3 Water Service Pipe. Water service pipe shall conform to NSF 61 and shall conform to one of the standards listed in Table 605.3. All water service pipe or tubing, installed underground and outside of the structure, shall have a minimum working pressure rating of 160 psi (1,100 kPa) at 73.4°F (23°C). Where the water pressure exceeds 160 psi (1,100 kPa), piping material shall have minimum rated working pressure equal to the highest available pressure. Plastic (PVC) water service piping shall terminate within 5 feet (1,524 mm) inside the point of entry into a building. All ductile iron water pipe shall be cement mortar lined in accordance with AWWA C 104. If copper water supply pipe is utilized it shall be K or L copper. 
(5)  Section 605.4 Water Distribution Pipe. Water distribution pipe shall conform to NSF 61 and shall conform to one of the standards listed in Table 605.4. All hot water distribution pipe and tubing shall have a minimum pressure rating of 100 psi (600 kPa) at 180°F (82°C). If copper water distribution pipe is utilized it shall be K or L copper. 
(6)  Section 702.3 Building Sewer Pipe. Building sewer pipe shall conform to one of the standards listed in Table 702.3. All plastic piping shall be a minimum of Schedule 40 PVC. 
(Ord. No. 2000-18, § I, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 2001-20, 11-26-01; Ord. No. 2002-14, 7-22-02; Ord. No. 2004-002, 1-26-04; Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-10-12) 
Sec. 18-73. - Amendments to the International Fuel Gas Code. 
    The fuel gas code adopted by reference in this article is amended as follows: 
(1)  Reference to ICC Electrical Code is hereby repealed; heretofore, substituted with the National Electrical Code. 
(2)  Section 109. Means of Appeal is deleted. The City of Wharton, Code of Ordinances, Chapter 18, Article VII, Division I, Plumbing and Mechanical Appeals and Advisory Board shall administer appeals. 
(3)  Section 406.4 Test Pressure Measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a manometer or with a pressure measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss due to leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the pressure tests are made. An annually certified diaphragm gauge shall be used for all pressure tests. 
(4)  Addition of Section 406.4.3 Line and System Test. Upon completion of repairing or replacing a gas line, the Code Official has the authority to require a test on all gas lines and systems during a gas pressure test inspection. 
(5)  Section 409.5 Equipment shutoff valve. Exception: Shutoff valves for vented decorative appliances and decorative appliances for installation in vented fireplaces shall be installed in a ready accessible location within sight of the appliance. Such valves shall be permanently identified and shall service no other equipment. (This amendment shall also apply to the 2012 International Residential Code, Section G2420.5 (409.5) Equipment shutoff valve.) 
(Ord. No. 2000-18, § I, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 2002-12, 6-24-02; Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-10-12) 
Sec. 18-74. - Amendments to the International Mechanical Code. 
    The mechanical code adopted by reference in this article is amended as follows: 
(1)  Reference to ICC Electrical Code is hereby repealed; heretofore, substituted with the National Electrical Code. 
(2)  Section 109 Means of Appeal is deleted. The City of Wharton, Code of Ordinances, Section 18, Article VI, Plumbing and Mechanical Appeals and Advisory Board shall administer appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2000-18, § I, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-10-12) 
Sec. 18-74.1. - Addition to the International Mechanical Code. 
    The mechanical code adopted by reference in this article is added as follows: 
(1)  Require the mechanical contractor to mark the air handler legend plates or clearly mark access panel with the appropriate voltage/kw and phase of the installed components at the time of installation. If modifications are made, mark the appropriate electrical information at that time. 
(Ord. No. 2004-003, 1-26-04; Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-10-12) 
Sec. 18-75. - Amendments to the International Fire Code. 
    The fire code adopted by reference in this article is amended as follows: 
(1)  Reference to ICC Electrical Code is hereby repealed; heretofore, substituted with the National Electrical Code. 
(2)  Section 108 Board of Appeal is deleted. The City of Wharton, Code of Ordinance. Section 18, Article IV, Building Standards Commission will administer appeals. 
(3)  Section 315.1 has the following addition, which is to read as follows: 
a.  Section 315.1.1 Tank Storage-Restricted Locations. 
1.  The storage of flammable or combustible liquids in above ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within the limits of the fire districts. 
2.  The location and installation of outside above ground tanks for the storage of flammable or combustible liquids shall be in accordance with NFPA 30. 
b.  Section 315.1.2 Bulk Plants-Location of Plants. 
No new bulk plants shall be constructed within the limits of the Fire District. 
c.  Section 315.1.3 Installation of Containers. 
Within the limits of the fire district established by law restricting the storage of liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of heavily populated or congested commercial areas, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed 2,000 gal (7.57 m3) water capacity, except that in particular installations this capacity limit may be altered at the discretion of the fire official, after consideration of special features such as topographical conditions, nature of occupancy and proximity to buildings, capacity of proposed containers, degree of private protection to be provided, and capabilities of the local fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2000-18, § I, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-10-12) 
Sec. 18-76. - Appeals procedures. 
    The building standards commission shall serve as the board of appeals; 
(1)  The building standards commission shall administer appeals, which may arise from decisions made by the building official. 
(2)  Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by any interpretation of this code or by any decision or ruling by the building official under this code shall have the right to make an appeal to the building standards commission. 
(3)  Within a period of ten days from the filing of the appeal, the commission shall hear the appeal, together with the testimony of all parties concerned, and render a decision thereon within three days thereafter. In hearing such an appeal, the building standards commission shall not have the power to waive or set aside the requirements of this code. The building standards commission shall have the power to interpret its provisions, in case of alternate types of construction or material, shall determine whether or not such alternate types of construction or material is in fact equal to the standards of this code, considering adequacy, stability, strength, sanitation and safety to the public's health and welfare. 
(4)  Any person, firm or corporation who may be aggrieved by the decision of the building standards commission shall have the right to appeal. Such appeal shall be submitted by written notice addressed to the mayor and city council within ten days after the action appealed from, stating such person's desire to appeal from such action. Upon receipt of notice of such appeal, the city council shall set the appeal for a hearing, and the city secretary shall notify the appellant and also the chairman of the building standards commission of the date of such hearing. The city council shall have the right to affirm, modify or reverse the action and/or decision complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. If no appeal is taken within the time and in the manner provided in this section, the ruling of the building standards commission shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2000-18, § I, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06) 
Sec. 18-77. - Building line setback requirements. 
(a)  Definitions: 
(1)  Abut/abutting shall mean to physically touch or border upon; or to share a common property line or border. This term implies a closer proximity than the term "adjacent." 
(2)  Accessory building shall mean a building, the use of which is incidental to that of the principal building and which is located on the same lot. An accessory building is not an unattached residential vehicular garage that supports the use of the principal building. 
(3)  Adjacent shall mean lying near or close to. (See "abut/abutting") 
(4)  Building/yard setback line shall mean a line or lines within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building/structure outermost projection and property line. 
(5)  Commercial shall mean a building(s)/structure(s) where the occupation, employment or enterprise is carried on for profit generally located on a smaller site than industrial. (A business, non-residential). 
(6)  Duplex/two-family dwelling shall mean a building containing two dwelling units designed to be occupied by two families living independently of each other. 
(7)  Dwelling shall mean a building, or portion thereof, which is used exclusively for human habitation. An unattached residential vehicular garage is considered to be part of the dwelling. 
(8)  Exterior side building/yard setback line shall mean a line or lines within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building/structure outermost projection and an exterior property line. (See "setback measurements") 
(9)  Front building/yard setback line shall mean a line or lines within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building/structure outermost projection and the property line facing a street right-of-way. The front of a building/structure is the primary access to it as originally intended by the builder/architect and inherent to the style and design of the building structure. 
(10)  Industrial shall mean a building(s)/structure(s), which is used to engage in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted, or raw materials. Engaged in the manufacture, predominately from previously prepared materials of finished parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, storage, sales and distribution of such products; or engaged in storage, wholesale and distribution of manufactured products, supplies and equipment. An industrial building(s)/structure(s) may generate high levels of noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, odors or light. 
(11)  Interior side building/yard setback line shall mean a line or lines within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building/structure outermost projection and the interior property line. (See "setback measurements") 
(12)  Lot shall mean a plot of land having frontage on at least one public street, which is or in the future may be offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement. 
(13)  Multi-family residential shall mean buildings designed to contain three or more complete separate living facilities for single family occupancy. Multi-family dwellings shall include apartments and condominiums. 
(14)  Parcel shall mean a contiguous area of land in the possession of or owned by, or recorded as the property of, the same person or persons. Parcels of land generally are large enough to be subdivided into lots. 
(15)  Principal building shall mean the building in which the principal use of the lot, which it is located on, is conducted. 
(16)  Property line shall mean the surveyed line(s) bounding the property to form a legal boundary. 
(17)  Rear building/yard setback line shall mean a line or lines within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building/structure outermost projection and the rear property line. 
(18)  Setback measurements shall be measured from the outermost projection of the structure to the appropriate property line. An exterior side property line is one, which abuts or is adjacent to a street right-of-way. An interior side property line has no street frontage and is one which abuts another lot(s) or parcel(s) boundary. A rear property line is one which abuts another lot(s) or parcel(s), or a street right-of-way. 
(19)  Single-family resident shall mean a building/structure containing one dwelling designed to be occupied primarily by one family. 
(20)  Street shall mean a public right-of-way, however designated, which provides vehicular circulation and access to adjacent property. 
a.  A major thoroughfare means a principal traffic artery or trafficway, usually of more or less continuous routing over long distances, whose function is to serve as a principal connecting street with state and federal highways, and shall include each street designated as a major thoroughfare on the current major thoroughfare plan formally adopted and designated by the planning commission and city council. Minimum width of right-of-way shall be 100 feet. 
b.  A collector street means a street whose function is to collect and distribute traffic between major thoroughfares and minor streets. It is not necessarily of continuous routing for long distances, has intersections at grades, provides direct access to abutting property, and shall include each street designated as a collector street on the thoroughfare plan formally adopted and designated by the planning commission and city council. Minimum width of right-of-way shall be 80 feet. 
c.  A minor street means a street whose function is to provide access to abutting residential property within neighborhoods, with all intersections at grade, and not of continuous routing for any great distance so as to discourage heavy, through traffic. Minimum width of right-of-way shall be 60 feet. 
(21)  Utility easement shall mean an area for restricted use on private property upon which a public or private utility shall have the right to remove and keep removed; all or part of any permanent or portable building; obstructing fences without proper gate configuration to allow reasonable ingress or egress; trees, shrubs, or other improvements or growths which in any way endanger, tend to endanger, or significantly interfere with the construction or maintenance, or efficiency of its respective utility systems on any of these easements. The public utility shall at all times have the right of ingress and egress to, from, over, under and upon the said easement for the purposes of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, maintaining, and adding to or removing all or part of its respective systems without the necessity of procuring the permission of anyone. The ownership or title to the land encompassed by the easement is retained by the owner, while the dominant right to use the area is retained by the public or private and encumbered utility. Private owners may only make temporary and incidental use of the easement surface area in ways that do not interfere with the superior rights of the utility. 
(22)  Variance shall mean a deviation from the required norm that may be granted following certain procedures specified herein. 
(b)  Single-family residential: 
(1)  Minimum front yard setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet from the front property line except where abutting or adjacent to a major thoroughfare, in which event the minimum setback for the principal building shall be thirty-five (35) feet. This shall also apply for accessory buildings. 
(2)  Minimum interior side yard setback shall be five (5) feet for the principal building. Accessory buildings shall be permitted to maintain a minimum of five feet setback from the property line to the accessory building line. 
(3)  Minimum exterior side yard setback shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet, except that where the lot is adjacent or abuts on a major thoroughfare, the building line shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet from the side property line. Where the side of a corner lot is across from, or adjacent to the front yards of other lots, the building line shall be at the same setback distance from the street as the front building line of the opposite or adjacent lots. 
(4)  Minimum rear yard setback for the principal building shall be five feet from the rear property line. Accessory buildings shall be permitted to maintain a minimum of five feet setback from the rear property line. When the rear yard abuts any street, a minimum of 15 feet shall be required from the rear property line to the building line of the principal buildings and accessory buildings. If the rear public right-of-way is a major thoroughfare, a minimum (25)-foot setback from the rear property line to the building line shall be required. 
(5)  Principal buildings and accessory buildings shall not be allowed to encroach upon public or private utility easements even if such buildings are portable. 
(c)  Duplex/two-family dwellings: Same requirements as single-family residential. 
Exception: Duplex buildings may either be constructed entirely on one lot; or two lots, in which case when on two lots the two units shall be separated by a common fire-resistive wall on the common property line. 
(d)  Multiple-family residential: 
(1)  Same requirements as single-family residential. 
Exception: Multiple-family buildings on the same lot shall maintain a minimum separation of ten (10) feet between outermost projection of the structures. 
(2)  Where interior side yard setback is abutting existing or proposed single family or duplex residential uses, the minimum interior side yard setback shall be ten feet. 
(e)  Commercial: 
(1)  Minimum front building line setback: 25 feet, except that where abutting or adjacent to major thoroughfare, the minimum front building line setback requirement shall be 35 feet. 
(2)  Minimum interior side building line setback: Ten feet, except where abutting existing or proposed residential uses, in which case the minimum interior side building line setback shall be 20 feet. 
(3)  Minimum exterior side building line/street setback: Abutting or adjacent to a major thoroughfare, a minimum 25-foot setback shall be maintained. Abutting or adjacent to other streets, fifteen (15) feet minimum setback shall be maintained. 
(4)  Minimum rear building line setback: Ten feet, except where abutting existing or proposed residential uses, in which event the rear building line setback shall be 20 feet. Also, if the building is abutting or adjacent to a major thoroughfare, the minimum rear building line setback shall be 25 feet. Other streets shall require a minimum 15 feet rear building line setback. 
(f)  Industrial: 
(1)  Minimum front building line setback: 25 feet, except that where abutting or adjacent to major thoroughfare, the minimum front building line setback requirement shall be 35 feet. 
(2)  Minimum interior side building line setback: Ten feet, except where abutting existing or proposed residential uses, in which case the minimum interior side building line setback shall be 20 feet. 
(3)  Minimum exterior side building line/street setback: Abutting or adjacent to a major thoroughfare, a minimum 25-foot setback shall be maintained. Abutting or adjacent to other streets, 15 feet minimum setback shall be maintained. 
(4)  Minimum rear building line setback: Ten feet, except where abutting existing or proposed residential uses, in which event the rear building line setback shall be 20 feet. Also, if the building is abutting or adjacent to a major thoroughfare, the minimum rear building line setback shall be 25 feet. Other streets shall require a minimum 15-foot rear building line setback. 
(g)  Building permits required: No building permit shall be issued for the construction, exterior alteration, enlargement, or location of any building which does not conform to the building line setback requirements herein. 
(h)  Variances: When an applicant can show that a provision of these regulations would cause excessive regulatory hardship if strictly adhered to and where, because of some unique condition peculiar to the site (e.g. multiple boundaries, irregular shaped lot, three sided lot, etc.), which in the sole opinion of the planning commission would warrant a limited departure from standard application of the regulations without destroying the general intent of such provisions, the planning commission may authorize a specified variance. An application for a variance shall be obtained through the Planning Department for a non-refundable fee and submitted to the planning commission for consideration. If the application is approved by the planning commission, then the application will be submitted to the city council for final approval. Upon approval, the variance shall be effective for six months from that date. A new variance application and fee must be submitted if no work has commenced by the expiration date. If the applicant is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision of the planning commission to the city council within ten days from the date the planning commission decision. If the city council denies the application, the applicant may appeal to the district court and, upon perfection of the appeal, such appeal shall be by a trial de novo. The person appealing the decision of the city council must also file an original petition in the appropriate district court within 20 days from the date of the city council's decision; otherwise, the decision of the city council shall be final. 
(i)  Application: These building line setbacks established herein shall apply to or supersede the following: 
(1)  Unplatted property; 
(2)  Property platted but not yet built upon including undeveloped properties with deed restriction self-imposing setback requirements and undeveloped subdivisions platted with setback requirements. 
(j)  The developer or owner pays an application for variance fee as established by the city council of the City of Wharton under separate resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2000-03, § 2, 1-10-00; Ord. No. 2006-07, 4-24-06; Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06) 
Sec. 18-78. - Exterior building (facade) design standards. 
(a)  The standards and criteria contained within are deemed to be minimum requirements and shall apply to all new structures. A Facade Design Plan of the entire project shall be submitted with the site plan review documents. 
(b)  The standards and criteria contained within are deemed to be minimum requirements and shall apply when a cumulative 20 percent or more of the structure's exterior wall square footage is altered or repaired. A facade design plan of the entire project shall be submitted when applying for the building permit. 
(c)  Building materials: 
(1)  Exterior front walls (front facades) shall be a minimum 25 percent transparent in order to promote personal safety by permitting visibility between building occupants and outdoor pedestrians and drivers. 
(2)  Exterior front walls, exterior side walls and exterior rear walls (front, side and rear facades) that face or are adjacent to any roadway, shall be built with any approved building materials other than metal. 
(3)  All exteriors (facades) of buildings in a shopping center or in other business developments shall have similar architectural design and materials. 
(d)  Exemptions: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings may be exempt from such compliance. 
(2)  Painting the exterior of a structure shall not be considered an alteration or repair for the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, 2-23-07) 
Sec. 18-79. - Off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  Off-street parking required. At the time that any building, use or structure is initiated, erected, enlarged or converted from one land use to another land use which requires an increase in the number of parking spaces, off-street parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with these regulations for the use of occupants, employees, visitors and patrons. Off-street parking facilities shall be maintained and continued as long as the building, use or structure is continued. No person shall utilize such building, use or structure without providing the required off-street parking facilities. In addition, it shall be unlawful to discontinue or dispense with, or cause the discontinuance or reduction of, the required parking facilities apart from the discontinuance of the building, use or structure, without establishing alternative off-street parking facilities which meet these requirements. The provisions of this section may not apply to properties located in the downtown business area. These properties shall be evaluated separately by the building official for applicability. 
(b)  Amount of off-street parking spaces required. The required number of off-street parking spaces for any building, use or structure shall be determined by the list of land use classifications and corresponding parking standards contained in Table 3.1, of this section. Such parking standards shall be applied subject to the following subsections: 
(1)  Seating capacity. Where requirements are established on the basis of the number of seats, such requirements shall be based on the seating capacity permitted by the fire code and approved by the fire marshall's office. When determining seating capacity for a building, use or structure utilizing bench seating, each 22 inches of bench shall be considered one seat. 
(2)  Fractions. Fractional numbers shall be increased to the next whole number if the fraction is five-tenths or more, and when the fraction is less than five-tenths, the next lower whole number shall apply. 
(3)  Unlisted uses. The off-street parking requirements for any use not specifically listed in Table 3.1 shall be the same as those for the use most similar to the proposed use, as determined by the building official. 
Table 3.1 
Off-Street Parking Standards 
LAND USE NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES Single-family, patio-cluster, townhouse, condominium, manufactured home 2.0 spaces per dwelling unit Multifamily apartments Per dwelling unit:  Efficiency: 1.0 per space  1 Bedroom: 1.5 spaces  2 Bedrooms: 2.0 spaces  3 or more bedrooms: 2.5 spaces 
Where offices are provided on-site, visitor parking must be provided as per the office parking requirements outlined in this section and where clubhouses are provided on-site, appropriate off-street parking must be provided as per the community centers/club requirements outlined in this section Two-, three-, and four-family duplex, etc., apartments 2.0 spaces per unit Rooming, lodging or boarding houses 1.5 spaces per rental sleeping room Bed and breakfast 1 space per guestroom, plus 2 spaces per owners unit Churches, temples, synagogues 1 space per 4 seats in auditorium/chapel Community centers, clubs, lodges, etc. 1 space per 4 seats or 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater Game courts (tennis, racquetball, etc.) 4 spaces per court Golf courses 6 spaces per hole + 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area of public building(s) Hospitals and sanitariums 1.5 spaces per bed + 1 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area of emergency room and outpatient care (where such care is specifically provided) Libraries and museums 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area Nursing home, rest home, convalescent center 1 space per 3 beds + 1 space per administration and staff Parks, playgrounds, play-fields 2 spaces per acre Kindergarten and elementary 1 space per faculty and staff + 1 space per 12 seats in auditorium/assembly area Junior high or middle 1 space per faculty and staff + 1 space per 8 seats in auditorium/assembly area High schools 1 space per faculty and staff + 1 space per 4 students College education facilities 1 space per faculty and staff + 1 space per 3 students Swimming pools 1 space per 150 square feet of pool area Automobile and equipment sales and rentals:  For showroom, office area 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area  For outside lot 1 space per 2,500 square feet of paved storage/display area  For service area and body shop 4 spaces per bay and working area Auto repair shop 4 spaces per bay and working area Convenience store 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area (not in shopping center) Day care center 1 space per 10 children enrolled + 1 space per employee Flea market 1 space per 150 square feet of display area Funeral homes or mortuaries 1 space per 4 seats in the chapel(s) or auditorium(s) Furniture store 1 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area Horticulture, nursery 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area + 1 space per 2,500 square feet of greenhouse and yard storage area Kennel 1 space per 400 square feet of kennel area Laundry and dry cleaning services 1 space per 300 square feet of customer service area + 1 space per 500 square feet of remaining gross floor area For office 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area For manufactured home sales, display area 1 space for 10,000 square feet of area devoted to the sale, display or storage of manufactured homes Motel or hotel 1.5 spaces per motel/hotel unit + the number of spaces required by this section for any bar, restaurant or other related facility Nightclubs, bars, etc. 1.5 spaces per 100 square feet Business, professional, governmental 1 space per 350 square feet of gross floor area Banks 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area Medical 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area Personal services (beauty salons, barber shops, etc.) 3 spaces per chair or work station Arcades 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area Dance halls 1 space per 4 seats Golf driving range 1 space per driving station Health clubs 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area Rental, general 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area Retail, outdoor sales 1 space per 500 square feet of outdoor sales area Sports arenas, stadiums, gymnasiums, etc. 1 space per 4 seats Theaters 1 space per 4 seats Restaurant 1 space per 3 seats, w/bar add 1.5 per 100 square feet of gross floor area Restaurant, fast-food 1 space per 100 square feet of gross floor area Discount store 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area Hardware, paint, home improvement stores and lumber yards 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area Shopping center 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area Supermarket 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area Self-storage, mini-storage (climate control only) 1 space per 20 storage stalls + 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area of office space Service station, oil change shop 4 spaces per bay and working area Veterinarian office, pet grooming, etc. 1 space per 200 square feet of examining, operating or grooming areas, plus 1 space per 400 square feet of additional floor area Industrial, manufacturing, fabricating, finishing, printing 1 space per 650 square feet of gross floor area Recycling operations 1 space per 500 square feet, with a minimum of 3 spaces Scrap operations, junk yards 1 space per employee + 2 spaces per acre Warehousing, shipping, receiving 1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area Wholesaling, storage distribution 1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area  
(4)  Mixed uses. For mixed uses, the parking requirements shall be tabulated separately for each use within the development, using the specific standards listed in Table 3.1. Mixed uses regulated under separate parking requirements shall not be combined to achieve a larger square footage total that would result in a reduced parking requirement. If any part of a mixed use is converted to another use category, then the parking requirements shall be recalculated based on the new square footage figure. 
(5)  Large-scale developments. When the developer of a large-scale development can demonstrate that such development will require fewer parking spaces than required by the standards contained herein, the building official may allow a reduction in the number of required parking spaces for the development. Such a reduction in parking spaces shall be justified through the development of a parking study prepared by a professional traffic engineer or professional transportation planner and submitted to the building official. The building official shall forward the study to the planning commission for consideration. This provision shall not be used as a means to reduce the size of a parcel of land needed to accommodate a development. The balance of the land necessary to meet these requirements shall be held in reserve as an undeveloped area, to meet any future needs generated by an expansion of the business, a change in land use, or under-estimated parking demand. 
(6)  Working shifts. Where a manufacturing/industrial use has more than one working shift of employees, parking facilities should be adequate to accommodate overlap requirements during transition periods. 
(7)  Historic structures. When the parking standards of Table 3.1 are applied to a historic structure, as defined herein and such requirements would detrimentally affect the historic character of the property, the building official may reduce the parking requirement. Such reduction may only be allowed if the building official, in consultation with the chief of police or his designee determines that on-street parking in the vicinity of the use will not create a hazardous condition or detrimentally affect traffic movements. 
(8)  Employee/staff parking. Accommodations shall be included for all applications. 
(c)  Parking space dimension requirements. 
(1)  Standard parking space. Standard dimensions for pull-in parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet wide and 18 feet in depth. Parallel parking space dimensions shall be a minimum of 24 feet in length and ten feet in depth. 
(2)  Accessible parking spaces. Spaces should be constructed in accordance with the Texas Accessibility Standards or Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 1-9-12) 
Secs. 18-80-18-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-05, adopted Feb. 13, 2017, amended art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. IV, §§ 18-96-18-105, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Code 1978, §§ 6-30-6-38; Ord. No. 1989-01, adopted Jan. 23, 1989; and Ord. No. 1989-07, § 6-39, adopted Mar. 27, 1989. 
Charter reference- Authority of city to provide for the condemnation of buildings, § 17(12). 
Cross reference- Department of community development, § 2-1; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30. 
State Law reference- Dangerous structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001 et seq.; removal or destruction of structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.012. 

Sec. 18-96. - Definitions. 
    The words and phrases contained herein shall have the following meanings ascribed to them unless the context states otherwise: 
    Abatement. Any action the city may take on public or private property and any adjacent property as may be necessary to remove or alleviate a nuisance, including, but not limited to, demolition, removal, repair, boarding and securing or replacement of property. 
    Administrative enforcement order. An order issued by the building and standards commission, after a hearing, requiring a responsible person to correct a violation, abate a public nuisance, pay civil penalties and administrative costs or take any other action as authorized or required by this article and applicable state codes. Such term may also include an order authorizing the city to abate a public nuisance or assess a code enforcement lien. 
    Building. Includes, but is not limited to, any building, fence, awning, canopy, sign, shed, garage, house, tent, trailer or other structure whatsoever. 
    Building standards commission. A board appointed by the city council to conduct administrative hearings under this article as authorized in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54. 
    Code enforcement official. Any person authorized to enforce violations of this article or applicable state codes. 
    Minimum standards. The minimum standards for continued use and occupancy of a building as set forth in section 18-98 herein. 
    Owner of record. Any person, agent, firm, corporation or governmental agency shown to be the owner or owners of a building in: 
(1)  The real property, assumed name, or appraisal district records of the county; 
(2)  The tax and utility records of the city; or 
(3)  The records of the Secretary of State. 
    Public nuisance. 
(1)  Whatever is dangerous to human life or health; whatever renders the ground, water, air or food hazardous to human life, or health, or that is offensive to the senses; or that is or threatens to become detrimental to the public health; or 
(2)  Any building that creates a hazard to health, safety, comfort or welfare. 
    Substandard building. Any building that does not comply with the minimum standards. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 18-97. - Abatement. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, or other person in control of a building to allow that building to be in a condition that does not conform to the minimum standards, as defined herein. 
(b)  Any building that does not conform to the minimum standards is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated by vacation, relocation of occupants, repair, demolition, or removal, as necessary, upon the issuance of an order to abate issued in accordance with the procedures specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 18-98. - Minimum standards. 
    A building is considered not to meet the minimum standards of the city for continued use and occupancy of a building, regardless of its date of construction, under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Any building that is dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to public health, safety and welfare, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Any building with roof, ceiling, floors, walls, sills, windows, or foundation or any combination thereof rotted or decayed, and falling apart; or that is uninhabitable due to obsolescence and deterioration caused by neglect, vandalism, fire damage, old age, or the elements; 
b.  Any building intended for human occupancy that is in danger of falling and injuring persons or property; 
c.  Any building that is a fire menace because it is in a dilapidated condition, as described in subsections (1)a. and b. above, or that is likely to become a fire menace or be set on fire; 
d.  Any building that is in unsanitary condition and is likely to create disease because of the presence of insects, rodents or vermin; 
e.  Any building that is damp and in unsanitary condition and is likely to create disease and sickness because of being in the condition in subsections (1)a., b., c. or d. above, or for other reasons; 
f.  Any building intended for human occupancy that does not contain a minimum floor area of at least 150 square feet of floor space for one occupant and 100 square feet of floor space for each additional occupant; 
g.  Any building that has holes, cracks or other defects in it, or does not have railings for stairs, steps, balconies, porches, and elsewhere, thereby constituting a danger to persons or property; 
h.  Any building intended for human occupancy that is not weather-tight and watertight, or that does not have a moisture-resistant finish or material for the flooring or subflooring of each bathroom, shower room and toilet room; 
i.  Any building occupied by humans that does not have in operating condition a connection to discharge sewage from the structure or land into a public sewer system (where such is available), a toilet connected to a water source and to a public sewer system (where such is available), connection to potable water at adequate pressure, and a kitchen sink, bathtub or shower, and lavatory connected to a cold and hot water source; 
j.  Any building occupied by humans that does not have in operating condition heating equipment capable of maintaining a minimum inside temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit between November 1 and April 15 of each year in each room; 
k.  Any building intended for human occupancy that does not have exterior windows and doors that are easily opened to provide air ventilation and are covered with screens for keeping out insects and each opening of the structure, or air conditioning equipment capable of maintaining a maximum inside temperature of 85 degrees Fahrenheit or 20 degrees lower than the outside temperature, whichever is warmer, between April 16 and October 31 of each year; or 
l.  Any building intended for human occupancy that does not have operating supply lines for electrical service, if electric service is available within 300 feet of the building, or that does not have operating electrical circuits and outlets sufficient to safely carry a load imposed by normal use of appliances and fixes. 
(2)  Any building that is not occupied by its owners, lessees or other invitees and is not secure from unauthorized entry so that it could be entered or used by uninvited persons or children regardless of its structural condition. 
(3)  Any building that is boarded up, fenced or secured if: 
a.  The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or 
b.  The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or use of the building. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 18-99. - Authority. 
(a)  The city manager or any of the city's designated code enforcement officials, including staff members of the code enforcement department ("code enforcement officials") shall have the authority and powers necessary to gain compliance with the provisions of this article. Such powers include the power to issue notices of violation, inspect public and private property and use whatever judicial and administrative remedies are available under this article or applicable state laws. The city manager or any designated code enforcement official are authorized to enter upon any property or premises to ascertain whether the provisions of this article or applicable state codes and statutes are being obeyed, and to make any examinations and surveys as may be necessary in the performance of their enforcement duties. Such duties may include the taking of photographs, samples or other physical evidence. 
(b)  The owner, occupant, or other person in control of a building or structure shall be notified of any violation of this article. If said persons fail to respond to the notification, any code enforcement official shall have the authority to file a complaint with the city's municipal court system concerning the violation. Failure to appear on the date of the hearing shall result in the court issuing a warrant for the person's arrest relating to the violation described in the complaint. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with a code enforcement official in the performance of his or her duties and enforcement under this section. 
(d)  The city may secure a building that it determines does not meet the minimum standards and is unoccupied or occupied only by persons who do not have a right to possess the building. 
(e)  Before the 11th day after the date the building is secured, the city shall give notice to the owner of record by: 
(1)  Personally serving the owner with written notice; 
(2)  Depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the owner at the owner's last known post office address; 
(3)  Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten-day period in a newspaper of general circulation in the city if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown; or 
(4)  Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown. 
(f)  The notice shall contain identification of the building and the property on which it is located, a description of the existing violation(s) of the minimum standards, and a statement that the municipality will secure or has secured the building. 
(g)  The notice shall also state that the owner may request a hearing about any matter related to the city's securing of the building, and that if such a hearing is requested, it shall be held pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.0011(e) and heard by the building standards commission. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 18-100. - Inspection and notice of abatement. 
(a)  Inspection. The city manager shall designate the building official or a code enforcement official to inspect or cause to be inspected any building the official has probable cause to believe does not meet the minimum standards. All inspections, entries, examinations and surveys shall be done in a reasonable manner. If the code enforcement official is unable to obtain permission to search the building from the owner or a person in control of the premises, the code enforcement official shall obtain an administrative inspection warrant as provided for by Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. article 18.05. 
(b)  Determination. After completing the inspection, the inspecting official shall determine if the building is a dangerous building, as defined herein. 
(c)  Notice of abatement. After an initial determination that a building is a substandard building, the inspecting official shall notify the owner of record of the building, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the nature of the violation(s) of the minimum standards. The inspecting official shall also notify the owner of record of the building that the building is dangerous and that the owner must vacate and/or repair, demolish, or remove the building for the good of the public health, safety and welfare. A notice shall be posted on the dangerous building as follows: 
"THIS BUILDING IS DANGEROUS ACCORDING TO THE MINIMUM STANDARDS SET FORTH IN THE OFFICIAL CODE OF THE CITY, CHAPTER 18, ARTICLE IV AND THE OWNER MUST REPAIR, DEMOLISH OR REMOVE IT. CONTACT ____________________ AT ________________ FOR FURTHER INFORMATION. 
DATE ______________________________" 
(d)  Request for public hearing before building standards commission. If the owner does not reply or take action within 15 days from the date the notice was mailed, the inspecting official may request that a public hearing be held before the building standards commission, as defined in section 18-101, to determine whether the building complies with the minimum standards set forth in this article. The city shall then order a public hearing. 
(1)  If a public hearing is ordered, the city shall make a diligent effort to discover the identity and address of the owner(s) of record and any lienholders or mortgagees of the building and the underlying property. 
(2)  The city shall notify each owner, lienholder, or mortgagee by certified mail, return receipt requested, and notify any unknown owners by posting a copy of the notice on the front door of each improvement situated on the affected property or as close to the front door as practicable that a public hearing will be held in reference to the building and that the interested party may appear at the public hearing, be heard, and present evidence in reference to the condition of the building. The notice shall further advise the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee or unknown owner that he will have the burden of proof at such hearing and will be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required to make the building comply with this article and the amount of time it will take to reasonably perform the work. 
(3)  The city will publish notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The city may also file a notice of the public hearing in the official public records of real property in the county. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner of the property (if it can be determined from a reasonable search of county records), a legal description of the affected property and a description of the proceeding, including the date, location and time of the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-13-17) 
State Law reference- Warrants for fire, health and code inspections, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 18.05. 
Sec. 18-101. - Building standards commission. 
(a)  Created. In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54, the city hereby creates a building standards commission consisting of one, seven-member panel to be appointed by the city council for a term of two years. Each member of the panel shall be a resident of the city or city ETJ and two of whom shall be from a minority group if available. In addition, the building official, fire inspector and health officer shall be ex-officio non-voting members of the building standards commission. The building standards commission shall conduct its activities and enforce this article in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Code. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The building standards commission shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Require the reduction in occupancy load of an overcrowded structure or vacation of a structure that is hazardous to the health, safety and welfare of the occupants; 
(2)  Permit the repair of a substandard structure as an alternative to demolition of the structure; or 
(3)  Require the demolition of structures found to be substandard; 
(4)  Require the removal of personalty from a structure ordered vacated or demolished. Removal may be accomplished by use of city forces or a private transfer company if the owner of the personalty is not known, the whereabouts of the owner cannot be ascertained or the owner fails to remove the personalty. The building and standards commission may cause any personalty removed to be stored in the care and custody of a bonded warehouse facility. Cost of removal and storage is the responsibility of the owner of the personalty; 
(5)  Require that a vacant structure or vacant portion of a structure constituting a hazard be securely closed and made safe; 
(6)  Grant a variance when, in the opinion of the building and standards commission, a literal interpretation of the city's housing standards regulations would result in an imposition of an unnecessary or unreasonable hardship; and 
(7)  Interpret the provisions of this article in a way so as to carry out their intent and purpose and, from time to time, as it deems advisable, make suggestions and recommendations to the city council for improvement of the city's housing standards regulations. 
(c)  Applicability. This provision applies only to buildings that are considered not to meet the minimum standards defined in section 18-98, herein. This section does not affect the ability of a municipality to proceed under the jurisdiction of the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-13-17) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; department of community development, § 2-1. 
Sec. 18-102. - Receiver. 
    The city may bring an action in district court against an owner of residential property that is not in substantial compliance with the minimum standards and request the appointment of a receiver for purposes of rehabilitating the property pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.003. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 18-103. - Order to abate. 
(a)  If it is found at the public hearing that the building is in violation of the minimum standards, one of the following orders or any combination thereof may be issued by the building standards board: 
(1)  An order to secure or vacate the building and relocate occupants; or 
(2)  If it is determined that the order provided for in subsection (a)(1) above is not sufficient to protect the public health, safety or welfare, an order may be issued to repair, demolish or remove the building within a reasonable time. 
(3)  The decision of the building standards commission to secure, vacate, repair, demolish or remove a building shall be forwarded as a recommendation to the city council to review and consider at the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(b)  If the decision of the building standards commission is upheld by the city council the city shall promptly mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of any order issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section to the owner of record of the building and to any lienholder or mortgagee along with a notice containing an identification of the building and the property on which it is located; a description of the violation(s) of the minimum standards; a statement that the municipality will secure, vacate, repair, remove or demolish the building if the ordered action is not taken by the owner within a reasonable time. 
(c)  The order shall allow the owner 30 days to complete the ordered action, unless it is determined from the evidence presented at the public hearing that additional time is required. If more than 30 days is allowed to repair, remove or demolish the building, specific time schedules shall be established for the commencement and performance of the work. 
(d)  The order shall also state that any lienholders or mortgagees of the building and/or the underlying property shall have an additional 30 days to complete the ordered action if the owner fails to comply within the time allotted in subsection (c) above. 
(e)  The owner, lienholder or mortgagee may not be allowed more than 90 days to complete any part of the work required, remove or demolish the building unless the requirements of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001(k) are met. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-13-17) 
Cross reference- Appeals from decisions of department of community development, § 2-2. 
Sec. 18-104. - Filing and publication of order. 
    Within ten days following the date that an order is issued, the building standards commission shall: 
(1)  File a copy of the order in the office of the city secretary; and 
(2)  Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice containing the following: 
a.  The street address or legal description of the property; 
b.  The date the hearing was held; 
c.  A brief statement indicating the results of the hearing and the contents of the order; and 
d.  Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 18-105. - Appeal and judicial review. 
    Any owner, lienholder or mortgagee of record of a property jointly or severally aggrieved by any order issued under this article shall be entitled to judicial review in district court. A petition must be filed in district court by an owner, lienholder or mortgagee within 30 days after delivery of said order pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.0012. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 18-106. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  Criminal violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. A violation of any of the provisions or failure to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this article shall constitute a class C misdemeanor punishable by the maximum fine allowed by law and authorized by state statutes or other provisions of this article. Each such person may be charged with a separate offense for each and every day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall, upon conviction, be punished accordingly. 
(b)  Civil violations. In addition to any other remedy provided by this article, any provision of this article or applicable state law may be enforced by injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction upon a suit brought by the city. As part of a civil action filed to enforce provisions of this article, a court may assess a maximum civil penalty as allowed by law per violation of this article or state law for each day during which any person commits, continues, allows or maintains a violation of any provision of this article or state law. 
(c)  Recovery of civil penalties. The city manager may collect all civil penalties and related administrative costs by the use of all appropriate legal means, including referral to the city attorney, the recordation of a code enforcement lien pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter and state law, and the filing of a court action to recover such penalties and costs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 18-107. - Defenses. 
(a)  The following defenses apply only to the assessment of a penalty as provided in section 18-106. They do not alter any other requirements in this chapter or prevent any other enforcement remedies or procedures available to the city. 
(b)  It is a defense to subsections 18-98(1)j. and k. of this article that: 
(1)  Failure to maintain heating and air conditioning equipment in compliance with those subsections was the direct result of an act of nature or other cause beyond the reasonable control of the owner and the owner is making diligent efforts to repair the heating and air conditioning equipment in compliance with those subsections; or 
(2)  A written contract [was] in effect requiring the tenant to provide and maintain heating and air conditioning equipment, and the owner has provided utility connections for such equipment in compliance with the building regulations in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 18-108. - Expense of lien. 
(a)  If an owner or other interested party does not vacate, secure, repair, remove, demolish, or relocate occupants of a building within the time allotted in an order issued pursuant to this article, the city may take the ordered action at its expense at the direction of the city manager. If the city repairs the building, such repairs shall only be to the extent required to meet minimum standards and only if the building is a residential building with ten or fewer dwelling units. 
(b)  As an alternative to subsection (a) a civil penalty may be assessed against the property owner for failure to repair, remove or demolish the building. A notice of penalty shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the property owner advising the amount and duration of the penalty, the date on which it is due, and notice that failure to pay said penalty shall result in a lien being placed on the property. 
(c)  In addition to subsections (a) and (b) above, the city may assess and recover a civil penalty against a property owner at the time of the hearing for violations of this article, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.0015. 
(d)  Any expenses incurred by the city pursuant to subsection (a) of this section and any civil penalties incurred by the owner pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) of this section will be assessed against the property on which the building stands or stood. The city will have a privilege lien upon filing same in the official public records of the county clerk subordinate only to tax liens against the property unless it is a homestead as protected by the state Constitution. Then lien will be extinguished if the property owner or other interested party reimburses the city for all expenses and penalties. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 18-109. - Voluntary conveyance of property to city for demolition. 
(a)  Upon approval by the city council and a determination by the city council that a certain property has value to the city, the city may take possession of property on which there is located a building that the owner has been ordered to demolish; this requires conveyance of the property by warranty deed to the city and may require payment by the property owner for some portion of the demolition and disposal or the administrative costs associated with the conveyance and demolition. The terms of this type of agreement must be reduced to writing, to be signed by both parties, and approved and accepted by the city council prior to conveyance. 
(b)  The city is permitted to dispose of certain demolition waste in a landfill owned and operated by the city under Permit by Rule No. 9002 issued to the city by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality under 30 Texas Administrative Code section 330.7(i). In accordance with state law, in order to dispose of the demolition waste in the permit-by-rule landfill, the city must acquire ownership of the property prior to disposing of the demolition waste in the landfill and must require the donor to provide clear evidence of the financial inability to demolish the structure and dispose of the waste. Any person wishing to convey property to the city under this section, must provide a sworn statement and financial documentation sufficient to establish the financial inability to demolish the structure and dispose of the waste. The terms of this type of agreement must be reduced to writing, to be signed by both parties, and approved and accepted by the city council prior to conveyance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 18-110. - Removal of debris required. 
(a)  Within 30 days after any building or structure is demolished or removed from any lot or tract of land: 
(1)  All debris must be removed from the property; 
(2)  All holes or depressions in the ground must be filled to grade level; 
(3)  All lumber, pipes and all other building materials must be removed from the property or stored in such a manner that they are not a hazard to safety and do not create a condition where rats are likely to live or mosquitoes likely to breed; 
(4)  All pipes and conduits must be removed from above grade and must be removed or sealed below grade; 
(5)  The foundation and all piers, pilings, steps, flatwork and other appurtenances shall be removed. 
(6)  An existing foundation and related appurtenances may be re-used if a valid building permit has been issued for construction reusing the existing foundation and related appurtenances, and the approved plans include a signed and sealed drawing, from a registered engineer, approving the re-use of the existing foundation and the elevation of the existing foundation meets the requirements of the city's flood prevention ordinance. 
(b)  Each owner and each person having control over the property on which the building or structure stood prior to removal or demolition is individually responsible for completing such work or causing such work to be completed. 
(c)  After all debris has been removed from the lot or tract of land, the owner or person having control over the property must provide fill dirt to eliminate any sunken areas due to the debris removal. The lot or tract of land must remain free of any sunken areas for a minimum of 90 days after all debris is removed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 18-111. - Report, inspection where work believed not completed. 
    It shall be the duty of all city employees to make a report in writing to the building official whenever such employee has reason to believe a building or structure has been demolished or removed from a lot of land and the work required by this article has not been completed. Upon receipt of such written report, the code enforcement department shall inspect the lot or tract, and if it is found that in fact the work required by this article has not been completed, the facts shall be reported to the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 18-112. - Notice to complete work. 
    Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the building official that a building or structure has been demolished or removed and that the work required by this article has not been completed, the building official shall cause written notice to be given by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the property or to any person having control over the property, setting out the work required by this article which has not been completed. In such notice, the building official shall order the owner of the property or person having control over the property to complete or cause to be completed all work required by the article within 30 days of service of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 18-113. - Means of securing buildings. 
    Buildings shall be secured according to the requirements stated in the most current adopted edition of the International Property Maintenance Code. In addition, the panels shall be fitted so as not to extend past the outer edge of the window or door. All boards and panels shall be painted as a means of protection from the outdoor elements. The paint color shall match, as close as possible, the existing exterior color of the building that is being secured. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-13-17) 
Secs. 18-114-18-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTRICAL CODE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1997-01, adopted Jan. 13, 1997, amended ch. 18, art. V, in its entirety as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, art. V contained similar provisions and was derived from Code 1978, §§ 6-39-6-48, 6-50-6-59, 6-65-6-79, and 6-85-6-87 and Ord. No. 1995-04, adopted Feb. 27, 1995. 
Cross reference- Electrical system in mobile home and/or travel trailer park, § 38-42. 

DIVISION 1. - ADOPTION OF THE TEXAS ELECTRICAL SAFETY AND LICENSING ACT 

Sec. 18-136. - Law. 
    V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1305, title 8, administered by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (effective September 1, 2003) [is hereby adopted by the city for regulation of electrical safety and licensing, except insofar as it may conflict with provisions of this article.] 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2004-13, 8-9-04) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-137. - Codes and rules adopted. 
(a)  The Administrative Rules of the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation 16 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 73 are hereby adopted, except insofar as they may conflict with provisions of this article. 
(b)  Effective March 2, 2018 at 12:01 a.m., the City of Wharton adopts the National Electric Code, 2017 Edition with its latest revisions except insofar as it does not conflict with amendments to the City of Wharton Code of Ordinances section 18-254 through section 18-261. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of these rules and regulations shall be subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-5 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 1999-05, § I, 4-15-99; Ord. No. 2002-05, 3-11-02; Ord. No. 2004-13, 8-9-04; Ord. No. 2005-003, 3-14-05; Ord. No. 2008-03, 3-24-08; Ord. No. 2011-13, 9-12-11; Ord. No. 2014-13, 12-18-14; Ord. No. 2018-03, 2-26-18) 
Sec. 18-138. - Electrical board-Created; membership; organization. 
(a)  There is hereby created an electrical board, which shall consist of five members. Members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council at any regular council meeting date between the election date set for the mayor's election and June 30 of the same year. Board members' appointments shall be for a period of two years, and any or all members may be removed by the mayor with council approval for reasons considered justifiable by the city council. Continued absence of any member from regular or called meetings of the board may render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. The chairman of the electrical board shall be elected by a majority vote of the board. Members of the electrical board shall be selected as follows: 
(1)  One member shall be selected from licensed and insured master electricians performing business with an established electrical contracting firm within the jurisdiction of the city. This member need not be the owner of such firm, but must be employed full-time by such firm. 
(2)  One member having had at least 20 years of experience as a master electrician, having no other affiliation with any other business that has additional representation on the electrical board, or a master electrician as stated in subsection (a)(1) above, provided that, he is employed by a different electrical contracting firm than the person in subsection (a)(1). 
(3)  One member shall be an employee of the power company, such power company being the one holding a franchise to transmit and distribute electrical energy within the city. 
(4)  One member shall be the city fire marshal/inspector. 
(5)  One member shall be selected at large from the city council. 
(b)  No meeting shall be considered official except when a majority is present. 
(c)  The city attorney shall be the electrical board's legal consultant. 
(d)  The chairman of the electrical board shall appoint a secretary to keep the official records of the board's actions, such records to be open for public inspection upon request of any taxpayer. 
(e)  Regular meetings of the electrical board shall be held on a basis to be determined by the board at the time of appointment. Special meetings of the board may be called by the chairman for conducting urgent business. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2004-001, 1-26-04; Ord. No. 2004-13, 8-9-04; Ord. No. 2014-13, 12-18-14) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 18-139. - Same-Duties. 
(a)  The electrical board shall review and recommend revisions of the electrical code, ordinances and regulations pertaining to local electrical work. 
(b)  The electrical board shall prepare reports to the city council indicating therein the official actions of the board. 
(c)  The electrical board may request suspension per V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1305.252 (chapter 1305) for just cause of the license under this chapter of a license holder working in its jurisdiction. 
(d)  The electrical board shall make such investigations regarding electrical work as is deemed necessary by a majority of the board members or as directed by the city council, city manager, building official or the electrical inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2014-13, 12-18-14) 
Sec. 18-140. - Same-Appeal from actions. 
    Any person dissatisfied with a decision of the electrical board shall have the right to appeal. Such appeal shall be perfected by addressing a letter to the city council within ten days after the action appealed from, stating such person's desire to appeal from such action. Upon receipt of notice of such appeal, the city council shall set the appeal down for hearing, and the city secretary shall notify the appellant and also the chairman of the electrical board of the date of such hearing. The city council shall have the right to affirm, modify or reverse the action and/or decision complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. If no appeal is taken within the time and in the manner provided in this section, the ruling of the electrical board shall be final. The action of the electrical board shall in all things be effective unless and/or until reversed or modified as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 18-141. - Electrical inspector-Creation of position; appointment; qualifications. 
(a)  The position of electrical inspector is hereby created. This position shall be filled by appointment by the city manager. The electrical inspector shall be the building official. 
(b)  The electrical inspector shall be well-versed in the rules and regulations as set out in this article and all local ordinances relating to electrical work shall be thoroughly versed in requirements of the latest edition of the National Electrical Code and the International Fire Code and shall maintain a library of such codes and ordinances in order to be of aid in maintaining uniformity in work requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2004-13, 8-9-04) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 18-142. - Same-Duties. 
(a)  The electrical inspector shall be responsible for the enforcement of this article and any other electrical ordinance, shall make or cause to be made thorough inspections of all electrical work, and may cause to be disconnected from any source of electrical energy any wiring not meeting the requirements as set out in this article and which is deemed hazardous to life and property. 
(b)  The electrical inspector shall cause to be issued for each job requiring any type of electrical work a permit and inspection report, shall see that the fees set out in this article are properly paid and that all persons doing electrical work within the city shall comply with this article and all related ordinances. 
(c)  The electrical inspector shall submit a written monthly report of the activities of his office to the city council at its second regular meeting. 
(d)  The electrical inspector and the electrical board shall work in close harmony. The inspector having authority to recommend and to enforce this article and other related ordinances; the electrical board to recommend standards, procedures and changes in the Code and to hear any appeals that may arise from decisions rendered by the electrical inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 18-143. - Same-Right of entry. 
    The electrical inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building, manhole or subway in the discharge of their official duties or for the purpose of inspecting the electrical apparatus or appliances therein contained, and for that purpose they shall be given prompt access to all buildings, private or public, and to all manholes and subways on application to the firm or individual owning or in charge or control of the buildings, manholes and subways. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 18-144. - Liability for damages. 
    This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any party owning, operating or controlling any electric wiring, apparatus, devices, appliances, fixtures or equipment for damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein; nor shall the city be held as assuming by this article any such liability because of the inspection authorized in this article or the certificates or approval issued as provided in this article or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 18-145. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in any sum not less than $100.00 nor more than the maximum provided in section 1-5 for each offense. If the terms or provisions of this article are violated by any corporation or firm, the officers and agents actively in charge of the business of such corporation or firm and the person actually performing the work for such corporation or firm shall be subject to the penalties provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 1999-05, § III, 4-15-99; Ord. No. 2012-01, 1-9-12; Ord. No. 2012-11, 9-10-12; Ord. No. 2015-15, 12-14-15; Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17; Ord. No. 2017-04, 2-13-17; Ord. No. 2017-05, 2-13-17; Ord. No. 2017-10, 8-28-17) 
Secs. 18-146-18-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES AND REGISTRATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-13, adopted Dec. 18, 2014, amended div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out, with the exception of § 18-171 which remains as codified. Former §§ 18-172-18-180, pertained to simialr subject matter and derived from: Ord. No. 1997-01, adopted Jan. 13, 1997; Ord. No. 2003-05, adopted Apr. 24, 2003; Ord. No. 2003-07, adopted Aug. 11, 2003; Ord. No. 2004-11, adopted June 14, 2004; and Ord. No. 2004-13, adopted Aug. 9, 2004. 

Sec. 18-171. - Compliance generally. 
    No person shall cause or allow any electric wiring or apparatus to be installed, altered or changed in any building or structure within the City of Wharton unless the person doing such work has been licensed in accordance with rules and regulations of the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulations for electricians. Each licensed electrical contractor, upon applying for the first permit with the City of Wharton, shall provide the city with certificates of insurance in the same amounts as required by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2004-13, 8-9-04) 
Sec. 18-172. - Electrical work done only by or under a licensed electrician. 
    No person or firm shall engage in the business of installing electrical wiring or apparatus within any building or structure or on any property within the city who does not hold a valid and unexpired State of Texas Master Electrician's License, and a State of Texas Electrical Contractors License. All journeymen and apprentices working under the master electrician on the jobsite shall be registered at no fee with the permit office. There shall be no more than ten apprentices supervised under the direction of one journeyman on the jobsite at any given time. 
    The only exception to the above, is electrical work performed in a dwelling or on a dwelling premises by the owner who resides in that dwelling and whose property is recorded as a homestead with the Wharton County Central Appraisal District. Any work so performed, however, must be permitted, inspected and approved the same as if it was performed by a licensed electrician. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, 12-18-2014) 
Sec. 18-173. - Suspension, withholding or revocation of licenses. 
    As described in V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1305.252 (chapter 1305). 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, 12-18-2014) 
Sec. 18-174. - Transferability. 
(a)  No electrical work shall be performed by any person not the holder of the required license. 
(b)  No person shall employ another person for doing electrical work unless such person proposed to be employed is the holder of the proper license. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, 12-18-2014) 
Sec. 18-175. - Identification of service vehicles. 
    As described in V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1305.166 (chapter 1305). 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, 12-18-2014) 
Secs. 18-176-18-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 18-201. - Permit required; exceptions. 
(a)  No alteration or change shall be made in the electric wiring or apparatus located within a building nor shall any such electric wiring or apparatus be installed in any building without first securing a permit therefor, except as provided in this section, nor shall any change be made in any wiring or apparatus after inspection without notifying the electrical inspector and securing a new permit therefor. 
(b)  No wiring, poles, duct lines, guy anchors, apparatus, devices, appliances, fixtures or equipment for the transmission, distribution or utilization of electrical energy for any purpose shall be installed within the city nor shall any addition be made to any such existing wiring, poles, duct lines, guy anchors, apparatus, devices, appliances, fixtures or equipment without first securing a permit therefor from the building official, except as follows: 
(1)  No permit shall be required for replacing fuses or lamps or the connection of portable equipment to suitable receptacles which have been permanently installed or for repairs to portable appliances. 
(2)  No permit shall be required for replacing flush or snap switches, receptacles, lamp sockets, the installation of lamps or minor repairs on permanently connected electrical appliances and lighting fixtures. 
(3)  No permit shall be required for the installation, maintenance or alteration of wiring, poles and down guys, apparatus, devices, appliances or equipment for telegraph, telephone, signal service or central station protective service used in conveying signals or intelligence, except where electrical work is done at a voltage over 50 volts and not more than 500 watts. 
(4)  No permit shall be required for the installation, maintenance or alteration of electric wiring, apparatus, devices, appliances or equipment to be installed by an electric public service company for the use of such company in the generation, transmission, distribution, sale or utilization of electrical energy. However, an electric public service company shall not do any wiring on a customer's premises other than wiring or repairs to apparatus which is part of the company's distribution system, including metering equipment, meter cabinets, and meter related connections wherever located and transformer vaults in which the company's transformers are located, nor shall any of its employees do any work other than that done for the company as provided in this subsection by virtue of this exception. 
(5)  No permit shall be required for the installation of temporary wiring apparatus,devices, appliances or equipment used by a recognized electrical training school or college. 
(6)  No permit shall be required for the installation and maintenance of railway crossing signal devices, when such is performed by due authority of the railroad and in accordance with the standards of the American Railroad Association and in collaboration with and approval of the city street department. 
(c)  Where no permit is required for the installation or repair of wiring, apparatus, devices or equipment for the transmission, distribution or utilization of electric energy for any purpose, the wiring, apparatus, devices or equipment shall be installed or repaired in conformity with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 18-202. - Permit issuance to licensed persons only. 
    No permit required in this division shall be issued to any person or firm who is not the holder of a valid and current Texas Master Electrician's License and Texas Electrical Contractor's License. 
    A licensed contractor may designate, by letter to the permitting department, an individual authorized to obtain permits for this contractor. This shall remain in effect until cancelled by the permitting department or the electrical contractor. 
    The only exception to the above is electrical work performed in a dwelling or on the dwelling premises by the owner who resides in that dwelling and whose property is recorded as a homestead by the Wharton County Central Appraisal District. Any work performed, however, must be permitted, inspected and approved the same as if it was performed by a licensed electrician. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2004-13, 8-9-04; Ord. No. 2014-13, 12-18-2014) 
Sec. 18-203. - Application for permit. 
    The application for a permit required in this division shall describe the work to be done and shall be made in writing by a person holding the proper Texas Master Electricians License and Texas Electrical Contractors License or homestead exemption. The permit when issued shall be issued to such applicant to cover such work as described and detailed. Any changes or additions must be covered by additional permits at the time changes are made. The application shall be accompanied by such plans, specifications and schedules as may be necessary to determine whether or not the installation as described will be in conformity with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2004-13, 8-9-04; Ord. No. 2014-13, 12-18-2014) 
Sec. 18-204. - Submitting plans and specifications; criteria for issuance of permit. 
(a)  Plans and specifications. With each application for a building permit (E) when required by the electrical inspector for enforcement of this article, two sets of plans and specifications shall be submitted. The electrical inspector may require that such plans and specifications be prepared and designed by and bear the seal of a registered professional electrical engineer licensed by the state to practice as such. 
(b)  Issuance criteria. 
(1)  The application, plans and specifications filed by an applicant for a building permit (E) shall be checked by the electrical inspector. Such plans may be reviewed by other departments of the city to check compliance with laws and ordinances under their jurisdiction. If the electrical inspector is satisfied that the work described in an application for the permit and the plans filed therewith conform to the requirements of this article and other pertinent laws and ordinances and that the fees as specified in this article have been paid, he shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant. 
(2)  When the electrical inspector issues the permit, he shall endorse in writing or stamp on both sets of plans and specifications, "Reviewed". 
(3)  The electrical inspector may issue a building permit (E) covering part of a building or structure before the entire plans and specifications for the whole building or structure have been submitted or approved, provided adequate information and detailed statements have been made complying with all pertinent requirements of this article. The holder of such permit may proceed without assurance that the permit covering the work in the entire building or structure will be granted. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2004-13, 8-9-04; Ord. No. 2014-13, 12-18-2014; Ord. No. 2017-10, 8-28-17) 
Sec. 18-205. - Issuance and display of permit. 
(a)  Plans, specifications and schedule shall not be submitted and will not be examined under this article, unless the plans, specifications and schedule are submitted by the holder of the proper electrician's license or electrical sign contractor's license. If it is found that the installation as described will in general conform to the requirements of this section and if the applicant has complied with all provisions of this article and all applicable ordinances of the city, a permit for such installation shall be issued. 
(b)  On all new construction, remodel or repairs the permit for electrical work shall be displayed in a readily accessible location, or as directed by the electrical inspector, throughout the time such installation, as is covered by the permit, is being installed. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2014-13, 12-18-2014) 
Sec. 18-206. - Effect of issuance and display of permit. 
(a)  The issuing or granting of a building permit (E) or approval of plans and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for or an approval of any violation of any of the provisions of this article or any other ordinance. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this article shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorizes is lawful. 
(b)  The issuance of a permit based upon plans and specifications shall not prevent the building official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in plans and specifications or from preventing building operations from being carried on thereunder when in violation of this article or any other ordinance of the city pertaining thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2017-10, 8-28-17) 
Sec. 18-207. - Lapse of permit. 
    Every permit issued by the building official under this article shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 120 days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work and provided, further, that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 18-208. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  The building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under this article whenever the permit is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or when in violation of any ordinance, regulation or any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any contractor who accepts payment for electrical work, then refuses to finish the work for which a permit was taken, shall, after written notification by the building official, be reported to the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation for possible license suspension. (See V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1305.252, Requested Suspension by Local Government.) 
(c)  Upon failure on the part of any electrical contractor or electrical sign contractor to correct any defect, error or deficiency in any work installed under the authority of an building permit (E) issued to him within ten calendar days after written notification thereof from the electrical inspector, the electrical inspector shall, without further notice, stop the issuance of permits to such electrical contractor or electrical sign contractor until such corrections have been made, inspected and approved. This subsection shall be cumulative of all other penalties provided in this article, and in addition thereto the penalties provided in this article may be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2004-13, 8-9-04; Ord. No. 2014-13, 12-18-2014; Ord. No. 2017-10, 8-28-17) 
Sec. 18-209. - Permit and inspection fees. 
    Payment of a building permit (E) and inspection fees shall be required as established by the City Council of the City of Wharton under separate resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 1999-05, § II, 4-15-99; Ord. No. 2002-05, 3-11-02; Ord. No. 2004-13, 8-9-04; Ord. No. 2017-10, 8-28-17) 
Sec. 18-210. - Same-Double for late payment. 
    All building permit (E), inspection, fixture and appliance fees shall apply, except that if any person shall make application for permit as provided in this article after the work has been started or after the work has been partially completed or concealed, such person shall pay double the fee that would originally be required. These double fees shall be paid by the person to whom the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2017-10, 8-28-17) 
Sec. 18-211. - Inspection-Prior to concealment. 
    No person shall conceal or cause to be concealed any electric wiring or apparatus mentioned in this article without the express permission of an electrical inspector. The electrical inspector is hereby authorized and directed to have removed any flooring, lathing or plaster, sheet metal or any other material which may conceal any electrical wiring or apparatus contrary to this article. On completion of the inspection of any electric wiring or apparatus designed to be concealed and found to be in full compliance with this article, the electrical inspector shall post a notice to that effect at the main disconnecting means or other conspicuous place, and the notice shall be considered as an express permission to conceal the electric wiring and apparatus, but no concealment shall take place until such notice has been posted by an electrical inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 18-212. - Certificate of satisfactory inspection; turning on current. 
    Upon completion of the installation or of any alteration or change of electric wires and apparatus in any building, the person doing the installation shall notify an electrical inspector who shall inspect the installation within a reasonable time. If the installation is in accordance with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city, the electrical inspector shall issue a certificate of satisfactory inspection which shall contain the date of inspection and an outline of the results of such examination, but no certificate shall be issued unless all apparatus, wires, etc., connected therewith are in strict conformity with the rules and regulations set forth in this article nor shall current be turned on any wiring apparatus until a certificate of satisfactory inspection is issued. All electrical construction, all material and all apparatus used in connection with electric work and the operation of all electrical apparatus shall be in conformity with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 18-213. - Remedying dangerous or unsafe conditions. 
    Where wires or apparatus are found in dangerous or unsafe condition or are deemed to be an interference with the work of the fire department, the electrical inspector shall notify the person owning, using or operating them to place them in a safe, secure and noninterfering condition. Any person failing, neglecting or refusing within a reasonable time to make the necessary repairs or changes and have the necessary work completed within a reasonable time after the receipt of the notice shall be deemed guilty of violation of this article, and every day which shall elapse after the expiration of the reasonable time until the wires and apparatus are repaired, removed or changed as required by the electrical inspector or fire marshal shall be considered a separate offense within the intent and meaning of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 18-214. - Interruption of current by fire chief or electrical inspector. 
    The chief of the fire department or an electrical inspector or a competent person delegated by them or either of them shall have the power to at once cause the removal of all wires or the turning off of all electric current where the circuits interfere with the work of the fire department during the progress of a fire. The electrical inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the turning off of electric current from all conductors or apparatus which are deemed by him to be in an unsafe condition or which have not been installed in conformity with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2004-13, 8-9-04) 
Secs. 18-215-18-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INSTALLATION AND EQUIPMENT STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 18-251. - Decision on questions. 
    The electrical inspector and the electrical board shall decide all questions not provided for in this article pertaining to the installation, operation or maintenance of electric wiring and apparatus. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2014-13, 12-18-2014) 
Sec. 18-252. - Conformity to standards; identification of maker of materials. 
(a)  No electrical material, apparatus, device, appliance, fixture or equipment shall be sold or installed in the city unless it is in conformity with this article, the statutes of the state and the rules and regulations issued by the state department of commerce under authority of the state statutes. 
(b)  The maker's name, trademark or other identification symbol shall be placed on all electrical materials, apparatus, devices, appliances, fixtures and equipment used or installed under this article. All items enumerated in this section shall be listed and/or labeled approved by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 18-253. - Use of approved wiring. 
    In general, any type of electric wiring or wiring system may be used in the city as approved in the national codes adopted in this article, except where specifically prohibited in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 18-254. - Services and feeders. 
    The use of service entrance cable type SE shall be prohibited for use as service entrance conductors. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2004-13, 8-9-04; Ord. No. 2018-03, 2-26-18) 
Sec. 18-255. - Placing meters on street side of buildings. 
    The electrical public service company shall never require the placing of a meter on the front or street side of a building unless not practical to locate the meter otherwise. In such cases the location shall be at a point convenient to the electric public service company and as determined by the electrical board. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 18-256. - No. 1 Fire Zone wiring methods-General requirements. 
    Wiring for electric light or power installed for general use in buildings or structures located within the No. 1 Fire Zone limit of the city shall be installed in metal raceways, flexible metal raceways, nonmetallic raceways encased in not less than 50 millimeters (two inches) of concrete, type MI, MC, or AC cable. 
    Exception. Wiring for special occupancies, special equipment and/or special conditions shall be installed in accordance with the provision of the National Electrical Code. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2004-13, 8-9-04; Ord. No. 2018-03, 2-26-18) 
Sec. 18-257. - Aluminum cable, conductors or wire. 
    No aluminum or copper-clad aluminum electric cable, conductors or wire shall be used within the city on any building, structure or apparatus wiring except as noted in this section. 
    Aluminum type conductors may be used in feeders or as service entrance conductors, provided that no such aluminum conductors smaller than number one AWG shall be used. Aluminum conductors, where permitted, shall be installed in conduit and shall only be used in conjunction with compatible lugs, spliced, terminals or connectors. Aluminum conductors shall not be used as grounding electrode conductors. With the exception, aluminum conductors consisting of either two or three insulated wires wrapped around a messenger cable in sizes number six AWG and larger may be used for outside branch circuits and feeders, provided they are installed in accordance with the provisions of the electrical code. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2018-03, 2-26-18) 
Sec. 18-258. - Type UF cable. 
    Type UF electric cable shall be used only for branch circuit wiring on residential properties. Where installed underground, the cable shall be buried in accordance with latest edition of the National Electric Code. The cable shall be protected by rigid conduit on exterior walls and at the points where it enters and leaves the ground. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 2014-13, 12-18-2014) 
Sec. 18-259. - Back wired wiring devices. 
    The use of back wired wiring devices shall be prohibited unless all wires are terminated either under the screw or by use of a screw activated clamp. Terminating wires by a spring tension clamp are expressly prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1997-01, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 18-260. - Use of 14-gauge conductor or wire in residential applications. 
    The use of 14-gauge conductor or wire shall be prohibited for residential applications. 
(Ord. No. 2000-09, 3-13-00; Ord. No. 2004-13, 8-9-04; Ord. No. 2008-03, 3-24-08; Ord. No. 2014-13, 12-18-2014) 
Sec. 18-261. - Service equipment disconnecting means for new construction. 
    The service disconnecting means shall be installed at a readily accessible location outside of a building or structure nearest the point of entrance of the service conductors. 
    Exception. In large commercial and/or industrial application, this requirement could be waived by the authority of the City of Wharton Electrical Board. 
(Ord. No. 2008-03, 3-24-08; Ord. No. 2018-03, 2-26-18) 
Secs. 18-262-18-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2006-06, adopted March 13, 2006, amended former Art. VI, §§ 18-301-18-305, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VI, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1978. 
State Law reference- Flood Control and Insurance Act, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.311 et seq. 

Sec. 18-301. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and methods. 
(a)  Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the V.T.C.A., Water Code 16.315 et seq., delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Wharton, Texas, does ordain as follows: 
(b)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the City of Wharton are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood loses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(c)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Avoid increasing flood levels or flood hazards or creating new flood hazard areas; 
(3)  Minimize public and private property losses due to flooding; 
(4)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(7)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(8)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
(9)  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area; and 
(10)  Preserve the natural floodplains where at all possible. 
(d)  Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, 3-13-06) 
Sec. 18-302. - Definitions. 
    [Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.] 
    Adverse impact for the purposes of this article means an increase in the base flood elevation or a decrease in floodplain storage volume. 
    Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
    Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    Appeal means a request for review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
    Appeals board means the City Council of the City of Wharton. 
    Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principle structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one- percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings or columns. 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMS' effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) see "Flood elevation study." 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding"). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway see "Regulatory floodway." 
    Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or; 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system, which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Special flood hazard area . See "Area of special flood hazard." 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Sections 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, 3-13-06; Ord. No. 2009-04, 5-26-09; Ord. No. 2017-15, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 18-303. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which this article applies. The article shall apply to all areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Wharton. 
(b)  Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the City of Wharton, Texas," dated December 21, 2017, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) dated December 21, 2017, and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(c)  Establishment of development permit. A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer or liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, 3-13-06; Ord. No. 2017-15, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 18-304. - Administration. 
(a)  Designation of the floodplain administrator. The city manager shall appoint the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. The appointee must be a certified floodplain manager (CFM), as certified by the Association of State Floodplain Administrators, or be able to obtain certification within six months. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Agency, which is the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with subsection 18-303(b), the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of section 18-305. 
(9)  Require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-030 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is first demonstrated by data submitted by the applicant in accordance with the various requirements and procedures as set forth in section 18-303 that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(c)  Development permit: procedures. 
(1)  Prior to undertaking any development activities in the regulatory floodplain, an application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and must include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
a.  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
c.  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 18-305(b)(3); 
d.  For new construction, substantial improvements or other development, including fill, within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, an analysis prepared by a registered professional engineer, architect, or surveyor that shows no increase to the regulatory base flood elevation and no decrease to floodplain storage volumes within the special flood hazard area; 
e.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
f.  Evidence that the applicant has applied for all applicable state and federal permits, including request(s) for a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map revision based on Fill (CLOMR-F) from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) if required to do so by the floodplain administrator; 
g.  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection 18-304(b)(1); 
h.  Payment of a floodplain development permit fee as established by the city council of the City of Wharton under separate resolution. 
(2)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
a.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
b.  Any adverse impact of the proposed development on flood levels or floodplain storage. 
c.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
d.  The danger those materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
e.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
f.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
g.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
h.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
i.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
j.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
k.  The inability of the developer to obtain required permits, including the denial of a request for a CLOMR or CLOMR-F by FEMA. 
(d)  Variance procedures. 
(1)  The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(2)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(3)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(4)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article. 
(6)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection(c)(2) of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(7)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article (section 18-301(c)). 
(8)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or other special flood hazard area if any increase in flood levels or decrease in floodplain storage volume during the base flood discharge would result. 
(9)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(10)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
a.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
b.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
1.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances, and 
4.  The posting in a local newspaper of the request for variance by the applicant at least one week prior to the appeal board meeting at which the variance will be considered. Included will be a description of the project, the reason for the variance, and the time, date, and location of the appeal board meeting. 
c.  For applications receiving a variance to construct below the base flood elevation, applicant shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.  An applicant who receives a variance for development, including placement of fill, in a special flood hazard area shall apply for a letter of map change from the Federal Emergency Management Agency if requested to do so by the floodplain administrator. 
(11)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
a.  The criteria outlined in subsections 18-304(d)(1)-(10) are met; 
b.  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety; and 
c.  The developer or owner pays an application for variance fee as established by the city council under separate resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, 3-13-06) 
Sec. 18-305. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(a)  General standards. Due to the relatively flat topography and intense rainfall that can occur in the City of Wharton and surrounding areas, flooding of structures may occur in all areas within the jurisdiction of the city. Therefore, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvement of any residential or nonresidential structures located in areas outside of the special flood hazard areas shall have the lowest floor elevated to at least 12 inches above the nearest street curb or natural ground, whichever is higher; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage and which avoid the creation of stagnant ponds or pools which may constitute a health hazard; 
(4)  The owner or developer of property to be developed shall be responsible for the conveyance of stormwater runoff flowing through the property. This responsibility includes the stormwater runoff flowing onto the property from any other developed property as well as the drainage naturally flowing through the property by reason of topography; 
(5)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(8)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(b)  Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in subsections 18-303(b), 18-304(b)(8), or 18-305(c)(3), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  All construction. 
a.  New construction and substantial improvement, including fill, must be shown to have no adverse impact, including the following items on occurrence of the base flood: 
1.  Increase in water surface elevation on land not owned by the applicant and which is outside public drainage or ponding easements or private easements held by the applicant. 
2.  Increase in peak discharge rate downstream of the proposed development. 
3.  The introduction into the flood hazard area of materials hazardous to public health or safety. 
4.  Increased erosion. 
b.  The space occupied by the fill or structure constructed below the base flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the base flood elevation on the site. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely to a watercourse or public drainage easement. 
c.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. 
d.  A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection is satisfied. 
(2)  Residential construction . New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in subsection 18-304(c)(1)a. is satisfied. 
(3)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the "base flood plus one foot" level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(4)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(5)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  All manufactured homes to be placed within an area of special flood hazard shall be installed using methods and practices, which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
c.  All manufactured homes shall be in compliance with subsections 18-305(b)(1) and 18-305(b)(2) of this section. 
d.  Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (b)(5) of this section be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
(6)  Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of subsection 18-304(c)(1), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in subsection (b)(5) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(c)  Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with subsections 18-301(b), 18-301(c) and 18-301(d) of this article. 
(2)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of subsection 18-303(c), subsection 18-304(c); and the provisions of section 18-305 of this article. 
(3)  The developer will provide base flood elevation data for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, if not otherwise provided pursuant to subsections 18-303(b) or 18-304(b)(8) of this article. 
(4)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(5)  All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(d)  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 18-303(b) are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation or elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one foot greater than the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation or elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one foot greater than the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below a level one foot higher than the flood depth number noted on the map (in an AO Zone), or below the base flood elevation plus one foot (in an AH Zone), level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in subsection 18-304(c) are satisfied. 
(4)  Within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(e)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 18-303(b) are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection 18-305(e)(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of section 18-305. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, 3-13-06; Ord. No. 2009-04, 5-26-09; Ord. No. 2017-15, 12-11-17) 
Sec. 18-306. - Enforcement: penalties, repealer, severability. 
(a)  No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the provisions of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a Class "C" misdemeanor. Any person who intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day a violation occurs is a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Wharton from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(b)  The city council may file suit for injunctive relief or civil penalties or both for any violation or threatened violation of this article. 
(c)  As an addition or alternative to the remedies of subsection 18-306(b), the city council may submit a declaration to FEMA that the property is in continuous violation of the article and for the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program to declare that the property, pursuant to Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, no longer qualifies for flood insurance. 
(d)  The City of Wharton, Texas, Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, contained in the City of Wharton Code of Ordinances, chapter 18, article 6, adopted May 24, 1982, together with all other ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent or in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(e)  In the event any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase, provision, sentence, or part of the article or the application of the same to any person or circumstances shall for any reason be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect, impair, or invalidate this article as a whole or any part or provision hereof other than the part declared to be invalid or unconstitutional; and the city council declares that it would have passed each and every part of the same notwithstanding the omission of any such part thus declared to be invalid or unconstitutional, or whether there be one or more parts. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, 3-13-06; Ord. No. 2017-15, 12-11-17) 
Secs. 18-307-18-325. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PLUMBING AND MECHANICAL RULES AND REGULATIONS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2006-21, adopted Oct. 23, 2006, amended former Art. VII, Divs. 1-3, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VII pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2002-11, § II, adopted May 28, 2002. 

DIVISION 1. - APPEALS AND ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 18-326. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a plumbing and mechanical appeals and advisory board, which shall consist of five members. Members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council at any regular council meeting date between the election date set for the mayor's election and June 30 of the same year. Board members' appointments shall be for a period of two years, and any or all members may be removed by the mayor with council approval for reasons considered justifiable by the city council. Continued absence of any member from regular or called meetings of the board may render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. The chairman of the plumbing and mechanical appeals and advisory board shall be elected by a majority vote of the board. Members of the plumbing and mechanical appeals and advisory board shall be selected as follows. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06) 
Sec. 18-327. - Membership. 
(a)  Two members shall be selected from state licensed master plumbers, one of which shall own or be employed full time in an established plumbing contracting firm whose principal business office is located within the city. 
(b)  Two members shall be selected from state licensed air conditioning and refrigeration contractors, one of which shall own or be employed full time in an established air conditioning and refrigeration contracting firm whose principal business office is located within the city. 
(c)  One member shall be a full time employee of the local gas utility company, such utility company holding a franchise to furnish natural gas within the city. 
(d)  The city building official shall be an ex-officio, non-voting member of the board. 
(e)  The city utilities director shall be an ex-officio, non-voting member of the board. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06) 
Sec. 18-328. - Organization. 
(a)  Three members of the plumbing and mechanical appeals and advisory board shall constitute a quorum. In varying the application of any provisions of this Code or in modifying an order of the building official, affirmative votes of the majority present, but not less than three affirmative votes, shall be required. No board member shall act in a case in which he has a personal interest. 
(b)  The city attorney shall be the plumbing and mechanical appeals and advisory board's legal consultant. 
(c)  The chairman of the plumbing and mechanical appeals and advisory board shall appoint a secretary to keep the official records of the board's actions, such records to be open for public inspection upon request of any taxpayer. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06) 
Sec. 18-329. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The board may establish rules and regulations for its owner procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. The board shall meet at regular intervals, to be determined by the chairman, or in any event, the board shall meet within ten days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by any interpretation of this Code or by any decision or ruling by the building official under this Code shall have the right to make an appeal to the plumbing and mechanical appeals and advisory board. 
(c)  Within a period of ten days from the filing of the appeal the board shall hear the appeal, together with the testimony of all parties concerned, and render a decision thereon within three days thereafter. In hearing such an appeal, the board shall not have the power to waive or set aside the requirements of this Code but shall have the power to interpret its provisions and in case of alternate types of construction or material, shall determine whether or not such alternate types of construction or materials hall determine whether or not such alternate types of construction or material is in fact equal to the standards of this Code, considering adequacy, stability, strength, sanitation and safety to the public health and welfare. 
(d)  Any person, firm or corporation who may be aggrieved by the decision of the board shall have the right to appeal. Such appeal shall be perfected by written notice addressed to the mayor or city council requesting a hearing by the council, and the action of the city council thereon shall be final to the city council within ten days from the rendition of such decision. Such appeal shall be perfected by written notice addressed to the mayor and city council within ten days after the action appealed from, stating such person's desire to appeal from such action. Upon receipt of notice of such appeal, the city council shall set the appeal down for hearing, and the city secretary shall notify the appellant and also the chairman of the plumbing and mechanical appeals and advisory board of the date of such hearing. The city council shall have the right to affirm, modify or reverse the action and/or decision complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. If no appeal is taken within the time and in the manner provided in this section, the ruling of the plumbing and mechanical appeals and advisory board shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06) 
Secs. 18-330-18-355. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLUMBING CONTRACTORS 

Sec. 18-356. - Compliance. 
(a)  No person shall cause or allow any plumbing work be installed, altered or changed in any building or structure within the city and/or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction, when any water or sewer is connected to the city system, unless the person doing such work has been registered under this article and has received a permit under this article to do that particular work. The master licensee is ultimately responsible for any work performed. 
(b)  The building official or code official shall be licensed by the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners as a plumbing inspection and shall enforce The Plumbing License Law and boards rules created by the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners and the code currently adopted by the City of Wharton as stated in Section 18-66, Codes adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06) 
Sec. 18-357. - Master plumbing license holder. 
    The master license holder shall: 
(1)  Provide a copy of their state plumbing license to the code enforcement department; 
(2)  Provide a copy of their driver's license or other source of picture identification to the code enforcement department; and 
(3)  Provide a certificate of insurance for the company to the code enforcement department. 
A certificate of insurance must: 
a.  Have the City of Wharton as the certificate holder; 
b.  Be written by a company licensed to do business in the State of Texas; 
c.  Provide for commercial general liability insurance for the master plumber for claims for property damage or bodily injury, regardless of whether the claim arises from a negligence claim or on a contract claim; and 
d.  Be in a coverage amount of not less than $300,000.00 for all claims arising in any one-year period for general liability. 
(4)  Be required to notify the code enforcement department of all employees that are working within the corporate jurisdiction of the City of Wharton city limits. This notification shall include a copy of their plumbing license and picture identification of such personnel. Also, a master licensee shall submit, in writing, notification of any personnel that is allowed to sign for a permit applied for by said company that the master licensee is responsible for. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06) 
Sec. 18-358. - Permit fees and inspection fees. 
    The holder of the master license making or supervising any installation, alteration or change within the city shall pay the city permit and inspection fees. The city provides for and establishes fees for plumbing and inspection fees, which the city will provide in accordance with the fees set forth by council. These fees will be adopted by council in the form of a resolution at such times as deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06) 
Sec. 18-359. - Required inspections. 
    The code enforcement department shall set forth required inspections. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06) 
Secs. 18-360-18-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. MECHANICAL CONTRACTORS 

Sec. 18-411. - Compliance. 
(a)  No person shall cause or allow any mechanical work be installed, altered or changed in any building or structure within the city unless the person doing such work has been registered under this article and has received a permit under this article to do that particular work. The master licensee is ultimately responsible for any work performed. 
(b)  The building official shall enforce the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation, Texas Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Contractor License Law and the code currently adopted by the City of Wharton as stated in section 18-66, Codes adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06) 
Sec. 18-412. - Holder of the class A or class B air conditioning and refrigeration contractor license. 
    The holder of the class A or class B air conditioning and refrigeration contractor license holder shall: 
(1)  Provide a copy of their state mechanical license to the code enforcement department; 
(2)  Provide a copy of driver's license or other source of picture identification to the code enforcement department; and 
(3)  Provide a certificate of insurance for the company to the code enforcement department. 
A certificate of insurance must: 
a.  Have the City of Wharton as the certificate holder; 
b.  Be written by a company licensed to do business in the State of Texas; 
c.  Provide for commercial general liability insurance for the master mechanical contractor for claims for property damage or bodily injury; regardless of whether the claim arises from a negligence claim or on a contract claim; and 
d.  Be in a coverage amount required by the Texas Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Contractor License Law according to the type of license held, class A or class B. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06) 
Sec. 18-413. - Permit fees and inspection fees. 
(a)  The holder of the class A or B air conditioning and refrigeration contract license making or supervising any installation, alteration or change within the city shall pay the city permit and inspection fees. The city provides for and establishes fees from mechanical and inspection fees, which the city will provide in accordance with the fees set forth by council. These fees will be adopted by council in the form of a resolution at such times deed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06) 
Sec. 18-414. - Required inspections. 
    The code enforcement department shall set forth required inspections. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, 10-23-06) 
Secs. 18-418-18-465. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DRAINAGE CRITERIA 

Sec. 18-466. - Adequate drainage. 
    Adequate drainage shall be provided by developers and their engineers within the limits of the City of Wharton. The protection of adjoining property shall be considered in the review of plans submitted to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, 6-10-13) 
Sec. 18-467. - Drainage criteria manual. 
    All drainage plans shall be developed in accordance with the Wharton County Drainage Criteria Manual. Wharton County's manual uses the following terms: "Drainage Regulation Entity"; "Drainage Review Authority"; "Wharton County"; "County or County's"; and "County Engineer". These terms appear throughout the manual so that other governmental entities such as the City of Wharton can adopt the criteria and a county-wide drainage coordination can be achieved. The City of Wharton hereby adopts the Wharton County Drainage Criteria Manual; therefore the generic terms mentioned above shall be generally defined as follows unless the specific context of a reference to the "county" should remain: 
"Wharton County": City of Wharton. 
"County" or "county's": City, or city's. 
"Drainage regulation entity": City of Wharton. 
"Drainage review authority": City engineer. 
"County engineer": City engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, 6-10-13) 
Sec. 18-468. - Variances. 
    Variances to the Wharton County Drainage Criteria Manual may be granted by the City of Wharton's engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, 6-10-13) 
Secs. 18-469-18-490. - Reserved. 
Chapter 22 - ELECTIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Nominations and elections, art. III. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 22-1. - Persons authorized to receive applications for places on ballot. 
    In the absence of the city secretary, either the city manager or the assistant city manager may receive and file applications for places on the ballot from candidates for election to city offices. 
(Code 1978, § 6.5-1) 
Charter reference- How to get name on ballot, § 36. 
State Law reference- Candidacy for public office generally, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 141.001 et seq.; candidate for city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 143.001 et seq. 
Sec. 22-2. - Write-in candidates and procedures. 
(a)  In any general election for the office of mayor or city councilman, a write-in vote shall not be counted unless the name written in appears on the list of write-in candidates. 
(b)  To be entitled to a place on the list of write-in candidates, a candidate must make a declaration of write-in candidacy and must file this declaration with the city secretary. 
(c)  A write-in candidate must file a declaration of write-in candidacy by no later than 5:00 p.m. on the 30th day immediately before the election day for the position that the write-in candidate is seeking; provided, however, if a candidate whose name is to appear on the ballot dies or is declared ineligible after the 33rd day immediately before the election day, a write-in candidate may file a declaration of write-in candidacy for the office sought by the deceased or ineligible candidate if the write-in candidate files this declaration not later than 5:00 p.m. on the 27th day immediately before the election day. 
(Ord. No. 1991-25, § 6.5-2, 11-12-91) 
State Law reference- Write-in candidate, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 146.001 et seq.; write-in candidate in city election, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 146.051 et seq. 
Chapter 26 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; interlocal police assistance, § 2-3. 
State Law reference- Emergency management, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001 et seq.; local and interjurisdictional emergency management, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.101 et seq. 

Sec. 26-1. - Director; coordinator; organization; funds. 
(a)  The mayor shall hold the office of emergency management director of the city in accordance with state law. 
(b)  An emergency management coordinator and a deputy emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director. The appointments of the emergency management coordinator and deputy emergency management coordinator must be confirmed by the city council. 
(c)  The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(d)  The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The funds and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
(Code 1978, § 7-1; Ord. No. 2003-08, 8-11-03) 
Sec. 26-2. - Responsibilities and duties of emergency management director. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  Conducting an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards that threaten life and property within the city, as well as conducting an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures that would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur; 
(2)  Supervising the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city and recommending for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan; 
(3)  Declaring a local state of disaster, which declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the city council (any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary); 
(4)  Issuing proclamations, regulations or directives necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter, which proclamations, regulations or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring their contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant to the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary; 
(5)  Directing and controlling the operations of the emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel; 
(6)  Determining all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency organization of the city; 
(7)  Maintaining liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations; 
(8)  Marshaling all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan; 
(9)  Supervising the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and drafting and executing, if deemed desirable, an agreement with the county in which the city is located, as well as with other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency management efforts; 
(10)  Supervising and authorizing the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions that may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city; 
(11)  Authorizing agreements, subject to the approval of the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes; 
(12)  Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services that could be used during a disaster, as provided for in this chapter; and 
(13)  Fulfilling other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act of 1975 (V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001 et seq.). 
(Code 1978, § 7-2) 
State Law reference- Declaration of local disaster, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.108; mutual aid, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.109. 
Sec. 26-3. - Emergency management plan. 
    A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign responsibilities, tasks, duties and powers and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division of emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3) 
State Law reference- Assistance in development of local plans, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.044; local and interjurisdictional emergency management plans, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.106; penalty for violation of emergency management plan, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.173. 
Sec. 26-4. - Interjurisdictional program. 
    The mayor is authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of other cities in the county to form an emergency management council for the county. The mayor shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency management insofar as this program may affect the city. 
(Code 1978, § 7-4) 
State Law reference- Interjurisdictional programs, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.104. 
Sec. 26-5. - Override. 
    At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Code 1978, § 7-5) 
Sec. 26-6. - Exemption from liability for damages resulting from activities under this chapter. 
    This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety. Neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee or any of the agents thereof who in good faith carry out, comply with or attempt to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of the activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for death of or injury to any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of or damage to the property of such persons. 
(Code 1978, § 7-6) 
State Law reference- Personal liability exemption of member of local emergency planning committee, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.174. 
Sec. 26-7. - Commitment of funds. 
    No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council, unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life or property. 
(Code 1978, § 7-7) 
State Law reference- Finance, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.071 et seq. 
Sec. 26-8. - Offenses; penalties. 
(a)  Obstructing, hindering or delaying emergency management members. It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter. 
(b)  Emblems, insignia. It shall be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless the proper officials have granted such person the authority to do so. 
(Code 1978, § 7-8) 
State Law reference- Impersonating public servant, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 37.11. 
Chapter 27 - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Corrected Ord. No. 2011-08, § adopted May 9, 2011, amended ch. 27 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 27, §§ 27-1-27-24, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2006-24, § 1, adopted Dec. 11, 2006. 

Sec. 27-1. - Establishment and purpose of the EMS. 
    Whereas there was a need for the establishment of a pre-hospital care system for the City of Wharton, the City Council of Wharton established the emergency medical services department for its citizens and caused to be created the structure to facilitate such a service in February 1972. The City of Wharton may enter into an interlocal agreement with ESD #3 to provide EMS services for their established service area. The purpose of this organization is to provide the citizens of the City of Wharton and the service area of the Wharton County Emergency Services District (ESD) #3 quality pre-hospital health care and make such services available for the medical community as may be needed. This service is to operate 24 hours a day 365 days a year. The service shall be operated according to the Texas Department of State Health Services guidelines and rules that govern such operations and the medical direction of an appointed medical director for the service. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08(Corr.), 5-9-2011) 
Sec. 27-2. - Ambulance service charges. 
    The city provides for and establishes charges and rates for ambulance service which the city will provide in accordance with the fees and rates set forth by council. These fees and rates for service will be adopted by council in the form of a resolution at such times as deemed necessary. The cost of materials used to care for patients will be adjusted from time to time at the discretion of the department as needed to reflect the costs of these materials. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08(Corr.), 5-9-2011) 
Sec. 27-3. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning: 
    Ambulance means a ground motor vehicle used, designed or redesigned, and equipped for the primary purpose of the transportation of sick or injured persons, whether functioning as a basic life support, advanced life support or mobile intensive care unit service level as provided by state law and this chapter. The term does not include an ambulance that is owned by the state or federal government or an agency or subdivision thereof and operated by its employees. 
    Ambulance personnel means persons certified or licensed by the Texas Department of State Health Services at the level of emergency care attendant (ECA), emergency medical technician (EMT), emergency medical technician-intermediate (EMT-I), or emergency medical technician-paramedic (EMT-P) who respond to life-threatening and nonlife threatening emergencies and unscheduled nonemergencies in an ambulance. 
    Ambulance service provider means a service other than local or state agency that provides ambulance service to the public. 
    City certification means the written authorization issued by the City of Wharton for a designated company to provide medical care or service to any patient for that level of care. 
    Designated representative means any person authorized by the director. The designated representative shall have authority to conduct inspections of vehicles, equipment, and performance of personnel. 
    Director means the director of the emergency medical services department. 
    Emergency call(s) means a telephone call or other similar communication from a member of the public, as part of a 9-1-1 system or other emergency access communication system, made to obtain emergency medical services. 
    Emergency care attendant (ECA) means a person certified by the Texas Department of State Health Services proficient to perform as required by the Texas Health and Safety Code and relevant regulations for that level of certification. 
    Emergency medical service means services used to respond to an individual's perceived need for immediate medical care and to prevent death or aggravation of physiological or psychological illness or injury or the transportation of such individual from one place to another. 
    Emergency medical technician (EMT) means a person certified by the Texas Department of State Health Services as minimally proficient to perform basic life support and as further required by the Texas Health and Safety Code and relevant regulations. 
    Emergency medical technician (EMT-I) means a person certified by the Texas Department of State Health Services as minimally proficient to provide emergency prehospital care by initiating under medical supervision certain procedures, as regulated by the Texas Health and Safety Code and relevant regulations. 
    Emergency medical technician-paramedic (EMT-P) means a person certified by the Texas Department of State Health Services as minimally proficient to provide advanced life support that includes initiating under medical supervision of certain procedures, as regulated by the Texas Health and Safety Code and relevant regulations. 
    Medical director means the physician that has been appointed by the Wharton City Council and has medical responsibility of procedures and protocols for the care of patients by an emergency medical service. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, or partnership. 
    Provider means an organization or business providing medical transfer services and holding a valid ambulance provider permit. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08(Corr.), 5-9-2011) 
Sec. 27-4. - Cumulative effect. 
    This chapter is cumulative of applicable state laws and regulations. This chapter establishes standards for the operation and services of ambulances that are stricter in many respects than those provided by applicable state laws and regulations. To the extent of any difference in the standards for operations or services of an ambulance between this chapter and state standards, then the more restrictive shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08(Corr.), 5-9-2011) 
Sec. 27-5. - Penalty. 
    (a) Any person or provider who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each day the violation continues shall be a separate offense. Each offense shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. 
    (b) Each day that any violation of this chapter is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
    (c) This section shall not serve to limit any other remedies available to the city in law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08(Corr.), 5-9-2011) 
Secs. 27-6-27-11. - Reserved. 
Sec. 27-12. - Ambulance provider permit. 
(a)  Any person who desires to operate an ambulance within the jurisdiction of the City of Wharton must obtain an ambulance provider's permit. Application should be made with the City Secretary of the City of Wharton. It shall be unlawful for any person, including a provider, other than an employee of the department officially on duty, or an agency of the United States, to furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise for, or otherwise be engaged in the operation of an emergency ambulance or the providing of emergency service in the city. It shall be unlawful to operate an ambulance within the jurisdiction of the city by picking up nonemergency patients without having an ambulance provider's permit, issued by the City of Wharton. A provider shall place its equipment and personnel at the disposal of the city manager in the event of a public calamity or major disaster. 
(b)  All emergency calls that originate in the City of Wharton will be responded to by the City of Wharton - Emergency Medical Service. In the event that a private ambulance service receives a direct call requesting an ambulance that originates within the City of Wharton, it will be the duty of the private ambulance service to immediately refer the emergency medical call to the City of Wharton - Emergency Medical Service (EMS). 
(Ord. No. 2011-08(Corr.), 5-9-2011) 
Sec. 27-13. - Requirements for ambulance provider permit. 
(a)  Application shall be filed with the city secretary on the ambulance provider permit form, subscribed, and sworn to before a notary public. The ambulance provider permit shall included: 
(1)  Complete name(s). 
(2)  Complete address (business and home). 
(3)  Phone numbers (business and home). 
(4)  Provide proof of licenses issued by the Texas Department of State Health Services. 
(5)  Proof of insurance as required by the requirements established by the Texas Department of State Health Services. 
(6)  Copy of types of ambulance(s) to be used and VIN, license plate numbers, make and model, year, and manufacturer of each unit. 
(7)  Each application shall be sworn to be true and correct upon personal knowledge by the applicant. 
(8)  Statement that the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the past ten years. 
(9)  Applicant's permanent residence and mailing address. If the person submitting the application represents a partnership, then such information shall be given on all partners and persons having an interest in the business. If a corporation, the name and location of its principal place of business, the name, date of birth, telephone number and address of all the officers, directors and all stock holders of the organization. If the applicant's business is a corporation or association, a copy of the documents establishing the business and the name, address, and citizenship of each person with a direct interest in the business. Corporate applicants must provide a certified copy of the corporate charter, articles of incorporation, and statement from the Secretary of State certifying that the corporation is in good standing. 
(10)  The application must be approved by the city council. 
(11)  There shall be three copies of all related information submitted to the City of Wharton for processing purposes. 
(12)  The company shall notify the City of Wharton EMS Director, in writing, of any change in location of the company's place of business. 
(13)  The company shall provide the City of Wharton EMS Director, in writing, a list of all personnel and of any and all changes in said personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08(Corr.), 5-9-2011) 
Sec. 27-14. - Application fee for emergency medical services certification. 
    The application fee per person, partnership, or corporation having applied for the City of Wharton Emergency Medical Services Certification shall be $500.00, thus being nonrefundable. An application fee may be approved for transfer by the city manager for a change in ownership. The transfer fee shall be $250.00. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08(Corr.), 5-9-2011) 
Sec. 27-15. - Equipment. 
(a)  A provider shall furnish at its own expense all vehicles and necessary equipment which meet the minimum standards of the department. 
(b)  The periodic inspection required hereunder shall be in addition to any other safety or motor vehicle inspection required to be made for ambulance or other motor vehicles in the State of Texas, or other inspections required to be made, under general laws and ordinances, and shall not excuse compliance with any requirements of law and ordinance to display any official certificate of motor vehicle inspection at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08(Corr.), 5-9-2011) 
Sec. 27-16. - Vehicles. 
    Each vehicle to be used shall comply with the following requirements and such other requirements or modifications as may be established by the department: 
(1)  Comply with the federal general services administration specifications KKK-A-1822 minimum requirements. 
(2)  Comply with the Texas Transportation Code. 
(3)  Shall be equipped as required by 25 Texas Administrative Code, § 157.12. 
(4)  Every ambulance must be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(5)  The director of EMS or his designee shall cause all ambulances to be inspected before being placed in service and shall thereafter inspect such ambulances no less than once each year. All permitted ambulances and or vehicles are subject to spot inspections with no notice. In the event an ambulance or vehicle fails to pass inspection, the chief EMS officer shall notify the ambulance operator to correct the defects noted in the inspection and, after such notification, the chief EMS officer shall cause such ambulance to be re-inspected within 48 hours. If upon such re-inspection the defects noted in the original inspection have not been corrected, the permit decal shall be removed from the ambulance or vehicle and shall only be replaced upon such ambulance or vehicle after the defects have been corrected. 
(6)  No ambulance that has been substantially damaged or altered, or has received damage where the repair costs exceeds $1,000.00, shall be again placed in service until it has been repaired and re-inspected by the chief EMS officer. There will be no charge for re-inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08(Corr.), 5-9-2011) 
Sec. 27-17. - Personnel. 
(a)  Each vehicle shall be staffed at the level required by Texas Department of State Health Services. 
(b)  A provider shall maintain a current personnel file on each employee. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08(Corr.), 5-9-2011) 
Sec. 27-18. - Insurance. 
    A provider shall maintain a valid certificate of insurance coverage for the duration of the ambulance provider permit. The provider and/or insurance carrier is responsible for providing the certificate of insurance coverage to the City of Wharton prior to the expiration of the current policy. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08(Corr.), 5-9-2011) 
Sec. 27-19. - Terms. 
(a)  A provider's permit shall be personal to the holder and may not be sold, transferred or assigned, including any assignment by operation of law without consent from the City of Wharton. Unless sooner revoked, a provider permit is valid from date of issue until December 31st of that calendar year. Prior to any placement in service or replacement of an ambulance, the provider will submit the required information on the ambulance along with a fee of $20.00/unit per month from the date of the application through December 31st of that calendar year. 
(b)  The fee for the period January 1st through December 31st shall be $240.00/unit. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08(Corr.), 5-9-2011) 
Sec. 27-20. - Renewal. 
    Renewal application shall be filed at least 60 days prior to expiration in order to ensure any action before expiration of the permit. Prior to any placement in service or replacement of an ambulance, the provider will submit the required information on the ambulance along with a fee of $250.00/unit. The city manager shall have the authority to approve a renewal permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08(Corr.), 5-9-2011) 
Sec. 27-21. - City certification required. 
    No person shall furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise be engaged in the operation or control of any ambulance upon the public street or thoroughfare in the city, attend or render any care to any patient for compensation without having been issued city certification by the city in accordance with the terms and provisions set forth. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08(Corr.), 5-9-2011) 
Sec. 27-22. - Display of city certification. 
    The city certification shall be displayed on the issued ambulance on the back window on each permitted vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08(Corr.), 5-9-2011) 
Sec. 27-23. - Notification. 
    The City of Wharton and the city secretary shall be notified immediately if the ambulance provider receives any deficiencies from the Texas Department of State Health Services. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08(Corr.), 5-9-2011) 
Sec. 27-24. - Termination, suspension. 
(a)  The director or his designee may immediately suspend the operations, in whole or in part, of a provider if the director determines that continued operation by the provider would endanger the health, safety, or welfare of the public. The director shall present a written determination to the provider, detailing the deficiencies or violations forming the basis of is/her determination and setting therein a reasonable period for compliance. The city may cause an ambulance service provider's permit to be terminated or may refuse renewal as provided in this section. 
(1)  Failure to meet the requirements. in this chapter; 
(2)  Failure to pay the city certification fee; 
(3)  Violation of rules in this chapter; 
(4)  Failure to maintain Texas Department of State Health Services standards; 
(5)  Failure to maintain insurance requirements; 
(6)  Lapse in permit, process shall begin with $500.00 nonrefundable application fee. 
(b)  In the event that the ambulance service provider fails to comply with any other applicable requirement as set forth in this document or in the event that the permit was issued through error or on the basis of materially false or incomplete information, the city may give the service provider written notice of the grounds and may schedule a hearing regarding the termination of the permit or the refusal to renew the permit, as applicable. The ambulance service provider shall be given written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing. 
(c)  A failure to achieve compliance shall convert the suspension to a termination. A provider may appeal a termination to city council by filing a request with the director within ten days of the termination. The city council may uphold, vacate, or modify the director's determination. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08(Corr.), 5-9-2011) 
Sec. 27-25. - Denial. 
(a)  The city council has the authority to deny an application for an ambulance provider permit. The city council shall notify the applicant, in writing, if the application for permit has been denied and shall provide a reason(s) for denial. 
(b)  Upon denial of an ambulance provider permit application, the applicant shall not have authority to operate in the City of Wharton for a duration of one year from the date of denial. During the denial period, the ambulance provider may not submit a new application with the same ownership with a different business named operation. The ambulance provider may apply for an ambulance provider permit after the one-year duration and submit the required nonrefundable $500.00 application fee along with the required documentation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08(Corr.), 5-9-2011) 
Sec. 27-26. - Exemption. 
    The ambulance provider permit application and requirements shall not apply to nonprofit organizations or public agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08(Corr.), 5-9-2011) 
Chapter 30 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-15, adopted Oct. 22, 2012, amended ch. 30 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 30, §§ 30-1-30-133, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Code 1978, §§ 8-1-8-3, 8-5, 8-6, 8-21-8-31, 8-41-8-47 and 8-51, 8-52; Ord. No. 1989-08, § 8.32, adopted Mar. 27, 1989; Ord. No. 1991-29, §§ 8-46-8-49, adopted Dec. 10, 1991; Ord. No. 1995-11, adopted Nov. 27, 1995; Ord. No. 1997-02, adopted Jan. 13, 1997; Ord. No. 2005-08, adopted Aug. 22, 2005; and Ord. No. 2006-22, adopted Oct. 23, 2006. 
Charter reference- Fire department created, § 22. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; decorations at communtiy /civic center, § 2-216; aircraft and airports, ch. 6; buildings and construction, ch. 18; fire zone limits, § 18-1; construction codes, § 18-66 et seq.; substandard buildings and structures, § 18-96 et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal fire protection, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.001 et seq.; false alarm or report, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.06; silent or abusive calls to 9-1-1 service, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.061. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Arson reward. 
    A reward of $250.00 shall be paid by the city to any person causing the arrest and conviction of any person who shall be found guilty of arson committed within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
State Law reference- Arson, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.02. 
Sec. 30-2. - Interference with firefighters and other officials proceeding to fire. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or in any manner obstruct any firefighter or other city official proceeding to the scene or reported scene of any fire, or to make it difficult or dangerous for any firefighter or other city official to proceed to the scene of a fire. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
State Law reference- Riot obstructing governmental functions or services, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.02(a)(2); obstructing highway or other passageway after request or order to move issued by firefighter, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.03(a)(2). 
Sec. 30-3. - Unauthorized use of fire equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use the fire trucks or any of the fire equipment or apparatus belonging to the city unless the equipment is used in fighting fires or in the performance and fulfillment of orders received by the persons using the equipment and given by the duly authorized officers of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
State Law reference- Protective clothing and equipment of fire protection personnel, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 419.040 et seq. 
Sec. 30-4. - Mobile service units. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dispense flammable liquids by mobile service units within the city. As used in this section, mobile service units are vehicles, tank trucks or other mobile devices from which flammable liquids used as motor fuels may, as an act of retail sale, be dispensed into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles parked on off-street parking facilities or parked upon the streets of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
State Law reference- Flammable liquids, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 753.001 et seq. 
Sec. 30-5. - Fire and rescue service fees. 
(a)  The City of Wharton shall assess and collect fees for certain services rendered by the Wharton Volunteer Fire Department. The fees for use of equipment and supplies shall be established by the Wharton City Council in the form of a separate resolution. Said fees shall be assessed and collected when such equipment and/or supplies are used in connection with the following events or incidents: 
(1)  Vehicle fires; 
(2)  Vehicle accidents; 
(3)  Hazardous material spills or releases; and 
(4)  Rescues or rescue attempts at low water crossings. 
(b)  The city may contract the assessment and collection to a third party company or firm. 
(c)  Fees collected for reimbursement of use of equipment and supplies shall be allocated for expenditures by the Wharton Volunteer Fire Department. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
Secs. 30-6-30-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE MARSHAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- State fire marshal, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 417.001 et seq. 

Sec. 30-36. - Appointment; term of office; removal. 
    The city manager shall appoint a fire marshal, who shall hold office for the duration of his appointment, unless sooner removed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
Sec. 30-37. - Qualifications. 
    The fire marshal shall be properly qualified to perform the duties of the position. The fire marshal shall hold the following certifications through the Texas Commission on Fire Protection: Fire inspector and fire investigator. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
Sec. 30-38. - Responsibilities. 
    The fire marshal shall be responsible for enforcing all city, state and federal laws as they pertain to fire prevention; assist firefighters in public awareness programs; inspecting new and existing buildings and structures for potentially dangerous conditions relating to fire; and reviewing construction and engineering plans for potentially dangerous conditions relating to fire prior to commencement of construction. The fire marshal shall carry out duties in accordance with the fire prevention code set forth in the City of Wharton Code of Ordinances, chapter 18 Building and Construction, article III Construction Codes, section 18-66 Codes adopted, fire prevention code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
Sec. 30-39. - Issuing of permits and fire code inspections. 
    Permits shall be issued by the code enforcement department. The fire marshal, under the general direction of the building inspector, shall inspect public, commercial and residential structures for compliance with all applicable fire codes. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
Sec. 30-40. - Examination of commercial and public structures. 
    At least once every calendar quarter, the fire marshal may enter upon and make, or cause to be entered upon and made, a thorough examination of all commercial and public structures together with the premises belonging thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
Sec. 30-41. - Ordering removal or remedy-General conditions warranting. 
    Whenever the fire marshal shall find that any building, structure or other premises, because of disrepair, age, dilapidation or any other reason, is unduly susceptible to fire and that such building, structure or other premises is so situated as to endanger another building, structure or property or is so occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, he shall order the building or structure removed or the conditions causing undue susceptibility to fire remedied. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
Sec. 30-42. - Specific dangerous or hazardous conditions. 
    Whenever the fire marshal finds any condition which may be dangerous in character or likely to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to firemen or other persons or finds any violation of the Standard Building Code, National Electrical Code, Life Safety Code, Standard Fire Prevention Code or National Fire Codes or any code or ordinance adopted by the city and amendments thereto, he shall order the condition removed or remedied. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
Sec. 30-43. - Right of entry. 
    The fire marshal shall have the authority, at all times of the day or night, when necessary in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
Secs. 30-44-30-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Department of community development, § 2-1. 

Sec. 30-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Fire prevention code means the fire prevention code adopted in section 18-66. 
(2)  Wherever the term "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean the City of Wharton Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-72. - Fire prevention code. 
(a)  Reference the City of Wharton Code of Ordinances, chapter 18 Building and Construction, article III Construction Codes, section 18-66 Codes adopted, fire prevention code. 
(b)  Section 108, Board of Appeals of the International Fire Prevention Code adopted and referenced above is heretofore deleted and shall be amended as outlined in subsection (c) below. 
(c)  Appeal process. Reference the City of Wharton Code of Ordinances, chapter 18 Building and Construction, article III Construction Codes, section 18-76. Appeals procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
Sec. 30-73. - Fire marshal. 
(a)  The fire code shall be enforced by the fire marshal, which is hereby established and shall be operated under the supervision of the city manager. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall provide monthly inspection and other reports to the city manager. The reports shall contain all proceedings under the fire prevention code, with such statistics as the fire marshal may wish to include therein. The fire marshal shall also recommend any amendments to the fire prevention code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
Sec. 30-74. - Modifications. 
    The fire marshal shall have the authority to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee or his duly authorized agent when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the fire marshal thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
Sec. 30-75. - Appeals. 
    Whenever the fire marshal shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the fire prevention code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire marshal in accordance with the appeal process set forth above in subsection 30-72(c) Appeal process. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
Sec. 30-76. - New materials, processes or occupancies that may require permits. 
    The fire marshal shall determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies that shall require permits, in addition to those enumerated in the fire prevention code. The fire marshal shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
Sec. 30-77. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code or fail to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed in this article, shall severally for each such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-5. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provision contained in this article to the contrary, the application of the penalties in subsection (a) of this section shall not be held to prevent enforced removal of prohibited conditions or to prohibit or restrict the city fire marshal or city manager from taking actions to summarily abate and remove all prohibited conditions if, in the judgment of the city fire marshal or the city manager, such abatement is necessary for the health, safety or security of the city or its inhabitants. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
Sec. 30-78. - Abatement-Notice to remedy. 
(a)  Whenever any prohibited condition described in this chapter is found to exist upon any lot or premises in the city, any officer or authorized employee of the city shall notify the owner of such lot or premises to remove or remedy the condition within ten days after the date of such notice. Such notice shall be in writing and served on the owner in person or mailed to him at his latest known address. If personal service cannot be had and the owner's address is not known, such notice shall be given by publication at least twice within ten consecutive days in a newspaper published in the city. The city shall also send any such notice to any person holding a recorded lien against the property. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provision contained in this article to the contrary, such notification is not necessary if, in the judgment of the city fire marshal or the city manager, such notification would create a delay that may materially increase the danger to life or property. If notification can be accomplished without increasing the danger to life or property, notice shall be given by personal service or mail on the owner of the premises or the owner's representative and on any person holding a recorded lien against the property. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
Sec. 30-79. - Same-Performance by city. 
(a)  If the owner of any lot or premises fails to remove or remedy any prohibited condition described in this chapter within the required period after notice has been given as provided in this article, the city may do whatever is necessary to remove or remedy the condition or cause the work to be done and charge the expenses incurred thereby to the owner of such lot or premises, and such expenses shall be assessed against the real estate upon which the work was done. The doing of such work and the charging and assessing of the expenses thereof against the owner shall not relieve the owner or occupant of any such prosecution for such violation. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provision contained in this article to the contrary, the city may do whatever is necessary to remove or remedy the condition without giving the notice described in section 30-78 if, in the judgment of the city fire marshal or the city manager, such notification would create a delay that may materially increase the danger to life or property. If notification can be accomplished without increasing the danger to life or property, notice shall be given by personal service or mail on the owner of the premises or the owner's representative and on any person holding a recorded lien against the property. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
Sec. 30-80. - Same-Collection of expenses. 
    The city manager, fire marshal or health officer shall file a statement of expenses incurred by the city pursuant to section 30-79, giving the amount of such expenses and the date on which the work was done or improvements made and describing the property, with the county clerk, and the city shall have a privileged lien on such lot or real estate upon which the work was done or improvements to secure the expenditures so made in accordance with V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq., which lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. The amount of such expenses shall bear ten percent interest from the date of payment by the city. For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of such lien may be had in the name of the city, and the statement of expenses so made or a certified copy thereof shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, 10-22-12) 
State Law reference- Assessment of expenses, lien, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.007. 
Secs. 30-81-30-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-15, adopted Dec. 14, 2015, repealed the former art. IV, §§ 30-130-30-133, and enacted a new art. IV as set out herein. The former art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. No. 2012-15, adopted Oct. 22, 2012; and Ord. No. 2013-13, adopted June 10, 2013. 

Sec. 30-130. - Definitions. 
    In this article: 
    Fireworks means a composition or device designed for entertainment to produce a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, except: 
(1)  Toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices that use paper or plastic caps in sheets, strips, rolls, or individual caps that contain no more than an average of 25 hundredths of a grain of explosive composition per cap and that is packed and shipped in accordance with the U.S. Department of Transportation; 
(2)  Model rockets and model rocket motors designed, sold, and used to propel recoverable aero models; 
(3)  Novelties and trick noise makers; 
(4)  Pyrotechnic signaling devices or distress signals designed for marine, aviation or highway use; 
(5)  Blank cartridges used or intended for: 
a.  Use in a radio, television, film or theater production; 
b.  A signal or ceremonial purpose in an athletic event; 
c.  An industrial purpose; or 
(6)  The use of a pyrotechnic device by a military organization. 
    Person means an individual or entity, including an owner, manager, officer, employee or occupant. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, 12-14-15) 
Sec. 30-131. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, store, offer for sale, sell at retail, manufacture, use or explode any fireworks within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, 12-14-15) 
Sec. 30-132. - Reserved. 
Sec. 30-133. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person knowingly or intentionally violates section 30-131 of this article. 
(b)  An offense under this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(c)  Each day that a violation occurs or continues, constitutes a separate offense. 
(d)  A peace officer or a fire official may seize illegal fireworks. Fireworks seized under this section shall be kept in the custody of the chief of police or fire official. The owner of the seized fireworks may file an action contesting the seizure in the district court of this county within 30 days after the seizure. If an action contesting the seizure is not filed within that time, or if an action is timely filed unless upon final hearing the court orders the return of the seized fireworks, the chief of police or fire official shall destroy the fireworks. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, 12-14-15) 
Secs. 30-134-30-155. - Reserved. 
Chapter 34 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Health department created, § 22. 
Cross reference- Department of community development, § 2-1; smoking prohibited in council chambers, § 2-35; animals and foul, ch. 14; sanitary condition of enclosures for animals or foul, § 14-6; rabies control, § 14-76 et seq. 
State Law reference- State department of health, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 11 et seq.; Local Public Health Reorganization Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 121.001 et seq.; health authorities, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 121.021 et seq.; sanitation and environmental quality, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 341 et seq.; Texas Meat and Poultry Inspection Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 433.001 et seq.; dairy products, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 435.001 et seq.; special requirements, sale of milk, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 435.021 et seq.; offenses injurious to public health, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 9.01 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Burning rubbish. 
    The disposal by burning of garbage, trash or rubbish of any kind in any place within the city is prohibited, except in compliance with the fire prevention code adopted in section 18-66, the Texas Clean Air Act (V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 382.001 et seq.) and the air pollution control regulations authorized by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 382.051. 
(Code 1978, § 9-1) 
State Law reference- Permitting authority of state natural resources conservation commission, rules, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 382.051. 
Sec. 34-2. - Spitting on sidewalks, crosswalks and public buildings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate upon any sidewalk, crosswalk or public building in the city. 
(Code 1978, § 9-2) 
Sec. 34-3. - Sewage disposal-Approved methods. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any body waste or other sewage within the city except through a connection with the city's sanitary sewer system or through a septic tank installed and maintained in accord with the requirements of the state department of health. 
(Code 1978, § 9-3) 
State Law reference- Disposal of human excreta, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.014; protection of bodies of water from sewage, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.037; public toilet facilities, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.061; water quality control, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 26.001 et seq. 
Sec. 34-4. - Same-Connections required. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, every owner, lessee, tenant or user of any residence, hotel, business or any house or building whatsoever, situated within 300 feet of a public sanitary sewer line or main in and under any public way or easement within the city shall connect any sewage or wastewater disposal from such residence, place of business or other house or building owned, leased or used by him with such sewer line or main belonging to the city. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4) 
Sec. 34-5. - Noise-Nuisance declared. 
    Any unreasonably loud noise which causes material distress, discomfort or injury to persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. 
(Code 1978, § 9-5) 
Sec. 34-6. - Same-Interference with enjoyment of homes. 
    Any noise of such character, intensity and continued duration as to substantially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of private homes by persons of ordinary sensibilities is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. 
(Code 1978, § 9-6) 
Sec. 34-7. - Same-Enumeration. 
    The following acts, among others, are declared to be nuisances in violation of the noise prohibitions of this chapter, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning: 
a.  Daytime hours shall mean the hours from 7:00 a.m. on one day and 10:00 p.m. the same day. 
b.  Property line shall mean, with respect to single occupancy properties, the line along the ground surface and its vertical extension that separates the real property owned, leased, or occupied by one person from that owned, leased, or occupied by another person. With respect to shared occupancy properties the term shall mean the imaginary line that represents the legal limits of occupancy of any person who owns, leases, or otherwise occupies an apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, office, or any other type of occupancy from that of other occupants. 
(2)  Amplified sound. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, assist in making, permit, continue, cause to be made or continued, or permit the continuance of any sound using any sound amplifier that is part of or connected to any speaker system, radio, stereo receiver, compact disc player, cassette tape player, microphone, or any other sound source, when operated: (i) In such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or (ii) at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for persons who are in the vehicle or within the property or premises in which such sound amplifier is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such sound amplifier in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from a vehicle shall be presumed to violative to this section. The operation of any such sound amplifier in such a manner that bass sounds are plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the property line of a property or premises in which the amplification is located shall be presumed to be violative of this section. 
b.  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the sound source is a motor vehicle and that (i) the motor vehicle is a mobile sound stage or studio that is being used on a stationary basis at a location not situated upon any street for the purpose of providing sound, during daytime hours, for an event or function and (ii) the use is in compliance with all other provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Animals and birds. The keeping or harboring of any animal or bird which by any sound or cry shall disturb the peace, comfort or property of the inhabitants of the neighborhood. 
(4)  Horns and signal devices. The continued or frequent sounding of any horn or signal device of any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger or warning signal, or the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh noise for any unreasonable period of time so as to disturb persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity. 
(5)  Steam whistles on stationary boilers. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of danger so as to disturb persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity. 
(6)  Discharge of exhaust from engines. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or boat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom, so as to disturb persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity. 
(7)  Noise near school or hospital. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school or institution of learning while the school or institution is in session or adjacent to any hospital which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such manner indicating that the street is a school or hospital street, so as to disturb persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity. 
(8)  Loading and unloading operations; opening or destruction of containers. The creation of any loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers so as to disturb persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity. 
(9)  Shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors. The raucous shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(10)  Drums or loudspeakers calling attention to performance, show or sale. The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise to any performance, show or sale of merchandise so as to disturb persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity. 
(11)  The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air. It shall be unlawful for any driver to activate or use engine braking devices within the city limits except in an emergency situation. The term "emergency situation", for purposes of this section, shall mean one in which there is imminent danger of collision with persons, property, or animals. 
(Code 1978, §§ 5-13, 9-7; Ord. No. 2002-01, 1-14-02; Ord. No. 2007-13, § 1, 6-25-07) 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, ch. 14. 
Sec. 34-8. - Same-Permit for playing musical instrument on street or sidewalk. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to play any kind of musical instrument upon any of the streets or sidewalks or the public square of the city, unless a parade or assembly permit has been obtained as required in this Code. 
(Code 1978, § 9-8) 
Sec. 34-9. - Same-Vehicle loads. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive along or upon any public street or alley in the city any vehicle, which is loaded with iron or other material likely to produce a loud noise, without using proper deadening substances to prevent disturbances to persons of ordinary sensibilities within 150 feet of such vehicle. 
(Code 1978, § 9-9) 
Sec. 34-10. - Abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators or airtight containers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure or within any warehouse or storage room or any unoccupied or abandoned dwelling, building or any other structure, under such circumstances as to be accessible to children, any icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight container which has a capacity of 11/2 cubic feet or more and an opening of 50 square inches or more and a door or lid equipped with a latch or other fastening device capable of securing such door or lid shut without first removing such door, lid, snap lock or other locking device from such icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(Code 1978, § 9-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 756.011 et seq. 
Secs. 34-11-34-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CLEANLINESS AND SANITATION OF PREMISES; LITTERING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to define and prohibit nuisances, § 17(13); authority of city to provide for the regulation and inspection of the sanitary condition of premises, § 17(15). 
Cross reference- Clean city commission, § 2-121 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-46. - Discarding refuse in streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or throw any garbage, trash, offal, carrion, rubbish or other refuse or offensive substance in any street or other public way. 
(Code 1978, § 9-20) 
State Law reference- Solid Waste Disposal Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.001 et seq.; unlawful disposal of litter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 365.012. 
Sec. 34-47. - Discarding refuse on property of another or on or in waterways. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or place on the property of another, including city or other public property, or into any solid waste container or other container located on the property of another, including city or other public property, or on or in any public water or waterway any garbage, trash, carrion, offal, rubbish or other refuse or offensive substance. However, persons partaking of activities either as participants or spectators in public parks may use solid waste containers furnished by the city in such parks for the dumping of garbage, trash and rubbish from the use of such parks. It shall be unlawful, however, for persons to bring their household garbage, trash, rubbish or other substances onto city or other public property for dumping into solid waste containers. 
(Code 1978, § 9-21) 
State Law reference- Unlawful disposal of litter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 365.012. 
Sec. 34-48. - Refuse attracting vermin in or under structures. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, place or permit to accumulate or remain in or under any building or structure any garbage, rubbish, offal, carrion, manure or other refuse or offensive substance which may afford food, harboring or breeding place for rats, mice, snakes, flies or other vermin. 
(Code 1978, § 9-22) 
Sec. 34-49. - Accumulations of lumber, boxes, barrels or materials attracting vermin. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate or remain on any premises, improved or unimproved, or on any open lot or alley any lumber, boxes, barrels, bricks or stones and similar materials which may be used as a harborage by rats, mice, snakes, termites or other vermin, unless the materials are placed on open racks and elevated not less than 18 inches above the ground, with a clear intervening space underneath, to prevent the harborage of vermin. 
(Code 1978, § 9-23) 
Sec. 34-50. - Accumulation of carrion or filth on lots or yards. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to permit or allow any garbage, offal, manure, carrion, filth or other impure or unwholesome matter to accumulate or remain on any lot or yard. 
(Code 1978, § 9-24) 
State Law reference- Storage of garbage, organic wastes, etc., as nuisance, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.011(5). 
Sec. 34-51. - Accumulation or growth of weeds or brush. 
(a)  Nuisance declared. It shall be unlawful for any owner(s) of any premises within the city to allow weeds, grass or uncultivated plants to grow upon such premises or to allow trash or rubbish to accumulate upon such premises to such an extent as is reasonably calculated to create a fire hazard or to become injurious to the health of the citizens. Any such act is declared to constitute a public nuisance. 
(b)  Duty to cut growth. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any owner(s) of any premises to permit weeds, grass or uncultivated plants to grow upon such premises to a height greater than ten inches on an average or to grow in rank profusion thereon. Any premises upon which any weeds, grass or uncultivated plants grow above such height or in rank profusion shall be deemed a public nuisance. Provided, however, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any owner(s) of any premises who has received and maintains a valid permit to grow and harvest hay within the city limits. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the owner(s) of any premises to remove or cause to be cut all weeds, grass or uncultivated plants as often as may be necessary to comply with subsection (a) of this section, said removal shall not be accomplished by bailing of the weeds, grass or uncultivated plants unless the property owner has obtained a hay harvesting permit. 
(3)  The requirements for receiving and maintaining a valid permit to grow and harvest hay within the city limits are: 
a.  Applications for permits shall be obtained by the owner(s) of the property upon forms provided by the code enforcement department and shall contain or have attached thereto information including, but not necessarily limited to, the following: 
1.  Name, address and telephone number of the owner(s) and/or entity holding any lien against the premises. 
2.  The legal property description (lot and block number) of the premises and the amount of acreage per contiguous lot. 
b.  Permits shall be issued upon the payment of a fee of $20.00 per contiguous five acre or greater meadow and each permit shall be valid for one calendar year, expiring on December 31st. Permits shall be renewed annually upon the payment of an annual fee of $20.00 per approved meadow and before December 31st of the next calendar year. If a permit is not obtained prior to the deadline date, the property shall no longer be considered as a hay meadow and shall be subjected to the requirements of this section in its entirety until a hay permit is issued for the following year. 
c.  Hay cannot be stored on a meadow within the city limits if the permitted parcel is adjacent to a developed property, residential or commercial, and must be removed within seven days after the hay is harvested. 
d.  All hay meadows must be cut and harvested a minimum of two times during the calendar year. Additionally, the meadow shall be mowed within ten days after the first frost and shall be maintained at a height not to exceed ten inches, and in accordance with section subsection 34-51(b)(1), set forth above until the next harvesting season begins. 
e.  Notwithstanding any provision contained herein to the contrary, the use of meadows for harvesting hay shall not excuse the requirement that a width of at least ten feet between property lines shall be kept mowed below the required ten inch height at all times if the permitted parcel is adjacent to a developed property, residential or commercial. 
f.  Any violation of any applicable section of this article shall result in the revocation of the permit for the remainder of the permitted year and consideration of any violations may reflect the issuance of permit in the future. 
(c)  Partial exception. With respect to lots or parcels of land of contiguous five acres or more under single ownership, the provision of this section shall not be applicable to the area in excess of ten feet from any open public street or alley or to the area in excess of ten feet from any adjacent property under different ownership on which habitable structures are located. Lot and parcels of the land less than five acres must be maintained in accordance with this subsection 34-51(b)(1), set for above. 
(Code 1978, § 9-25; Ord. No. 1992-13, 8-11-92; Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-23-06; Ord. No. 2008-04, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 2010-02, 2-22-10) 
Sec. 34-52. - Stagnant water. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow the accumulation of stagnant water on any lot owned or occupied by him within the city or to permit stagnant water to remain thereon. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to permit or allow holes on such lot where water may accumulate and become stagnant. 
(Code 1978, § 9-26; Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-23-06; Ord. No. 2008-04, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 2010-02, 2-22-10) 
Sec. 34-53. - Fire code violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any conditions to exist that violate any provisions of Chapter 30, relating to fire prevention and protection, of this Code or the fire prevention code adopted in section 18-66. 
(Ord. No. 1991-21, § 9-26.1, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-23-06; Ord. No. 2008-04, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 2010-02, 2-22-10) 
Sec. 34-54. - Abatement-Notice to remedy. 
(a)  Whenever any condition described in this article is found to exist upon any premises in the city, any officer or authorized employee of the city shall notify the owner of such premises or the owner's authorized agent or representative, if known, and any person holding a recorded lien on the property to remove or remedy the condition within ten days after the date of such notice. 
(b)  Such notice shall be in writing and shall be served on the owner, the owner's authorized agent or representative, if known, and any person holding a recorded lien on the property, at the last known address of any such person. 
(c)  If the address of any lien holder is unknown, the city may give notice to the lien holder by sending written notice in care of the owner or the owner's authorized agent or representative. 
(Code 1978, § 9-27; Ord. No. 1989-09, § C, 4-10-89; Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-23-06; Ord. No. 2008-04, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 2010-02, 2-22-10) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to provide for the regulation and inspection of the sanitary condition of premises, § 17(15). 
Sec. 34-55. - Same-Performance by city. 
(a)  If the owner of any lot or premises fails to remove or remedy any condition described in this division within the required period after notice has been given as provided in section 34-54, the city may do whatever is necessary to remove or remedy the condition or cause the same to be done and charge the expenses incurred thereby to the owner of such lot or premises, and such expenses shall be assessed against the real estate upon which the work was done. The doing of such work and the charging and assessing of the expenses thereof against the owner shall not relieve the owner or occupant of any such prosecution for such violation. 
(b)  One (1) notice, sent by certified mail, shall be given prior to removal of weeds during the current calendar year. Once the city has given notice to remove or remedy any condition and the owner or the owner's authorized agent or representative has failed to remove or remedy the condition within the required time period, the city shall have the right to continue to do such work as is necessary to keep any such weeds, grass or uncultivated plants at or below the required height and to continue charging and assessing the expenses thereof against the owner without the necessity of giving further notices until and unless the owner or the owner's authorized agent or representative removes or remedies the condition. 
(c)  In the event an owner(s) of any hay meadow or premises is in violation more than one time per the current calendar year the owner(s) is subject to penalties as set forth in the section 1-5 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Wharton, Texas, which may result with a complaint filed in municipal court. 
(Code 1978, § 9-28; Ord. No. 1992-13, 8-11-92; Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-23-06; Ord. No. 2008-04, 4-14-08; Ord. No. 2010-02, 2-22-10) 
Sec. 34-56. - Same-Collection of expenses. 
    The city manager or health officer shall file a statement of expenses incurred by the city with the county clerk for the work described in section 34-55, giving the amount of such expenses and the date on which the work was done or improvements made and describing the property, and the city shall have a privileged lien on such lot or real estate upon which the work was done or improvements made to secure the expenditures so made in accordance with V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.007, which lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. The amount of such expenses shall bear ten percent interest from the date of payment by the city. For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of such lien may be had in the name of the city, and the statement of expenses so made or a certified copy thereof shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. 
(Code 1978, § 9-29) 
State Law reference- Abatement of nuisance, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.012; municipal regulation of sanitation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq. 
Sec. 34-57. - Trash receptacles at retail business establishments. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a retail business establishment offering for sale consumable items (beverages or food) in disposable containers or wrappers without providing trash receptacles to the public on the exterior premises of such business establishment. 
(Code 1978, § 9-31) 
Sec. 34-58. - Public nuisance. 
(a)  A person may not cause, permit, or allow a public nuisance under this section. 
(b)  A public nuisance is: 
(1)  Keeping, storing, or accumulating refuse on premises in a neighborhood unless the refuse is entirely contained in a closed receptacle; 
(2)  Keeping, storing, or accumulating rubbish, including newspapers, abandoned vehicles, motorized equipment, appliances, furniture, tires, and cans, on premises in a neighborhood for ten days or more, unless the rubbish or object is completely enclosed in a building or is not visible from a public street, private or public properties; 
(3)  Maintaining premises in a manner that creates an unsanitary condition likely to attract or harbor mosquitoes, rodents, vermin, or disease-carrying pests; 
(4)  Maintaining a building in a manner that is structurally unsafe or constitutes a hazard to safety, health, or public welfare because of inadequate maintenance, unsanitary conditions, dilapidation, obsolescence, disaster, damage, or abandonment or because it constitutes a fire hazard; 
(5)  Maintaining on abandoned and unoccupied property in a neighborhood a swimming pool that is not protected with: 
a.  A fence that is at least four feet high and has a latched gate that cannot be opened by a child; or 
b.  A cover over the entire swimming pool that cannot be removed by a child. 
(6)  Maintaining a flea market in a manner that constitutes a fire hazard. 
(Ord. No. 2000-13, 6-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-24, 10-14-02) 
Sec. 34-59. - Enforcement. 
    All ordinances within this chapter shall be enforced within the city limits and outside the city limits for a distance of 5,000 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2002-24, 10-14-02) 
Secs. 34-60-34-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - JUNKED VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1999-04, § I, adopted March 22, 1999, amended former Div. 2, §§ 34-81-34-90, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1978, §§ 9-40-9-49. 

Sec. 34-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least 35 years old. 
    Chief of police means the chief of police of the City of Wharton and any duly commissioned police officer of the City of Wharton. 
    Enforcement officer means the person designated by the chief of police to administer this division. 
    Junked vehicle means a motor vehicle as defined in the Texas Transportation Code Chapter 683, Subchapter E, Section 683.071 and is: 
(1)  That is self-propelled and inoperative; and 
(2)  That does not have lawfully affixed to it either an unexpired license plate or a valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate; 
(3)  That is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled or discarded; or 
(4)  That remains inoperable for more than 45 consecutive days. 
The term junk vehicle does not include (a) a vehicle or vehicle part that is completely enclosed within a building, in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other public or private property, (b) a vehicle or vehicle part that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or (c) that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle and the outdoor storage area, if any, are: maintained in an orderly manner, not a health hazard, and screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees or shrubbery or other appropriate means. 
    Motor vehicle collector means a person who owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires, trades or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore, preserve and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
    Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been altered or modified from the original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
(Ord. No. 1999-04, § I, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 34-82. - Junk vehicles declared a public nuisance; duty of property owners; unlawful to interfere with impounding. 
(a)  The location or presence of any junked vehicle on any lot, tract or parcel of land or any portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, private or public land or public rights-of-way, within the city shall be deemed a public nuisance. A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible from a public place or public right-of-way is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites vandalism, creates a fire hazard, is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of municipalities, and is a public nuisance. 
(b)  The owner or occupant of any real property within the City of Wharton shall keep such property free of and shall not permit or suffer the presence of junked vehicles on such property. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly interfere with or attempt to prevent the physical impounding of any junked vehicle by the chief of police or his delegate pursuant to this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 1999-04, § I, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 34-83. - Order to abate; service of notice; hearing; failure to comply. 
(a)  Whenever any junked vehicle is located on occupied premises within the city in violation of section 34-82(b) the chief of police shall order the owner of the premises, if in possession thereof, or the occupant of the premises whereon such public nuisance exists, to abate or remove the same. Such order shall: 
(1)  Be in writing. 
(2)  State the nature of the public nuisance and that it must be removed and abated within ten (10) days after the date of mailing or personal service of notice. 
(3)  State that a request for a hearing to determine whether or not the motor vehicle is a junk vehicle as defined herein must be made to the clerk of the municipal court, either in person or in writing and without the requirements of bond, before expiration of said ten (10) day period. 
(4)  State that in the event that no request for a hearing is received before the expiration of said ten (10) day period it shall be conclusively presumed that said vehicle is a junked vehicle as defined under state law and this subsection. 
The order must be mailed by certified mail with a five (5) day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, any lien holder of record and to the owner or occupant of the premises on which the public nuisance exists. If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle is unknown, notice to the last known registered owner may be placed on the motor vehicle or, if the last known registered owner is physically located, the notice may be hand delivered. If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the eleventh day after the date of the return. 
(b)  If the owner or occupant of the premises does not request a public hearing and either fails or refuses to comply with the order of the chief of police within the ten-day period after service thereof, as provided herein, the chief of police or his delegate shall take possession of such junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises on the issuance of an appropriate order of the judge of the municipal court. At the hearing it is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, that the vehicle is inoperable. A resolution or order requiring the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part must include a description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle if the information is available at the site. 
(c)  Certified mail notices returned undelivered but addressed and mailed in accordance with this section shall, after ten days after the date of the return, constitute adequate notice to the party to whom such notice was sent. 
(Ord. No. 1999-04, § I, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 34-84. - Notice to owner to abate nuisance when on unoccupied premises or on public property of public right-of-way. 
(a)  Whenever any junked vehicle is located on unoccupied premises or public right-of-way within the city in violation of section 34-82(b), the chief of police shall order the owner of the premises, as shown on the current tax rolls of the city whereon such public nuisance exists, to abate or remove the same. Such order shall contain the same information as for the order required under section 34-83. 
(1)  The order must be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, any lien holder of record and to the owner of the premises, as shown on the city tax rolls, on which the public nuisance exists. If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle is unknown, notice to the last known registered owner may be placed on the motor vehicle or, if the last known registered owner is physically located, the notice may be hand delivered. If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the eleventh day after the date of the return. 
(2)  If the owner or occupant of the premises does not request a public hearing and either fails or refuses to comply with the order of the chief of police within the ten-day period after service thereof, as provided herein, the chief of police or his delegate shall take possession of such junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises on the issuance of an appropriate order of the judge of the municipal court. At the hearing it is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, that the vehicle is inoperable. A resolution or order requiring the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part must include a description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle if the information is available at the site. 
(b)  Whenever any such junk vehicle is located on public property or on a public right-of-way within the city in violation of section 34-82, the chief of police shall order the owner or occupant of the public premises or the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way whereon said public nuisance exists, to abate or remove the same. Such order shall contain the same information as for the order required under section 34-83. 
(1)  The order must be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, any lien holder of record, and to the owner and occupant of the public premises, or to the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the public nuisance exists. If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle is unknown, notice to the last known registered owner may be placed on the motor vehicle, or, if the last known registered owner is physically located, the notice may be hand delivered. If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States post office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the eleventh day after the date of the return. 
(c)  Certified mail notices returned undelivered but addressed and mailed in accordance with this section shall, after ten days after the date of the return, constitute adequate notice to the party to whom such notice was sent. 
(Ord. No. 1999-04, § I, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 34-85. - Visible notice to owner to abate nuisance. 
(a)  At the time a junked vehicle is located by the chief of police on either occupied or unoccupied private or public property or public right-of-way, in addition to any other notices required herein, a visible notice, brightly colored, [may be posted on the vehicle]. Such notice shall: 
(1)  State that the vehicle is a public nuisance and that it must be removed and abated within ten days from the date on such notice. 
(2)  State that request for a hearing to determine whether or not the motor vehicle is a junked motor vehicle as defined herein must be made to the clerk of the municipal court, either in person or in writing and without the requirement of bond, before the expiration of said ten-day period. 
(2)  Shall state that in the event that no request for a hearing is received before the expiration of said ten-day period, it shall be conclusively presumed that said vehicle is a junked vehicle as defined under state law and this subsection. 
(3)  Shall state the date it was affixed. 
(b)  Affixing the notice set out herein shall not be a condition or requirement precedent to any proceeding or official action to abate such public nuisance and such proceeding or action shall not be rendered void or voidable nor in any way affected by failure to affix the visible notice prescribed herein. 
(c)  In the event the ten (10) day period set out on the visible notice is different from that prescribed in any other notice served as provided for herein, then official action or proceedings to abate such public nuisance shall not be commenced until after the expiration of both periods of time. 
(Ord. No. 1999-04, § I, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 34-86. - Public hearing; finding and orders of judge. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises on which a junked vehicle is located may, within ten days after service of notice to abate said nuisance, request of the clerk of the municipal court of the city, either in person or in writing, and without the requirement of the bond, that a date and a time be set when he may appear before the judge of the municipal court for a hearing to determine whether or not the motor vehicle is a junked motor vehicle. 
(b)  The judge of the municipal court shall hear any case brought before such court, as set out herein, and shall determine by a preponderance of the evidence whether or not the motor vehicle is a junked motor vehicle and in violation of this subsection. At the hearing, the motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable. Such hearing shall not be criminal and shall be as summary as due process and orderly procedure allows. Rules of evidence as in civil suits shall be followed. Upon finding that such motor vehicle is in violation of this subsection, the judge of such court shall order such defendant to remove and abate such nuisance within ten days, the same being a reasonable time. If the defendant shall fail and refuse, within ten days, to abate or remove the nuisance, the judge of the municipal court may issue an order directing the chief of police to have the same removed, and the chief of police or his delegate shall take possession of such junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises. Such order shall include a description of the vehicle, and the current identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
(c)  Notice of any hearing set under this section shall be delivered to the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1999-04, § I, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 34-87. - Abatement under court order. 
    If there is a junked motor vehicle, as herein defined, on premises that are occupied or unoccupied, and (a) neither the owner nor the occupant of the premises can be found and notified to remove same, or, (b) the notice required by sections 34-83 and 34-84 is returned undelivered by the U.S. Post Office and ten (10) days after the return of such notice the nuisance has not been abated, then upon a showing of such facts to the judge of the municipal court, the court may issue an order directing the chief of police to have the same removed, and the chief of police or his delegate shall take possession of such junked motor vehicle and remove if from the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1999-04, § I, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 34-88. - Notice to Texas Department of Transportation. 
    Notice shall be given to the Texas Department of Transportation that a junked vehicle has been impounded within five (5) days after the removal of the junked motor vehicle as provided in this subsection, identifying the vehicle or part thereof impounded. 
(Ord. No. 1999-04, § I, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 34-89. - Disposition of impounded junked vehicles. 
    The chief of police or his delegate shall dispose of all impounded junked vehicles in such manner as consistent with state law, provided such vehicle shall not be reconstructed or made operable. Disposal may be by removal or sale, with or without competitive bidding, to a scrap yard or demolisher. 
(Ord. No. 1999-04, § I, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 34-90. - Offense. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance described by Section 683.072 [Texas Transportation Code]. 
(b)  An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
(c)  The court shall order abatement and removal of the nuisance on conviction. 
(Ord. No. 1999-04, § I, 3-22-99) 
Sec. 34-91. - Appeal. 
    All appeals under this division shall be had as in all other municipal court cases. 
(Ord. No. 1999-04, § I, 3-22-99) 
Secs. 34-92-34-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RAT CONTROL ON BUSINESS PREMISES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and construction, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Texas Structural Pest Control Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 135b-6; rodent control, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.018; predatory animals and animal pests, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 825.001 et seq. 

Sec. 34-111. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business building means any structure, whether public or private and regardless of the type of material used in its construction, located within the city that is adapted to the occupancy for transaction of business, whether vacant or occupied; for the rendering of professional services; for the display, sale or storage of goods, wares or merchandise; or for the performance of work or labor, including hotels, roominghouses, alcoholic beverage establishments, office buildings, public buildings, stores, markets, restaurants, grain elevators, abattoirs, warehouses, workshops and factories. 
    Opening means any opening in the foundation, side or walls of any business building, including roof, chimney caves, grills, windows, sidewalk grates and sidewalk elevators, through which a rat may enter. 
    Premises means all business buildings, outhouses, sheds, barns, garages, docks, wharves or piers, whether public or private, and any and all other structures used in connection with the operation of any business building. 
    Rat harborage means any condition found to exist under which rats may find shelter or protection and includes any defective construction which would permit the entrance of rats into any business building. 
    Rat stoppage means an inexpensive form of ratproofing designed to prevent the ingress of rats into business buildings. It is essentially the closing or protecting of all openings in exterior walls and foundations or the grates in a sidewalk of business buildings with ratproof materials installed in such a manner to prevent rats from gaining entrance. 
(Code 1978, § 9-60) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-112. - Ratproofing for new construction. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any business building or curb or farmers' market, unless such construction shall render the building or market ratproof in accordance with this division. 
(Code 1978, § 9-61) 
Sec. 34-113. - Minimum requirements for applying rat stoppage. 
    For the purpose of obtaining maximum rat stoppage at a minimum cost to the owner or occupant of business buildings, the following are set forth as the minimum requirements for applying rat stoppage to business buildings: 
(1)  Approval of materials and method of installation. The health officer or his representative shall approve all materials used and the method of installation. 
(2)  Protective coating for metal and wire cloth. Solid sheetmetal, expanded metal and wire cloth specified in this section shall have a rust-resisting protective coating, preferably galvanized. 
(3)  Covering of foundation wall ventilator openings. All foundation wall ventilator openings shall be covered for their entire height and width with perforated sheetmetal plates of a thickness of not less than 14 gauge or with expanded sheetmetal of a thickness of not less than 18 gauge or with cast iron grills or grates or with any other material of sufficient strength and equal rat-resisting properties. The openings therein shall be small enough to prevent the ingress of rats, and in no instance shall be larger than one-half inch. 
(4)  Covering of other openings in foundation or exterior wall. All foundation and exterior wall openings, excluding those used for the purpose of ventilation, light, doors and windows, such as those openings around pipes, electric cables, conduits, openings due to deteriorated wall, broken masonry or concrete, shall be protected against the ingress of rats by closing such openings with cement mortar, concrete or masonry or close-fitting sheetmetal or suitable size pipe flanges or other material with equal rat-resisting properties, which shall be securely fastened in place. 
(5)  Doors. All exposed edges of the lower eight inches of wooden doors and door jambs, serving as front, rear or side entrances into business buildings, from the ground, basement or cellar floors, and other doors accessible to rats shall be protected against the gnawing of rats by covering such doors and jambs with solid sheetmetal of not less than 24-gauge thickness. The same material shall be used on door sills or thresholds, or such door sills or thresholds may be constructed of cement, stone, steel or cast iron. Doors, door jambs and sills of coal chutes and hatchways that are constructed of wood shall be covered with solid sheetmetal of 24 gauge or heavier or they may be replaced with metal chutes of 24 gauge or heavier installed in such a manner as will prevent the ingress of rats. All doors on which metal flashing has been applied shall be properly hinged to provide for free swinging. When closed, doors shall fit snugly so that the maximum clearance between any door, door jamb and sill shall not be greater than three-eighths inch. Door jambs and sills constructed of metal, concrete, masonry, stone or cement mortar or cast iron and steel, when fitting closely to exclude rats, are not required to comply with this subsection. 
(6)  Windows. All windows and other openings for the purpose of light or ventilation located in the side or rear of exterior walls and within 30 inches above the existing ground level immediately below such opening shall be covered for their entire height and width, including frame, with wire cloth of 19 gauge or heavier, having a mesh of not larger than one-half inch. All window and other openings for the purpose of light or ventilation in the exterior walls that may be accessible to rats by way of exposed pipes, wire, conduits and other appurtenances shall be covered with guards of wire cloth of 19 gauge or heavier, having a mesh of not larger than one-half inch or, in lieu of wire cloth covering, such pipes, wires, conduits and other appurtenances shall be blocked from rat usage by installing sheetmetal guards of 24 gauge or heavier. Such guards, when used on horizontal pipes, wires, conduits or other appurtenances shall be placed in a vertical position and shall be snugly fitted around the pipe, wire, conduit or other appurtenance. Such guard shall measure not less than 12 inches beyond and on all sides of the pipes, wire, conduit or other appurtenance where the intervening space between the wall and pipe permits and shall extend 30 inches in an upward direction and 12 inches in a downward direction and shall be securely fastened to the pipe, wire, conduit or other appurtenance and also to the adjacent wall wherever practicable so that the guard will remain in a vertical position at all times. Such guards, when used on vertical pipes, wires, conduits or other appurtenances, shall be fitted snugly around the pipe, wire, conduit or other appurtenance; shall be placed in a horizontal position (right angle to pipe, etc.) and shall extend horizontally from the pipe, wire, conduit or other appurtenance for a minimum distance of 12 inches beyond and on all sides of the pipe, wire, conduit or other appurtenance, where the intervening space between pipes and wall permits; and shall be securely fastened to the pipe, wire, conduit or other appurtenance and also the adjacent wall wherever practicable in such manner that the guard will remain in a horizontal position at all times. 
(7)  Protection of light wells. Light wells with windows in exterior walls that are located below the outside ground level shall be protected from the ingress of rats by one of the following methods: 
a.  Installing over light wells cast iron or steel grills or steel gratings or other material of equal strength and rat-resisting properties, with openings in grills or gratings not to exceed one-half inch in shortest dimension. 
b.  Installing securely to and completely covering existing metal grills that are broken or have openings larger than one-half inch in the shortest dimension or that are otherwise defective with expanded metal of 18 gauge or heavier, having openings not greater than one-half inch shortest dimension or with 16 gauge or heavier wire cloth with one-half-inch mesh. 
c.  At the option of the owner, the opening in the wall of the building below the grate may be entirely closed with brick or concrete or partially closed and the remaining open space covered with 19 gauge or heavier wire cloth with mesh not to exceed one-half inch. 
(8)  Protection of space between floor sill and ground where sill is less than 12 inches above ground. Business buildings constructed on piers having wooden floor sills less than 12 inches above the surface of the ground shall have the intervening space between the floor sill and ground protected against the ingress of rats by installing a solid masonry or concrete curtain wall not less than four inches thick or a solid sheetmetal curtain wall of 24 gauge or heavier around the entire perimeter of the business building and extending such curtain wall to a depth of not less than 36 inches below the surface of the ground level and fastening the curtain wall securely to the exterior wall of the business building in such manner as will prevent rats from entering the building. In lieu of the installation of curtain walls, all ground floors of wood construction may be replaced with concrete of not less than three-inch thickness with the exterior walls protected for a height of 24 inches above the concrete floor with masonry, concrete or solid sheetmetal of 24 gauge or heavier. Exterior wall protection shall be securely tied into the concrete floor at all points. 
(9)  Protection of space between floor sill and ground where sill is 12 or more inches above ground. Business buildings constructed on piers having wooden floor sills 12 or more inches above the ground level shall have the intervening spaces between the floor sill and ground protected against the ingress of rats by installing curtain walls in accordance with subsection (8) of this section or by protecting such buildings against the ingress of rats by installing solid sheetmetal coverage of 24 gauge or heavier snugly around each pipe, cable, wire, conduit or other utility service passing through a wooden ground floor. Such metal coverage shall not be less than eight inches in diameter larger than diameter of pipe, cable, wire, conduit or other utility service and shall be securely fastened to the wooden floor. 
(10)  Miscellaneous openings. All other openings in wooden ground floors through which rats may gain entrance into double walls or the interior of business buildings, such as openings that may exist in floors and double walls above floor sills, shall be closed with 24 gauge or heavier solid sheetmetal or 16 gauge or heavier wire cloth of one-half-inch mesh or with concrete or masonry. Wood frame constructed business buildings having concrete or masonry foundation walls shall have ventilators in the foundation walls protected in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1978, § 9-62) 
Sec. 34-114. - Special rat stoppage requirements for markets. 
    Curb or farmers' markets in which fruit or vegetables or any other food products are exposed and offered for sale on racks, stands, platforms and in vehicles outside of business buildings shall have floors paved with concrete or asphalt for the entire surface area of the market for rat control. Display racks, stands or platforms on which fruit or vegetables or any other food products are displayed or offered for sale shall be of sufficient height that all such fruit, vegetables or other food products shall be kept at a distance of not less than 18 inches above the floor pavement and shall be so constructed that rats cannot harbor therein or thereunder. 
(Code 1978, § 9-63) 
Sec. 34-115. - Inspection of business buildings; ordering rat-control work. 
    The health officer or his representative is authorized to make frequent and unannounced inspections of business buildings within the city for the purpose of determining any rat infestation, and shall order by written notice either the owner, occupant, agent or any other person in custody of any rat-infested business building to protect such building by rat stoppage as provided in this division, regardless of the need for the remodeling of or repairs to such business buildings, and further order that such other rat-control methods be employed as may be deemed necessary by the health officer or his representative to maintain the business building free from rats. The written notice and/or order shall specify the time, not less than 15 days, for completion of such work and improvements. Unless such work and improvements are completed in accordance with the written order and/or notice by either the owner, occupant, agent or other person in custody of the business building within the time so specified or within the time in which a written extension has been granted by the health officer or his representative, the owner, occupant, agent or other person in custody of the building shall be deemed guilty of an offense under this division. 
(Code 1978, § 9-64) 
Sec. 34-116. - Inspections. 
    The health officer or his representative is authorized to make inspection during the course of and upon completion of any construction, repairs, remodeling or installation of rat-control measures to business buildings to ensure compliance with this division, and no person shall interfere with or refuse to permit such inspection. 
(Code 1978, § 9-65) 
Sec. 34-117. - Trapping rats. 
(a)  For the purpose of eliminating all rats that may remain in any business building after rat stoppage shall have been carried into effect, all storerooms, warehouses or other business buildings in the city shall be provided by the owner, occupant, agent or any other person in custody of such business building with one or more traps, which shall be kept set and freshly baited at frequent intervals and maintained in good working condition and which shall be inspected daily. Any rats caught in the traps shall be killed, removed daily and disposed of in a manner acceptable to the health officer; and such traps shall be reset and rebaited. 
(b)  Rats may also be destroyed by such means other than trapping as are approved by the health officer or by any authorized agency of the United States Public Health Service or the state department of health. 
(Code 1978, § 9-66) 
Sec. 34-118. - Treatment of rat burrows and harborage places. 
    Rat burrows and other exterior harborage places for rats shall be treated under methods prescribed by the health officer. 
(Code 1978, § 9-67) 
Sec. 34-119. - Precautions against climbing rats. 
    In order to protect business buildings from what is commonly called the climbing or roof rat, it shall be unlawful to permit fishing poles, ladders or any other object that a rat could climb on in order to reach the roof of any business building to lean against the sides or walls of such business building. The owner of a business building shall also protect elevator shafts, fire escapes and guy wires in such manner that rats will not have ingress into any business building. Any person in charge of a business building shall trim the branches of all trees extending over and against such building, and the trees shall be cut and trimmed and kept trimmed and cut so that no part of any branch or any part of such tree shall be closer than ten feet to any business building, and the tops of all trees shall be cut back ten feet from a line extending perpendicularly from any exterior wall of a business building. 
(Code 1978, § 9-68) 
Secs. 34-120-34-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of food service establishments, retail foodstores, mobile food units and roadside food vendors, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 437.001 et seq.; public health measures relating to food, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 438.001 et seq. 

Sec. 34-161. - Authority and definitions. 
(a)  The inspection of food service establishments within the city or its police jurisdiction, the issuing, suspension and revocation of permits for the operation of such establishments, the issuing, suspension and revocation of permits for the handling of food in such establishments and the enforcement of this article shall be regulated by the city health officer. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Food includes beverages. 
    Food service establishment means any establishment engaged in the business of selling food at retail for human consumption, either on or off the premises where sold. However, the term "food service establishment" shall not include establishments which handle only prepackaged, snack-type foods. 
    Regulatory authority means the health officer or his designated assistant. 
(Code 1978, § 9-69) 
Sec. 34-162. - Permit-Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food service establishment in the city who does not possess an unrevoked permit therefor from the city issued by the city health officer or his designated assistant. 
(b)  If a person conducts, in a single building or at the same address, more than one operation, vocation or business, a separate permit shall be required for each such operation, vocation or business. 
(Code 1978, § 9-70) 
Sec. 34-163. - Same-Authority to issue. 
    The city health officer or his designated assistant is hereby authorized to issue permits to any person making application for a food service establishment permit in the city. However, only a person who complies with this article shall be entitled to receive such permit. 
(Code 1978, § 9-71) 
Sec. 34-164. - Same-Application. 
(a)  Forms. Application for such a permit as required by this article in sections 34-162 and 34-163 shall be made in writing to the city health officer or his designated assistant and shall be sworn to upon forms prescribed and furnished by the city health officer or his designated assistant. 
(b)  Required information. The application for a food service establishment permit shall include but shall not be limited to a provision requiring the applicant to swear or affirm that the applicant knows of no reason that the operation of the applicant's food service establishment would constitute a hazard to public health. 
(c)  Change of ownership. A new application shall be made for a permit as required by sections 34-162 and 34-163 of this article at any time a change of ownership of the food service establishment occurs. 
(Code 1978, § 9-72) 
Sec. 34-165. - Same-Posting. 
    Every food service establishment shall at all times display in public view its food service establishment permit. 
(Code 1978, § 9-73) 
Sec. 34-166. - Same-Duration; temporary permit. 
    Any permit granted under section 34-163 shall remain in full force and effect for 12 months from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked for cause. However, the city health officer or his designated assistant may grant a temporary food service establishment permit which shall remain in force and effect for 24 hours from the time of issuance, unless sooner revoked for cause. 
(Code 1978, § 9-74) 
Sec. 34-167. - Same-Nontransferable; specific to location. 
(a)  Every permit issued under this article shall be nontransferable. 
(b)  A food service establishment permit shall permit the operation of the establishment only at the location for which granted. 
(Code 1978, § 9-75) 
Sec. 34-168. - Same-Suspension; hearing. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, without prior notice or hearing, suspend any permit to operate a food service establishment if the holder of the permit does not comply with this article or if the regulatory authority determines that the operation of the food service establishment otherwise constitutes a hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by subsection (b) of this section. When a permit is suspended, food service operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be allowed an opportunity for a hearing within 20 days of receipt of a request for a hearing. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within ten days. If no written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within ten days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(c)  Whenever a food service establishment is required under this section to cease operations, it shall not resume operations until such time as a reinspection determines that conditions responsible for the requirement to cease operations no longer exist. Opportunity for reinspection shall be offered within a reasonable time. 
(Code 1978, § 9-76) 
Sec. 34-169. - Same-Revocation; hearing; notification; application for new permit. 
    The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a food service establishment permit for serious or repeated violations of this article or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of his duty. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. Whenever a revocation of a permit has become final, the holder of the revoked permit may make written application for a new permit. 
(Code 1978, § 9-77) 
Sec. 34-170. - Service of notice. 
    A notice provided for in this article is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the food service establishment permit or person in charge or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(Code 1978, § 9-78) 
Sec. 34-171. - Hearing; written report of decision. 
    The hearings provided for in this article shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by him. Based upon the evidence presented at such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make a final finding and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered at the hearing. The regulatory authority shall furnish the holder of the permit with a written report of the hearing decision. 
(Code 1978, § 9-79) 
Sec. 34-172. - Inspection frequency; right of entry. 
(a)  Inspection of food service establishments shall be performed as often as the regulatory authority deems it necessary for the enforcement of this article. 
(b)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce this article or whenever the city health officer or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that a condition exists in any building or upon any premises that would be a violation of this article, the city health officer or his authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the building or premises or to perform any duty imposed upon the city health officer by this article. If such building or premises is occupied, the city health officer or his authorized representative shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building or premises is unoccupied, the city health officer or his authorized representative shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused or if no owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises can be located, the city health officer or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy by law to secure entry. 
(Code 1978, § 9-80) 
Sec. 34-173. - Examination and condemnation of food. 
    The regulatory authority may examine or sample food as often as the regulatory authority deems it necessary for enforcement of this article. The regulatory authority may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge specifying with particularity the reasons therefor, place a hold order on any food which he believes is in violation of any section of this article. The regulatory authority shall tag, label or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No food subject to a hold order shall be used, served or removed from the establishment. The regulatory authority shall permit storage of the food under conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed within ten days and that if no hearing is requested the food shall be destroyed. A hearing shall be held if so requested and, on the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated or the owner or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with this article. 
(Code 1978, § 9-81) 
Sec. 34-174. - Permit fees. 
    The city shall charge a fee of $10.00 for each food service establishment permit and a fee of $3.00 for each temporary food service establishment permit. However, the city shall charge no fees for food service establishment permits for any government-owned and -operated food service establishment. 
(Code 1978, § 9-82) 
Sec. 34-175. - General operating requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale or keep for the purpose of selling or offering for sale any food of any kind intended for human consumption which is spoiled or tainted or which is unwholesome and unfit for human consumption for any reason. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale or keep for such purpose any food or drink intended for human consumption which has been adulterated by any material harmful in any way. 
(c)  Premises used for sale or storage of food intended for human consumption must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. It shall be unlawful to permit any accumulation of refuse or waste of any kind to remain thereon for more than 24 hours, and it shall be unlawful to permit any decaying animal or plant material to remain on such premises. 
(d)  Premises used for the storage, preparation or sale of food intended for human consumption shall be kept free from flies, vermin and rodents. 
(e)  All persons engaged in handling or coming in contact with food intended for sale for human consumption shall keep themselves clean, both as to person and clothing. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any infectious or contagious disease to handle or be engaged in the care or preparation of any such food, and it shall be unlawful to permit any such person to be employed in or about any premises where food is stored, prepared or sold or to deliver any such food. 
(Code 1978, § 9-83) 
Secs. 34-176-34-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Registry and cleanup of certain hazardous waste facilities, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.181 et seq. 

Sec. 34-201. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bulk form means: 
(1)  Substances in dry form weighing over 1,000 pounds; or 
(2)  Substances in liquid form consisting of more than 55 gallons. 
    Commercial substance means: 
(1)  Any substance that has monetary value; 
(2)  Any sellable product; or 
(3)  Any substance capable of being used for a purpose other than as a waste product. 
    Hazardous means: 
(1)  Any substance, mixture or article that is poisonous on the basis of human experience; 
(2)  Any substance, mixture or article that is toxic, corrosive, an irritant, a strong sensitizer, flammable or that generates pressure through decomposition, heat or other means, if such substance or mixture of substances may cause substantial personal injury or substantial illness during or as a proximate result of any customary or reasonably foreseeable handling or use; 
(3)  Any radioactive substance; or 
(4)  Anhydrous ammonia. 
    Noncommercial substance means: 
(1)  Waste; or 
(2)  Any substance that has no market value and that is not reasonably capable of being used for any purpose other than as a waste product. 
    Toxic means: 
(1)  Any substance, mixture or article that is poisonous on the basis of human experience; 
(2)  Any substance, mixture or article found to be a hazardous substance or banned hazardous substance in accordance with the Federal Hazardous Substances Act; or 
(3)  Any substance, mixture or article found to be toxic, highly toxic, an irritant, a strong sensitizer, corrosive, flammable or pressure generating in accordance with the Federal Hazardous Substances Act. 
(Code 1978, § 9-101) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-202. - Transport of noncommercial toxic or hazardous substances in bulk form restricted to designated route. 
    Every vehicle, whether common carrier or not, transporting noncommercial toxic or hazardous substances in bulk form shall be confined to movement within the city to the following route: 
Only along U.S. Highway 59 Bypass within the city limits. 
(Code 1978, § 9-102) 
Sec. 34-203. - Accumulation or disposal of toxic or hazardous substances. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, place or permit to accumulate or remain on any property within the city limits any noncommercial toxic or hazardous substances. 
(Ord. No. 1989-10, § 9-103, 5-8-89) 
Sec. 34-204. - Abatement-Notice to remedy. 
(a)  Whenever any condition described in this article is found to exist upon any premises in the city, any officer or authorized employee of the city shall notify the owner of such premises or his authorized agent or representative, if known, and any person holding a recorded lien on the property to remove or remedy the condition within ten days after the date of such notice. 
(b)  Such notice shall be in writing and served on the owner, his authorized agent or representative, if known, and any person holding a recorded lien on the property, either in person or by mail to the latest known address of any such person. 
(c)  If the address of any lienholder is unknown, the city may give notice to the lienholder by sending written notice in care of the owner or his authorized agent or representative at the last known address of any such person or entity. 
(Ord. No. 1989-11, § 9-105, 5-22-89) 
Sec. 34-205. - Same-Performance by city. 
    If the owner of any premises, his authorized agent or representative fails to remove or remedy any condition described in this article within the required period of time after the city has given notice as provided in this article, the city may do whatever is necessary to remove or remedy the condition or cause the work to be done and may charge to the owner of such lot or premises the expenses incurred, which expenses shall be assessed against the real estate upon which the work was done. The charges against the owner for expenses shall not relieve the owner or occupant of any prosecution for such violation. 
(Ord. No. 1989-11, § 9-106, 5-22-89) 
Sec. 34-206. - Same-Collection of expenses. 
    The city manager or health officer shall file a statement of expenses incurred by the city under this article with the county clerk, giving the amount of such expense and the date on which the work was done or improvements made and describing the property, and the city shall have a privileged lien on such lot or real estate upon which the work was done or improvements made to secure the expenditures so made in accordance with Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4436, which lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. The amount of such expenses shall bear ten percent interest from the date of payment by the city. For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of such lien may be had in the name of the city, and the statement of expenses so made or a certified copy thereof shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1989-11, § 9-107, 5-22-89) 
Sec. 34-207. - Cleanup costs. 
(a)  Any person who accidentally, negligently or intentionally causes or is responsible for a spill of toxic or hazardous materials affecting property within the city shall be liable for the payment of all costs incurred by the fire department and any assisting departments and agencies to abate such an event. The remedy provided by this section shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(b)  For purposes of this article, costs incurred by the fire department or other departments of the city shall include but shall not be limited to all actual out-of-pocket expenses attributable to the abatement or cleanup of any toxic or hazardous materials, including costs of equipment operations, costs of materials utilized, costs of specialists, experts or other contract labor not in the full-time employment of the city, overtime costs and any other incidental costs the city incurs as a result of the incident. 
(c)  The authority to recover costs under this section shall not include actual fire suppression, rescue, medical and other services specifically provided by the fire department and other city departments and that are unrelated to a particular hazardous materials incident. 
(Ord. No. 1989-19, 9-25-89) 
Sec. 34-208. - No parking of hazardous materials railroad cars. 
    It shall be unlawful to park or cause to be parked any railroad cars containing hazardous material or residues of hazardous material. Parking shall be defined as stationery for a period of more than two consecutive hours, except for purposes of loading or unloading any such materials. 
(Ord. No. 1992-23, 11-24-92) 
Chapter 38 - MANUFACTURED HOUSING, MOBILE HOMES AND TRAVEL TRAILERS 
[1] 
Footnotes: 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory structure shall mean any allowable structural addition to a mobile home including, without limitation, awnings, carports, cabanas, Florida rooms, porches, ramadas, storage building, utility room and similar appurtenant structures. 
    Alterations shall mean the replacement, addition, modification, and removal, or installation of any equipment in a new manufactured home after sale by a manufacturer to a retailer, but prior to sale and installation by a retailer to a purchaser, which may effect the construction, fire safety, occupancy, plumbing, heat-producing or electrical system. It includes any modifications made in the manufactured home which may affect the compliance of the home with the standards, as established by Texas Department of Labor Standards or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, but it does not include the repair or replacement of a component or appliance requiring "plug-in" to an electrical receptacle, which appliance was not provided with the mobile home by the manufacturer, if rating of the receptacle to which it is connected. 
    Building official shall mean the City of Wharton building official as prescribed by Chapter 18 Buildings and Construction, Article II, Building Official, sections 18-36-18-40 of the City of Wharton Code of Ordinances. 
    Camping trailer shall mean a portable unit mounted on wheels and constructed of collapsible partial side walls which fold for towing by another vehicle and unfold to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or trailer use. 
    Construction trailer shall mean any trailer or temporary structure associated with the construction process. 
    Dependent shall mean not self-contained and not having a water-flush toilet, lavatory and shower connected to outside facilities. 
    Finalized shall mean as to any permit, that all work authorized by the permit has been completed in due compliance with law. 
    HUD-code manufactured home means a structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on-site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. 
    Manufactured housing or manufactured home shall mean a HUD-code manufactured home or a mobile home and collectively means and refers to both. 
    Mobile home shall mean a structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on-site, is 320 feet or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. 
    Mobile home lot shall mean a plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home. 
    Mobile home park shall mean a contiguous development of land which has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes. 
    Mobile home stand means the space within the lot on which the mobile home or travel trailer is to be located. 
    Mobile home subdivision shall mean a duly recorded subdivision for mobile homes approved by the city in accordance with all applicable codes, ordinances, laws, rules and regulations. 
    Motor home shall mean a vehicular unit designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use built on or permanently attached to a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis or on a chassis cab or van which is an integral part of the completed vehicle. 
    Recreational vehicle shall mean a unit which contains facilities for either sleeping or temporary living quarters, or both, and which has its own motive power or is designed to be mounted on or towed by another motor vehicle. The term recreational vehicle shall include but not be limited to a motor home, truck camper, travel trailer and camping trailer; provided, however a recreational vehicle shall not include a boat, a mobile home or a modular home. 
    Recreational vehicle park shall mean a contiguous development of land which has been planned and improved for the placement of recreational vehicles. 
    Sales lot means any premises used by a retailer for showing mobile homes to potential customers or any tract of land used for showing recreational vehicles to potential customers excepting premises used and owned by an individual showing a recreational vehicle which he owns and has used when such individual has not shown or sold more that two recreational vehicles to potential customers in any 12-month period. 
State Law reference- Retailer required to hold manufacturer housing retailer's certificate, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5221f. 
    Self-contained shall mean having a water-flush toilet, lavatory, tub or shower and kitchen sink, all of which are connected to water storage and sewage holding tanks located within the recreational vehicle and which facilities are also capable of being connected to outside utilities. Further, a recreational vehicle shall not be self-contained unless all plumbing fixtures and electrical outlets are both capable of being operated independent of connections to sewer, water and electrical systems and capable of being connected to outside utilities. 
    Skirting means concealment from view of the undercarriage on all sides of a mobile home and/or recreational vehicle. Skirting attachments must be constructed with metal, vinyl, wood, masonry, or other material approved by the city. 
    Solid fence shall mean any fence constructed of masonry, metal, or wood or any combination of such materials and may be screened with Venetian blinds, plantings or other appropriate materials to obscure visibility. 
    Trailer or temporary trailer shall mean any trailer or portable structure which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used for nonresidential purposes other than, or in addition to, a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation which is or will be, connected to the required utilities which use is permitted herein for a limited period of time only, such as a construction office used at a construction site. Except as other wise specifically provided, the term "trailer" as used in this chapter shall mean and include the term "trailer" and "temporary trailer" but shall not include travel trailer. 
    Travel trailer shall mean a vehicular, portable structure on a permanent chassis, designed by the manufacturer to be towed by another vehicle and used as a temporary dwelling, and which meets the definition of "temporary living quarters" or "permanent living quarters" as applicable to its use. 
(1)  "Temporary living quarters". A travel trailer intended to be used for recreational, camping or travel use and of such size and weight so as not to require a special highway movement permit and which complies with the standards of NFPA 501-C, dated 1982, or the ANSI standards for the construction of travel trailers which were in effect at the time the travel trailer was constructed. 
(2)  "Permanent living quarters." A travel trailer which may be occupied indefinitely (without limit as to the length of time it is occupied) which: 
a.  In the traveling mode does not require a special highway permit; 
b.  Is less than eight feet in width; 
c.  Is less than 40 feet in length exclusive of pulling or tow equipment; 
d.  Has a minimum floor area of 120 square feet; 
e.  When placed on location, has all the amenities, facilities and capabilities of a mobile home; and 
f.  Complies with standards of NFPA 501-C, dated 1982, or the ANSI standards for the construction of travel trailers which were in effect at the time the travel trailer was constructed. 
    Truck camper shall mean a portable unit constructed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, travel, or camping use, consisting of a roof, floor, and sides to be loaded onto and unloaded from the bed of a truck. 
    Any reference to the masculine gender including, but not limited to him and his in this chapter also includes the feminine gender. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-2. - Building official's authority. 
    Except as otherwise specified in this chapter, the building official shall be the permit and license issuance officer for all permits and licenses required pursuant to this chapter. He shall prescribe forms therefor including all information reasonably and necessarily required for his enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. He shall also have authority to establish reasonable and necessary administrative rules and regulations relating to the performance of his duties under this chapter, including, but not limited to the place where license and permit applications will be received and the times when inspections will be made. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-3. - Notices and orders. 
    The building official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to remove or abate illegal or unsafe conditions and to ensure compliance with all the requirements of this chapter for the safety, health and general welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-4. - Compliance. 
    When any person shall have been notified by a written notice by the city that any condition may exist or work being done by him as owner, agent, or in any other capacity, is in violation of the provisions of this chapter, it shall be his duty to abate the violation within the time specified in the written notice. Such time shall not exceed ten (10) days and the building official may provide for immediate compliance when a serious threat to life or substantial damage to property may exist. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-5. - General penalty; continuing violations; abatement. 
(a)  Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars, and each day's violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
(b)  Abatement. In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Secs. 38-6-38-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REQUIREMENTS CONCERNING MOBILE HOMES, MANUFACTURED HOUSING AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-35. - Definitions. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided, the term "mobile home" as used in this division shall mean and include the term mobile home and manufactured housing. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Secs. 38-36. - Authorized locations. 
(a)  Placement of a mobile home for use or occupancy as a residential dwelling, constructed prior to June 15, 1976 shall be prohibited within the corporate limits of the City. said prohibition will be prospective and shall not apply to a mobile home previously legally permitted and used or occupied as a residential dwelling within the city. Permits for such use occupancy shall be granted by the city for replacement of a mobile home constructed prior to June 15, 1976 within the corporate limits with a HUD-code manufactured home, provided the placement of such replacement manufactured home can meet the setback and distance requirements in this Code. 
(b)  Except as permitted in (a) above and subject to lawful compliance with this Code, a mobile home may be placed, or permitted to remain within corporate limits of the city, if and only if, it is situated: 
(1)  In a mobile home park licensed pursuant to Article III of this chapter; 
(2)  In a duly platted and recorded mobile home subdivision, meeting all requirements of Article IV of this chapter; 
(3)  In a mobile home sales lot; 
(4)  Upon a site purchased by a landowner prior to the effective date hereof, provided that the occupancy of the mobile home meeting HUD-code manufactured home standards will meet the requirements of being a "homestead" as set forth in Chapter 41 of the Texas Property Code. The landowner and occupant of the mobile home shall never utilize the mobile home as a rental unit or commercial property. Successor owners of such property and mobile home shall also be allowed to occupy same as long as it is occupied as a "homestead" and not converted to rental or commercial property. This "homestead exception" further requires that the initial landowner and occupant shall make written application for a mobile home placement permit with the city within sixty (60) calendar days after the effective date of this chapter [Ord. No. 2000-06, effective Feb. 27, 2000 at 12:01 a.m.], otherwise this one-time "homestead exception" shall forever expire at midnight on the sixtieth day after the effective date of this chapter. 
(5)  Upon a site that such mobile home has continuously occupied prior to and since the effective date hereof, provided that such occupation was lawful on that date, and further provided, that the continued occupation thereof does not pose a significant danger to the health or safety of persons within the mobile home or to others; 
(6)  Upon a site that such mobile home has occupied prior to and since annexation of the site by the city, provided that such mobile home has continuously occupied the site since the date the site was annexed, and further provided, that the continued occupation thereof does not pose a significant danger to the health or safety of persons within the mobile home or to others; 
(7)  The exemption for existing mobile homes shall apply to the mobile home being occupied prior to and at the time of adoption of this chapter as defined in subsection (5) above, or to the mobile home being occupied prior to and since the time of annexation as defined in subsection (6) above, and shall include any replacement mobile homes for such site provided such replacement is made within six (6) months of the date the existing mobile home being replaced has been removed, damaged or destroyed, if the placement of such replacement mobile home meeting HUD-code manufactured home standards can meet the setback and distance requirements found in this Code. 
(8)  Upon a site having no other dwellings except a mobile home occupied prior to the effective date hereof, provided that such occupation was lawful on that date, and further provided that reapplication for the placement of a mobile home is made within six months of the effective date hereof, and provided that the occupation thereof does not pose a significant danger to the health or safety of persons within the mobile home or to others. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place a mobile home at any location not authorized by this chapter, or to permit or suffer any mobile home to remain within the corporate limits of the city in any location not authorized pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  A recreational vehicle may not be placed on any property except as specifically permitted in this chapter. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the above, all permits, licenses and approvals for occupancy issued pursuant to this chapter are hereby made expressly subject to applicable deed restrictions and covenants running with the land to which they pertain and no such permit, license or approvals for occupancy shall be construed as authorizing any violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Secs. 38-37. - Placement standards and skirting requirements. 
(a)  Placement of mobile homes and recreational vehicles within mobile home parks shall be as set forth in Article III of this chapter. 
(b)  Mobile homes placed outside of mobile home parks shall conform to the requirements of all sections in this chapter. 
(c)  In addition, all mobile homes shall have skirting construed within thirty (30) days after being placed, either within a mobile home park or outside of a mobile home park. Any mobile homes existing within the corporate limits of the city on the effective date hereof, whether within a mobile home park or outside, will be required to have skirting construed by no later March 1, 2001. However, before being subject to a penalty for violation of this subsection, the building official shall serve the owner or occupants or any mobile home without skirting with written notice of violation hereof requiring compliance within such time as designated therein. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Secs. 38-38. - Upkeep, smoke detectors. 
(a)  All mobile homes and recreational vehicles, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by this Code or by standards adopted by this Code, or by any other law, in a mobile home or recreational vehicle, shall be maintained in good working order. 
(b)  No persons shall occupy a mobile home or recreational vehicle, regardless of the age of the mobile home or recreational vehicle, unless there is installed therein smoke detectors approved by the city, or as required by law for that particular mobile home or recreational vehicle. 
(c)  All smoke detectors in a mobile home or recreational vehicle shall be maintained so that they are in good working order at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Secs. 38-39. - Restricted uses. 
    Mobile homes and recreational vehicles shall only be permitted for residential use or occupancy unless another use is specifically approved by planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Secs. 38-40-38-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MOBILE HOME COMPLIANCE 

Sec. 38-90. - Definition. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided, the term "mobile home" as used in this division shall mean and include the term mobile home and manufactured housing. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Editor's note- Section number and catchline have been supplied by the editor. 
Sec. 38-91. - Finalized placement permit required for occupancy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy in whole or in part, make use of any utility service, or to furnish a utility to any mobile home which has been placed or replaced within the corporate limits of the city until and unless a placement permit therefor has been issued and requirements thereof complied with and finalized. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow another person to use or occupy in whole or in part, make use of any utility service, or to furnish utility to any mobile home which has been placed or replaced within the corporate limits of the city on a premises belonging to such person, or over which such person has control until and unless a placement permit therefor has been issued and requirements thereof complied with and finalized. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-92. - Placement inspection and fees. 
(a)  Each mobile home placed or replaced within the corporate limits of the city for the first time shall be inspected by the building official to determine that its placement is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. A fee for such placement inspection is hereby established and shall be collected in the amount specified in the building code for building permit fees. In consideration of such fee the applicant shall be entitled to the original inspection of the placement of the mobile home and one reinspection for deficiencies, if required. 
(b)  Each mobile home moved from one location in the city to another, for which a mobile home placement permit has already been issued, shall be subject to a transfer fee for the mobile home placement inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-93. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to place or replace a mobile home shall make application for the resulting mobile home upon one (1) or more forms prescribed by the building official setting forth: 
(1)  A description of the resulting mobile home by dimensions, manufacturer and serial or identification number. 
(2)  The name and address of the person having title to the resulting mobile home. 
(3)  The date of manufacture of the resulting mobile home. 
(4)  Whether the resulting mobile home has affixed to it a seal, label, or decal certifying its compliance with standards adopted by the Texas Department of Labor and Standards pursuant to Vernon's Ann. Civ. St art. 5221f, or a seal, label or decal issued by another state certifying its compliance with standards promulgated for mobile homes by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(5)  If the resulting mobile home has affixed to it a seal, label or decal as described in item (a)(4) above, the applicant shall certify whether or not there have been any alterations to the mobile home since the seal, label or decal was affixed. 
(6)  The proposed location of the resulting mobile home by legal description, plot plan, diagram or other means which is adequate to advise the building official of the exact placement and stand and its relationship to property lines and other structures. 
(7)  The license number of the mobile home park operator if the resulting mobile home is to be placed in a mobile home park. 
(8)  The county clerk's recording information for the plat thereof if the resulting mobile home is to be placed in a mobile home subdivision. 
(9)  Any information necessary to determine compliance with any applicable regulations pertaining to flood proofing in flood-prone areas. 
(10)  The utilities to be provided to the resulting mobile home and the source and availability thereof. 
(11)  Any additional information the building official finds will aid him in the enforcement of this chapter or other laws applicable to mobile homes. 
(b)  The application shall be signed by the owner of the resulting mobile home or his agent, and if the resulting mobile home is to be lawfully placed outside a mobile home park, the owner of the land on which the resulting mobile home is to be located. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-94. - Finalization of placement permit. 
    A placement permit shall be finalized by the building official and occupancy of the mobile home shall be authorized when: 
(1)  The applicant has obtained all applicable permits and inspections under this Code and the city building codes. 
(2)  The building official has found that the mobile home and its placement meet all applicable requirements of the city's ordinances and all state laws, which may be enforced by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-95. - Revocation. 
    The city council may revoke any mobile home and/or recreational vehicle park license issued under this chapter if any of the provisions of this chapter are violated. However, before the license may be revoked, the city council must give ten days notice to the holder of the license and hold a public hearing thereon. After the license has been revoked, the license may be reissued if the reasons for the revocation have been duly corrected and any fines imposed have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-96. - Utility disconnection. 
(a)  When any utility service to a mobile home is disconnected, it shall be the duty of the utility company to disconnect, lock, seal or otherwise prevent the unauthorized connection or reconnection of such utility service. In the event that the service is provided on a submetering or other basis whereby the utility company's billing is not made directly to the offending mobile home resident, then such duty to disconnect or prevent shall rest upon the non-offending person contracting for service with the utility company. 
(b)  A mobile home which has not been replaced, but which has had any utility service thereto disconnected, may be reconnected to such utility service, provided that: 
(1)  A placement permit has been previously issued and finalized for such mobile home at the site on which it is located; and 
(2)  A permit has been obtained for reconnection for any electrical utilities and the building official has found, upon inspection, that the exterior wiring service on the mobile home is in such condition that it may be serviced. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-97-38-117. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 

Sec. 38-118. - Recreational vehicle placement. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, use or occupy a recreational vehicle within the corporate limits of the city unless such placement, use or occupancy is specifically authorized by this chapter. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to permit, allow or suffer the placement, use or occupancy of a recreational vehicle on any property under his ownership or control unless such placement, use or occupancy is specifically authorized by this chapter. 
(b)  Any provisions of this chapter which authorize the occupancy of a certain type of recreational vehicle under certain conditions shall not be applicable to any other type of recreational vehicle. 
Any computation of time under the provisions of this division shall commence from the date that the recreational vehicle is placed, parked or stored. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-119. - Recreational vehicles outside parks. 
(a)  A recreational vehicle may be parked or stored outside a mobile home or recreational vehicle park so long as no one occupies it for permanent use, no utilities are connected to the recreational vehicle, and the vehicle is not parked on or extending over public property, unless parked on the street in full compliance with the laws. 
(b)  An occupied recreational vehicle may be lawfully parked or temporarily placed on any private property for a period not to exceed seven (7) days in any consecutive six-month period. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any mobile home or recreational vehicle on any street in the city in which such parking blocks the natural flow of traffic or creates a hazard. Under no circumstance shall any person park a mobile home or recreation vehicle on a public street within the city for a period in excess of three hours. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-120. - Camping trailers. 
(a)  A camping trailer may be placed in a recreational vehicle park licensed by the city as such, for a period not to exceed 30 days in any consecutive six-month period and may be used for sleeping and living purposes during the time it is so placed in a recreational vehicle park. 
(b)  No camping trailer may be placed or used for any purpose within a mobile home park. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-121. - Motor homes, truck campers, and travel trailers. 
(a)  A motor home, a truck camper or a travel trailer may be placed in a mobile home park or a recreational vehicle park for a period of time not to exceed six months within any consecutive 12-month period, and may be used for sleeping and living purposes during the time that it is so placed in the recreational vehicle or mobile home park if: 
(1)  It is self-contained. 
(2)  It has at least 120 square feet of floor space. 
(3)  The park in which it is placed is licensed by the city as a recreational vehicle park or a mobile home park. 
(4)  It is placed on a lot in the recreational vehicle or mobile home park which was shown on the park's application and approved by the city for use of the specific type of recreational vehicle being placed thereon. 
(b)  A motor home, a truck camper or a travel trailer which is not self-contained may be placed in a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days within any consecutive 12-month period and may be used for sleeping and living purposes during the time it is placed in the mobile home or recreational vehicle park if: 
(1)  It has a minimum of 84 square feet of floor space. 
(2)  The mobile home or recreational vehicle park in which it is placed is licensed by the city as a mobile home park or a recreational vehicle park, and the park meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  It is placed on a lot in the mobile home or recreational vehicle park which was shown on the park's application and approved for use of the specific type of recreational vehicle being placed thereon. 
(c)  A travel trailer may be placed in a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park, and may be used for sleeping and living purposes while it is placed in such a park, without limitation as to the period of time it is so located and used if: 
(1)  It is placed in a park which is licensed by the city as a recreational vehicle park or a mobile home park. 
(2)  It is placed on a lot in a recreational vehicle or mobile home park which is shown on the park's application and approved by the city for use by travel trailers connected to public utilities. 
(3)  It is connected to the mobile home or recreational vehicle park's (or to a public) water supply, sewer system and electric system, and to a gas system if the travel trailer is designed for natural gas and has any gas appliances. 
(4)  It has at least one hundred twenty (120) square feet of floor space for the first occupant and at least thirty (30) square feet for each additional occupant. 
(5)  It is tied down and blocked pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-122. - Responsibility of park owners and managers. 
    No mobile home park or recreational vehicle park or owner or manager of such a park shall allow, suffer or permit one (1) or more persons to use a recreational vehicle in such park in violation of any provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-123-38-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE HOME, MANUFACTURED HOUSING AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS 
DIVISON 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-166. - Definitions. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided, the term "mobile home" as used in this article only shall mean and include the term mobile home, manufactured housing and recreational vehicle and the term "mobile home park" shall mean and include the term mobile home park, manufactured housing park and recreational vehicle park. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-167. - Location. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements contained herein, each boundary of a mobile home park must be at least 200 feet from any permanent building or structure located outside the park, unless separated therefrom by a solid fence at least six feet in height. 
(b)  Non-conforming mobile home parks existing on the effective date hereof will be required to comply with this section no later than March 1, 2002, however, solid fencing will not be required if impractical where it will block existing park entrances and driveways. 
(c)  A variance to these requirements may be given by the city planning commission. The procedure for obtaining a variance is set forth in section 38-262 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
DIVISION 2. - PLATTING AND DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 38-168. - Mobile home park plat. 
(a)  Any person developing a mobile home park shall become familiar with the requirements of this chapter and policy of the comprehensive master plan as prepared by the city planning commission. 
(b)  Whenever any mobile home park is proposed and before any building or development permit for the erection of any structure shall be granted by the building official as hereinafter provided, the person desiring to develop such park shall present to the planning commission for consideration, a properly prepared plat in accordance with requirements established in the Subdivision Ordinance of this Code [Appendix A], with the exception of the filing requirement in the county clerk's office. 
(c)  All proposed mobile home park plats within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be submitted to the planning commission for consideration. The planning commission has power and authority to recommend approval of said plats to the city council. 
(d)  A fee shall be applicable for a mobile home park plat(s). 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-169. - Building or development permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any mobile home park within the city without first having obtained a building or development permit therefor from the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-170. - Application contents; fees. 
(a)  All applications for mobile home park building or development permits shall be submitted to the building official with the required fee in accordance with the building code of the city and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The street address and legal description of the land on which the mobile home park development is to be, or is located; 
(3)  Complete engineering plans and specifications of the proposed development showing, but not limited to the following: 
a.  The area and dimensions of the tract of land; 
b.  The number, location, and size of all mobile home lots; 
c.  Designations clearly showing: 
1.  Each lot designated for recreational vehicles; 
2.  Each lot designated for dependent recreational vehicles; 
3.  Each lot designated for self-contained recreational vehicles not connected to the park's utilities; and 
4.  Each lot designed for mobile homes (such term not to include recreational vehicles). 
d.  The location and width of roadways and walkways and vehicle parking; 
e.  The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes; 
f.  The location and details of fire hydrants; 
g.  The location of standpipes if a standpipe system is to be installed; 
h.  Plans and specifications of the required mobile home park office and all buildings constructed within the mobile home park; 
i.  The location and details of all electrical and gas systems; and 
j.  Site drainage plan and proximity to any 100-year flood plains. 
(b)  The building official shall require that all or any portion of the plans and specifications be certified by a professional engineer registered in Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-171. - Review and approval process. 
    When, upon review of all applications for a building or development permit, the building official is satisfied that the proposed plan meets with the requirements of this chapter, and other applicable provisions of this code, and any other applicable laws, rules and regulations, the permit will be issued. The issuance of the building or development permit shall not excuse the permittee from obtaining any other separate permits required under the building code of the city for specific work necessary in the construction of the mobile home park or for subsequent repair or maintenance thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-172. - Permit appeals. 
    Any appeals which a person may desire to make based upon the refusal of the building official to issue any mobile home park development or building permit for construction or maintenance work therein shall be made in accordance with the appeal procedure as provided in the city building code. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-173-38-178. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LICENSE 

Sec. 38-179. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any mobile home park within the limits of the city unless he holds a valid license issued annually by the building official in the name of such person for the specific mobile home park. All applications for licenses shall be made to the building official, who shall issue a license upon compliance by the applicant with provisions of the chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-180. - Notice of disposition and transfer. 
    Every person holding a mobile home park license shall give notice in writing to the building official within twenty-four (24) hours after having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of any interest in, or control of any mobile home park. Such written notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such mobile home park. Upon application in writing for transfer of license and deposit of the $25.00 dollar transfer fee, the license shall be transferred if the mobile home park is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code. Such transferee shall be entitled to operate the mobile home park for a period of thirty (30) days, but if he shall not have within said period of time made application for a mobile home license, then his right to operate such park shall terminate upon the expiration of the thirty-day period. If such license terminates upon the aforesaid basis, the occupants of the mobile home park shall be given a thirty-day notice to remove their mobile homes from the premises and failure to do so within such period of time shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-181. - Application for license. 
(a)  Applications for original licenses shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and shall contain: the name and address of the applicant; the location and legal description of the mobile home park; plans and specifications of the park as required in this Code; and any information that may be required by the building official so that the city can determine whether the park meets all applicable laws and ordinances. Such application shall be accompanied by the payment of the annual license fees. 
(b)  Applications for annual renewal of licenses shall be made in writing by the holders of the license, shall be accompanied by payment of the annual license fee and shall contain any change in the information submitted since the original license was issued, or the latest renewal was granted. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-182. - Issuance of mobile home park license. 
    The building official shall not issue any license for the operation of a mobile home park unless application has been made therefor pursuant to this chapter, all applicable fees have been paid, and the park is found to meet all requirements of this chapter, and all other applicable laws and ordinances. Provided, however, the issuance of a license shall not constitute conclusive evidence against the city that the park does physically meet the requirements of this chapter or other applicable laws and ordinances recognizing that compliance is a dynamic condition. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-183. - Appeals. 
    Any applicant for a mobile home park operator's license whose application has been denied may appeal such denial by written notice of appeal to the city council within ten days of the decision of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-184. - Correction of violations. 
    Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, the building official finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of this chapter, or regulations issued thereunder, the Building Official shall give notice in writing to the person to whom the license was issued that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in the notice issued by the building official, the license shall be subject to city revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-185. - Revocation and expiration of license. 
(a)  The city council may revoke any license issued under this article in case any of the provisions of this chapter are violated. However, before such license may be revoked, the council must give ten days notice to the holder of such license and hold a public hearing thereon. After such license has been revoked, the license may be reissued if the reasons for such revocation have been duly corrected and any fines have been paid. 
(b)  After a mobile home operator's license has expired, or if a mobile home operator's license has been revoked, notice shall be given by the city to the park occupants to vacate the premises within a period of 30 days and remove their mobile homes therefrom. Failure of any such park occupant to comply therewith shall constitute a violation subject to a penalty and fine set forth in section 38-5. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent the city from ordering the immediate evacuation or closure of any mobile home park to the extent permitted by law in the event of imminent or extreme hazard to human life or property. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-186. - Posting. 
    The license certificate issued under this article shall be conspicuously posted in the office of, or on the premises of, the mobile home park at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-187. - Fees. 
    The operator of any mobile home park existing on February 14, 2000, within the limits of the city shall not be required to pay the annual license fee and any subsequent annual license fees for the mobile home park provided the operator obtains a license for the mobile home park by December 31, 2000. The operator of any mobile home park not in existence on February 14, 2000 shall be required to pay all annual license fees. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00; Ord. No. 2000-24, 10-23-00) 
Sec. 38-188-38-194. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INSPECTION 

Sec. 38-195. - Maintenance. 
    Every person owning or operating a mobile home park shall maintain such park, and any facilities, fixtures, private utilities, septic systems, and permanent equipment in connection therewith, in a clean and sanitary condition free from litter, high weeds, noxious odors and shall maintain such equipment and fencing in a state of good repair. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-196. - Office building. 
(a)  Parks with more than 20 lots. Each mobile home park with more than 20 lots shall construct a building to be known as the administrative "office" with a sign designating it as such, in which shall be kept copies of all records pertaining to the management and supervision of the park, as well as all rules and regulations of the park, and such records, rules and regulations shall be made available for inspection by the building official. 
(b)  Parks with 20 lots or less. Mobile home parks with 20 lots or less shall be required to permanently post in a prominent place at or near the entrance to the mobile home park a placard or notice containing the name and address of a person authorized by the park owner to respond to notifications on a 24-hour basis. 
(c)  Nonconforming parks. Nonconforming mobile home parks existing on the effective date hereof will be required to comply with subsection (b) above, regardless of the number of lots therein. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-197. - Inspection of mobile home parks. 
    The city's building official, health officer, chief of police, fire marshal and their respective authorized deputies, officers, inspectors and other representatives are hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary or desirable to determine satisfactory compliance with this chapter and all other applicable ordinances and laws. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-198. - Hours of inspection and entry. 
    The persons designated in section 38-197 shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. Upon presentation of proper identification to the licensee, responsible agent or other persons in charge of any mobile home park, such persons may enter any building, structure, dwelling, vacant mobile home, or premises which the mobile home park operator is responsible for maintaining, but not including any private property owned, leased or in possession and control of individuals living within the mobile home park, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Mondays through Fridays; provided, however, that in case of emergency where extreme hazards are known to exist which may involve imminent injury to persons, loss of life or severe property damage, such persons may enter the aforesaid structures and premises at any time upon presentation of proper identification. Such persons are hereby authorized and directed to seek an administrative search warrant as provided by law if denied admission to inspect any such premises. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-199-38-209. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MOBILE HOME PARK STANDARDS 

Sec. 38-210. - Location. 
(a)  A mobile home park may be located upon any property within the corporate limits of the city provided: 
(1)  The site is a contiguous development of land comprised of a minimum of two acres and not less than ten mobile home stands; 
(2)  No valid and applicable deed restrictions or other land use restrictions prohibit the development or use of the site as a mobile home park; 
(3)  Soil conditions, ground water level, drainage, proximity to 100-year flood plain, and topography do not constitute hazards to the residents' health or safety; 
(4)  The site is not to be exposed to objectionable smoke, dust, noise, odors, or other adverse influences; 
(5)  The use of the site, as proposed, is not in any flood hazard area; and 
(6)  The location of this site is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  A nonconforming mobile home park existing on the effective date hereof will not be required to comply with subsection (a)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-211. - Use for nonresidential purposes. 
    No part of any mobile home park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except such uses that are recreational or required for the direct servicing and well-being of park residents and for the proper management and maintenance of the mobile home park and the required mobile home park office. Laundromats for park residents may be allowed along with vending machines. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-212. - Requirements and principles. 
(a)  The mobile home park shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  The mobile home park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to insure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. 
(2)  Each mobile home lot within the park shall: 
a.  Consist of a minimum of 3,600 square feet; and 
b.  Be at least 35 feet wide at the front stand. 
(3)  A mobile home shall be harbored on each lot stand so that: 
a.  There shall be a minimum clearance of 25 feet from front of lot line. 
b.  There shall be at least 21 feet side clearance between each mobile home. 
c.  End-to-end clearance shall be not less than ten feet. 
d.  There shall be at least ten feet clearance between mobile homes and any building within the mobile home park or from any property line bounding the mobile home park, except storage buildings. 
(4)  All mobile home lots shall abut upon a public street, common area street or driveway and shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Public entrance, private entrance and any public or private collector streets within the mobile home park shall be at least 280 feet wide. 
b.  All other private common area streets or driveways within the mobile home park shall be at least 28 feet wide. 
c.  All private common area streets or driveways shall be well marked in the daytime and lighted at night. 
d.  1.  The minimum quality of all public streets which are to be dedicated to the city and private common area streets or driveways shall be six inches of concrete and constructed in accordance with the most current edition of the Design Standards for the City. 
2.  Any non-common area private streets and private driveways may be six inches of limestone base (or its equivalent) and one and one-half inches of asphalt topping. 
3.  Private common area streets or driveways inside a nonconforming mobile home park existing on the effective date hereof will, at a minimum, be required to be paved by the park owner no later than March 1, 2002, with chipcoat, sealcoat asphalt, concrete or other surfaces approved by the building official. A base which is adequately durable under normal use and weather conditions shall be installed by the park owner prior to paving. 
e.  Along all private common area streets or driveways, concrete curb gutter shall be constructed by the park owner in accordance with the most current edition of the design standards for the city. 
(5)  For each mobile home lot there shall be two off-street parking spaces provided. 
(6)  For each mobile home lot there shall be provided an attached or detached storage building of a minimum of 150 cubic feet. 
(7)  All public and private utilities shall be installed underground. 
(b)  Section 38-212(a)(2) through (a)(7) with the exception of section 38-212(a)(4)d.3. will not apply to nonconforming mobile home parks existing on the effective date hereof, as long as such park continues to be operated without ceasing as a mobile home park at the same location on the effective date of this chapter [Feb. 27, 2000]. However, the owner of a non-conforming mobile home park shall physically establish a minimum clearance of ten (10) feet in all directions between mobile homes, manufactured housing and/or recreational vehicles and additions thereto. All other articles and sections shall apply to nonconforming parks. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-213. - Duties of owner generally; register. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner, his agent, representative or manager to prescribe rules and regulations for the management of the park; to make adequate provisions for the enforcement of the rules; and to enforce any and all subsequent rules and regulations which may be adopted for the management of such park. Copies of all such rules and regulations shall be furnished to the city secretary. In addition thereto, it shall be the duty of the park owner, his agent, representative or manager to comply strictly with the following: 
(1)  Provide for regular inspection of all public and private utilities. 
(2)  Provide for the collection and removal of garbage and other waste material. 
(3)  Prohibit the placing or storage of unsightly material or inoperative vehicles of any kind. 
(4)  All sewer traps not in use shall be capped. 
(5)  Provide and maintain safe and sanitary public and private utility connections to each mobile home lot. 
(6)  Maintain neat, clean, sanitary and safe common areas of the park, and require residents to properly maintain private property. 
(7)  Insure that each mobile home is so placed on the stand in such a manner that the full length of the frame can be firmly blocked to the concrete footings or concrete runners. 
(8)  Each mobile home stand shall be assigned a number and this number shall be displayed on the street side of the mobile home. 
(9)  Provide or demand that all mobile homes and/or recreational vehicles have skirting constructed within 30 days after home being placed. 
(b)  The licensee shall maintain or ensure that an agent maintains a park register showing: 
(1)  The names of persons leasing or residing in the park showing the mobile home lot on which they are leasing or residing. 
(2)  The serial number of each mobile home which is located in the park; whether the mobile home is a mobile home as defined in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5221f, a HUD-Code manufactured home, a recreational vehicle connected to the park's utilities, a self-contained recreational vehicle not connected to the park's utilities, or a dependent recreational vehicle; the make, manufacturer, model, year, length and width of the mobile home, and the lot on which each such mobile home is located. 
(3)  The date each mobile home is placed in the park and the date it is removed from the park. 
(4)  The date each recreational vehicle is placed in the park and the date it is removed from the park. 
(5)  The park register shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times to the persons designated in section 14-103 of this Code and other properly identified officials whose duties may necessitate access to the information contained therein. 
(c)  The park register shall be initiated on January first of each year, and shall be retired on December 31st. Old registers shall be retained on the premises for at least three (3) years following the retirement. 
(d)  The licensee shall notify the health officer immediately of any known communicable or contagious disease within the mobile home park. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-214. - Water, sanitary sewer, electrical and gas supply. 
    All mobile homes are to be properly connected to an approved water, sanitary sewer, (septic, if allowable), gas and electrical system, and terminate within the mobile home stand. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-215. - Fuel. 
    Bottled gas shall not be used at individual mobile home lots unless the containers are properly connected. Bottled gas cylinders shall be securely fastened in place. No cylinders containing bottled gas shall be located in a mobile home or within five (5) feet of a door thereof. State and local regulations applicable to the handling of bottled gas and fuel oil must be followed by the park owner and residents. The maximum number of gallons of bottled gas per mobile home shall be no more than one (1) five-gallon and one (1) fifteen-gallon container. The maximum amount of fuel oil per mobile home shall not be more than fifty-five (55) gallons. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-216. - Additional construction. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating a mobile home park or occupying a mobile home to construct, or permit to be constructed, any additional structure, building or shelter in connection with or attached to a mobile home, except, however, awnings of canvas or metal, suitably constructed, may be attached to such mobile home, as well as accessory structures as defined herein including portable prefabricated, temporary rooms, for the express purpose of increasing mobile home living area, commonly called among other references "cabana," which meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Of metal only, fire resistive, double wall, mechanical joint panels, (no welded joints between panels permitted); 
(2)  Strength of materials and structure to meet the minimum standards of the most current edition of the standard building code, as adopted by the city; 
(3)  Capable of being dismantled or moved; 
(4)  Such rooms shall be completely dismantled or removed from the site at the time the mobile home to which it is accessory is moved; 
(5)  Finish and appearance to be as near the same as possible to the mobile home to which it is accessory; 
(6)  The length must not exceed the length of the mobile home to which it is accessory; and 
(7)  When additions are made, such additions shall be computed as part of the mobile home stand. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-217. - Tiedown and foundation blocking standards. 
(a)  The installation of manufactured housing shall comply with the standards and requirements of the Texas Manufactured Housing Code. 
(b)  All manufactured housing must have adequate tiedowns pursuant to Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5221f. 
(c)  Manufactured housing shall be placed on piers and footings meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  Piers and footings shall be installed directly under the main frame or chassis of the mobile home. They shall be located under both frame rails. Piers shall be spaced so that the center of no pier is farther than ten (10) feet from the center of the next one. 
(2)  All footings shall be of solid concrete-type construction, at least 16 inches in length, 16 inches in width, and four inches in height. All grass and organic material shall be removed from beneath the footing, and the pier footing shall be placed on stable soil. 
(3)  Piers shall be constructed of standard eight-inch by eight-inch solid concrete type construction blocks. Treated wood blocks and shims used for leveling shall be no more than four inches in overall thickness per pier, and blocks shall be at least 71/4 inches wide and 15 inches thick. 
(4)  Piers similar to those described above such as adjustable screw anchor columns may be used if they are attached to both the frame rail and to a concrete pad at least four inches thick. 
(5)  The following may be substituted for footings as described in subsection (2) above: 
a.  Two runners, each 36 inches wide, and as long as a mobile home are to be harbored upon such stand. 
b.  Runners to be four inches thick, reinforced concrete with four Number 4 bars over the full length of the runner and tied 12 inches on center with Number 4 bar. 
c.  Reinforcing steel shall be supported on chairs no less than every three feet. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-218. - Community maintenance standards; responsibilities of the licensee or agent. 
(a)  The person to whom a license for a mobile home park is issued shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park in compliance with this chapter and to keep its facilities and equipment in good repair and in clean sanitary condition. 
(b)  The licensee shall notify or have an agent notify the mobile home park community residents of all applicable provisions of this chapter and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this chapter. 
(c)  The licensee shall supervise or have an agent supervise the placement of each mobile home on its mobile home stand, which includes securing its stability and installing all utility connections. Where permits are required, they shall refuse to allow connections that are in violation hereof or require permits. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-219. - Responsibility of the resident. 
(a)  The mobile home park resident (owner or tenant) shall comply with all applicable requirements of this Code and shall maintain his mobile home site, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in clean sanitary condition. 
(b)  The owner of mobile home shall be responsible for proper placement of his mobile home on its mobile home stand and proper installation of all utility connections in accordance with the instructions of the park management. The mobile home owner shall obtain all city licenses and permits where required. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-220. - Insect and rodent control. 
(a)  Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free from insect and rodent harborage and infestation. 
(b)  The mobile home park community shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests. The mobile home park owner or his agent shall be responsible to accomplish this. 
(c)  Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent harborage; lumber, pipe, and other building material shall be stored at least (1) foot above the ground. 
(d)  The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled by the park owner or his agent to prevent harborage of ticks, chiggers and other noxious insects. Open common areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description. 
(e)  No person shall keep, store or allow any motor vehicle to remain on the premises of a mobile home park if such motor vehicle is incapable of being operated under its own power; provided however, this subsection shall not be applicable to a recreational vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-221. - Special provisions applicable to existing nonconforming parks. 
(a)  A mobile home park constructed prior to the effective date hereof, or prior to the annexation of the land on which the mobile home park is located, may continue to be used as a mobile home park although not constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter if: 
(1)  The mobile home park meets all other requirements of law which were applicable at the time of its original construction as a mobile home park; and 
(2)  The mobile home park contains no conditions which constitute a threat to the health and safety of its residents or the public in general. 
(3)  The mobile home park otherwise complies with this chapter. 
(b)  Any additions, alterations, repairs and replacements to existing nonconforming parks will have to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, a mobile home park that was constructed before the effective date hereof, or before annexation by the City, may not be enlarged so as to expand the number of stands therein unless the enlargement is constructed in full and current compliance with the requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Secs. 38-222-38-229. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 38-230. - Plat approval. 
    Mobile home subdivision plats will be considered and approved for recordation in the same manner and subject to the same provisions of this code as are applicable to plats for other residential subdivisions, provided that no such mobile home subdivision plat will be approved by the city unless the following additional requirements are complied with: 
(1)  It shall contain a minimum of four acres of land and not less than 20 lots; and 
(2)  It shall be restricted by deed restriction so that no permanent type residential dwelling shall be permitted therein. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Secs. 38-231--38-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SALES AND STORAGE 

Sec. 38-236. - Residence prohibited. 
    No mobile home or recreational vehicle shall be permitted to be occupied for residential use on a sales lot, unless the requirements for a mobile home park are compiled with and a license for the operation of such park has been issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-237. - Prohibited connections to utilities. 
    No mobile home or recreational vehicle on a sales lot may be connected to any utilities except as authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-238. - When connection to electricity permitted. 
    A mobile home or a recreational vehicle located on a sales lot for display purposes may only be connected to electricity if: 
(1)  It has been placed on a sales lot designated for sale of mobile homes or recreational vehicles connected to electricity pursuant to a plan submitted to and approved by the building official. 
(2)  The sales lot has a valid authorization for connection of either mobile homes or recreational vehicles, or both, to electricity at all times the mobile home or recreational vehicle is connected to electricity. 
(3)  The connection to the mobile home or recreational vehicle is in compliance with all applicable ordinances. 
(4)  All electrical wiring in the mobile home or recreational vehicle meets the requirements of: 
a.  The National Electrical Code that was in effect at the time the mobile home or recreational vehicle was manufactured; 
b.  Any addition or amendment of the National Electrical Code that was issued after the date the mobile home or recreational vehicle was manufactured; or 
c.  Federal or State of Texas laws regulating the installation of electrical wiring in mobile homes at the time the mobile home was manufactured, if the structure is a mobile home. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-239. - Authorization. 
    To obtain authorization for connection of either mobile homes or recreational vehicles, or both, to electricity, the owner or operator of the sales lot shall make application therefor on a form furnished by the city for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-240. - Sales office permitted. 
    The owner or operator of a mobile home sales lot may apply for a placement permit for one (1) mobile home thereon to be connected to utilities for use as an office and for demonstration purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-241. - Dealer's responsibility. 
(a)  As to any sales lot operated by a holder of a manufactured housing retailer's certificate issued pursuant to Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5221f, as amended, the holder of such certificate shall ensure that all requirements of this article are complied with. 
(b)  As to any sales lot which is not operated by a holder of a manufactured housing retailer's certificate issued pursuant to Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5221f, as amended, the person who operates such lot shall ensure that all requirements of this article are met. 
(c)  No person shall show the interior of any mobile home or recreational vehicle to any person if such mobile home or recreational vehicle has been connected to utilities unless the requirements of this article have been met. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-242. - Surfacing required. 
(a)  All portions of lots or tracts of land used for egress or ingress in the operation of a mobile home sales lot or storage lot shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the standards as herein set out. 
Acceptable surface materials and specifications for sales lots and ingress, egress rights-of-way: 
(1)  Concrete paving: 
a.  Subgrade-Minimum six-inch lime stabilized subgrade. 
b.  Surface-Minimum six-inch concrete paving with #4 bars c-c, each way. 
c.  Concrete-Five and one-half-sack mix, 3,500 psi 28-day compressive strength. 
(2)  Asphalt paving: 
a.  Subgrade-Minimum six-inch lime stabilized subgrade. 
b.  Base-Minimum eight-inch flexible base conforming to Texas Department of Transportation Item 247, Type A, B or C, Grade 1 or Grade 2. 
c.  Surface-Minimum one and one-half-inch Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete pavement conforming to Texas Department of Transportation Item 340, Type D. 
(3)  Stone or rock: 
a.  Subgrade-Minimum six-inch lime stabilized subgrade. 
b.  Base-Minimum eight-inch flexible base conforming to Texas Department of Transportation Item 247, Type A, B or C, Grade 1 or Grade 2. 
(b)  In addition to these requirements, the city director of public works shall be vested with the power to require other and additional requirements including more stringent requirements when the same are deemed to be appropriate and necessary by the director of public works to accomplish the objectives as set out in this chapter and in this Code. 
(c)  At least on 125 feet of depth with a minimum width of 25 feet used as ingress and egress into the mobile home sales or storage lot shall be constructed and maintained as herein required. 
(d)  The director of public works shall be authorized to approve alternative materials or methods of construction when such alternative methods or materials shall neither be in conflict with the objectives of this Code, nor will result in construction of a lesser or inferior standard as herein provided. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall be applicable to all storage and sales lots whether constructed and/or opened prior to, or subsequent to, the final passage of an ordinance adopting the provisions of the section. The owner and/or operator of a sales or storage lot existing at the date of final passage of an ordinance enacting the provisions of this section may apply for an exemption application for exemption with the director of public works. An exemption may be granted if the director of public works finds upon appropriate investigation and analysis that: 
(1)  The presently existing paving or surfacing material is of sufficient stability and quality to accomplish the intent of this section and will provide a surface comparable to that intended herein; 
(2)  The projected useful life of the surface will extend at least more than two years beyond the effective date of this section; and 
(3)  The surface and subsurface were installed in accordance with readily accepted paving and surface preparation techniques. 
(f)  The director of public works is authorized to issue certificates of exemption at any time prior or subsequent to the effective date of this section. Any certificate issued shall only be applicable to surfaces existing as of the effective date of this section and any replacement, except ordinary and usual repairs shall be constructed in accordance with all provisions of this Code. 
(g)  If the exemption application is denied, the owner and/or operator may appeal the decision of the director of public works to the city manager within ten days of the decision of the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-243. - Density and perimeter buffering. 
(a)  All mobile homes placed within a sales or storage lot shall maintain a minimum four-foot surface and aerial separation between any other mobile home, manufactured house or other building(s) on all sides and in all directions. This regulation and provision shall be deemed the minimum requirement and shall not be superseded by any other setback requirements that may otherwise be required in this Code or by other law providing for a lesser setback. 
(b)  No mobile home or manufactured house shall at any time be placed closer than five feet to any abutting property line for any area of land used for mobile home sales or storage. The required five-foot perimeter shall be deemed a perimeter buffer and shall be the minimum setback and shall not be superseded by any other setback requirements that may be otherwise required in this Code or by other law providing for a lesser setback. The required open space shall be free of storage or other materials and shall at all times be maintained as open space and shall be mowed as needed or paved with an appropriate impervious surface. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-244. - Fencing. 
(a)  All sales or storage lots first opened after the final passage of this article shall be fenced on all sides, except such side(s) as shall abut a public street. The required fence shall be constructed of materials that are constructed and designed to block or limit, by at least 90 percent, the field of vision of any person from an adjacent track or parcel of land, and shall be of a height not less than six feet as measured from the mean elevation of the land or area where is is situated. In addition, an access gate of sufficient size shall be provided to permit the safe and proper movement of mobile homes and manufactured housing upon the public streets and roadways without damage to fence or gate. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable if the proposed sales or storage lot shall be situated at least 200 feet from any pre-existing building or structure. 
(c)  At such later time as a building or structure shall be permitted and constructed within 200 feet of a lot or tract of land used for the storage or sales of mobile homes, the owner or other person operating the storage or sales lot for mobile homes shall have 60 days from the date of completion of the adjacent building and structure to construct the required fence. 
(d)  Any continuing use of land for the storage or sales of mobile homes and manufactured housing after receipt of a notice from the building official to construct the required fence shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-245. - Site drawings; permit required-Period of implementation. 
    Prior to constructing any facilities or improvements, or using any lots or land for a mobile home sales or storage lot, the owner or operator thereof shall submit an application and site drawing as hereinafter required. 
(1)  All mobile home and/or manufactured housing sales and/or storage lots shall submit site drawings and such information as may be required in an application to the building official in accordance with the city's building code, this Code and all other laws and ordinances that have been properly adopted showing the location of all proposed or existing buildings and structures, access ways, parking lots, internal roads and other improvements, on the site or lot, including the location(s) or areas designated for mobile homes which are to be placed on the site for sale, parts sales, repairs, office use or storage. Such drawing shall also show the location of all electrical disconnect boxes, as well as water and gas disconnection. Each plan shall specify the location of all fire hydrants or other devices used for internal fire control or suppression. 
(2)  Upon review of such application and information submitted, including plans and drawings, and upon finding the same comply with the requirements of this Code and other applicable law, the director of public works may issue a mobile home/manufactured home certification of compliance. Issuance of a permit shall only certify that the required site plans have been reviewed and it shall not be understood by anyone that the city has found and determined that the proposed plan will be actually constructed in conformity with this Code or any other law or regulation. The director of public works may withhold the issuance of a required permit if it is found that the proposed development is not in accordance with this Code, law, regulation, or that the existence of the proposed use of the lot or land will likely constitute an actual adverse impact to the health, safety and well-being of the city and its residents. 
(3)  The city may periodically inspect all mobile home sales and/or storage lots to review compliance with all applicable provisions required herein and make any necessary revisions to the site drawings to reflect required changes. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-246. - Additional requirements. 
    Mobile home sales and/or storage lots and all operations thereon shall at all times comply with all other applicable provisions in the Code, including but not limited to those provisions governing health, sanitation and nuisances as provided within city ordinances, and those provisions governing building and construction as provided within city ordinances as well as any other state or federal laws, rules or regulations which may be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Secs. 38-247-38-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 38-261. - Alternative materials and methods of construction. 
    The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed in this chapter, provided any such alternate has been approved by the city. The building official may approve any such alternate provided that the proposed design is satisfactory and that the material and method of work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed by the city in this chapter in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire-resistance, durability and safety. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-262. - Variations and provisions. 
(a)  Variations and modifications of the general requirements of mobile homes, mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks will be considered by the planning commission when in its judgment special or particular factors and conditions warrant such variation and they do not affect the general application or spirit of the rules and regulations, or the master plan of the city. An application for a variance shall be obtained through the code enforcement department and submitted to the planning commission at the next regularly scheduled meeting for consideration. Advice and cooperation is to be offered and will always be fully given by the members of the city staff and planning commission. 
(b)  Before any decision of the planning commission regarding a variance or modification shall become final, such decision shall be subject to review by the city council, if within ten days from the date of the planning commission's decision, any member of council requests review of such decision at the next regularly scheduled council meeting. The council may approve or deny the decision of the planning commission. 
(c)  If the application is denied by the planning commission, an applicant may appeal the decision to the city council within ten days from the date of the decision. If the city council denies the application, the applicant may appeal to the appropriate local court. 
(d)  The applicant shall pay an application fee as established by the Wharton City Council under a separate resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00; Ord. No. 2012-09, 6-11-12) 
Secs. 38-263-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TRAILERS 

Sec. 38-271. - Authorized locations. 
(a)  A trailer may not be placed on any property except as specifically permitted in this chapter, either pursuant to division 4 of article II hereof, or pursuant to this article, and it shall be unlawful for any person to place, use or occupy such trailer within the city unless such placement, use or occupancy is specifically authorized by this chapter. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to permit, allow or suffer the placement, use or occupancy of a trailer on any property under his ownership or control unless such placement, use or occupancy is specifically authorized by this chapter. 
(b)  Travel trailers shall be permitted in accordance with article II, division 4 hereof. 
(c)  Construction trailers or offices shall be permitted at construction sites for nonresidential purposes and shall only be approved for the duration of the construction project. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-272. - Building permit required. 
    All trailers, except as provided in division 4 of article II hereof, shall be permitted only as temporary structures in accordance with the city's building code. Such permit shall not be assessed a fee and shall state therein the date it expires. Such trailer shall be completely removed upon the expiration of the permit, unless an extension is applied for and approved. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 2, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 38-273-280. - Reserved. 
Chapter 42 - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to regulate, license or grant permits to businesses, occupations and callings, § 17(18). 
Cross reference- Aircraft and airports, ch. 6; alcoholic beverages, ch. 10; animals and foul, ch. 14. 
State Constitution reference- Authority of city to levy one-half of state tax, art. VIII, § 1. 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of miscellaneous businesses and other activities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.001 et seq.; occupation taxes levied by local governments, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 101.008; gross receipts tax on utility companies, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 182.021 et seq.; miscellaneous occupation taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 191.081 et seq.; going out of business sales, V.T.C.A., Business Commerce Code § 17.81 et seq.; private investigators and private security agencies, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4413(29bb); Texas Pawnshop Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5069-51.01 et seq.; motor vehicles for hire, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6698; occupational and business regulation, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8402 et seq.; regulation of auctioneers, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8700. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXHIBITIONS AND CARNIVALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Circuses, carnivals and zoos, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 824.001 et seq. 

Sec. 42-36. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amusement ride means any mechanical device that carries or conveys passengers along, around or over a fixed or restricted route or course or within a defined area for the purpose of giving its passengers amusement, pleasure or excitement, but such term does not include: 
(1)  Any coin-operated ride that is manually, mechanically or electrically operated and customarily placed in a public location and that does not normally require the supervision or services of an operator; or 
(2)  Nonmechanized playground equipment, including but not limited to swings, seesaws, stationary spring-mounted animal features, rider-propelled merry-go-rounds, climbers, playground slides, trampolines and physical fitness devices. 
    Carnival means and includes amusement activities, rides, merry-go-rounds, booths for the conduct of games of skill, food dispensing facilities and sideshows. 
    Class A amusement ride means an amusement ride designed primarily for use by children 12 years of age or younger. 
    Class B amusement ride means any amusement ride not defined as a class A amusement ride. 
    Exhibitions, as used in sections 42-38 through 42-41, means and includes circuses, menageries, carnivals, sideshows and other similar amusement enterprises which are open to the public and for admission to which a fee is charged. 
(Code 1978, § 11-1(a), (b)) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.A.T.S. Insurance Code, art. 21.60, § 2. 
Sec. 42-37. - Gambling and other prohibited activities. 
    It is not the intent of this article to authorize, license or in any way permit gambling or gambling devices or other activities which are otherwise prohibited by law. 
(Code 1978, § 11-1(c)) 
Sec. 42-38. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate within the city any exhibitions or carnivals which are open to the public without first securing a license therefor. However, this section shall not be held to apply to those amusements or exhibitions which may be specifically licensed in other sections of this Code. 
(Code 1978, § 11-2) 
Sec. 42-39. - Maintaining order, cleanliness, and safety. 
    In addition to the other requirements set forth in this article, the applicant for an exhibition or carnival license shall furnish suitable evidence of his intention and ability to comply with the following conditions, and such licensee shall comply therewith: 
(1)  The operator and sponsor of the carnival or exhibition shall each be wholly responsible for maintaining order and for keeping the site clean, free of trash, papers and other debris. Trash containers in adequate numbers shall be placed in convenient locations for the use of the public. 
(2)  No ride shall be placed in operation for public use unless it is in good condition, safe and free of electrical, mechanical or other hazardous defects. Adequate safeguards shall be placed to protect both operators and the general public from inadvertently coming into contact with moving parts, belts, motor gears, electrical switches and other possible or potential hazards. 
(3)  Sufficient members of the city police department and/or the county sheriff's department shall be admitted free of charge to all such carnivals and exhibitions for the purpose of preserving and maintaining order. 
(Code 1978, § 11-3) 
Sec. 42-40. - License issuance, fees. 
(a)  Upon satisfactory application being made and approved by the city manager for an exhibition or carnival license, the city secretary shall issue such license. The following schedule of fees shall apply to such licenses: 
(1)  For circuses, per day ..... $ 100.00 
(2)  For carnivals, per day ..... 200.00 
(3)  For each individual ride, sideshow and concession, per day ..... 25.00 
(4)  For other public amusements or for exhibitions for which no specific fee is stated, per day ..... 25.00 
(b)  However, no fee shall be charged for any amusement, exhibition or carnival where the amusement, exhibition or carnival is operated by or given for the benefit of any religious, educational, charitable, social or fraternal organization. 
(Code 1978, § 11-4) 
Sec. 42-41. - Insurance. 
    No license shall be issued for conducting an exhibition or carnival until the applicant therefor has placed on file with the city secretary a certificate of insurance indicating that the applicant has an insurance policy currently in force written by an insurance company authorized to do business in this state, a surplus lines insurer as defined by V.A.T.S. Insurance Code, art. 1.14-2, or an independently procured policy subject to V.A.T.S. Insurance Code, art. 1.14-1, in an amount of not less than $100,000.00 per occurrence with a $300,000.00 annual aggregate for class A amusement rides and an amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for class B amusement rides insuring the owner or operator against liability for injury to persons arising out of the use of the amusement ride. 
(Code 1978, § 11-5) 
State Law reference- Amusement Ride Safety Inspection and Insurance Act, V.A.T.S. Insurance Code, art. 21.60. 
Sec. 42-42. - Athletic exhibition license. 
    It shall be unlawful to conduct, operate or exhibit any race between persons, animals or vehicles; boxing or wrestling match; or other athletic contest or exhibition for admittance to which a fee is charged without having first secured a license therefor. No license shall be required for athletic contests or exhibitions given or for the exclusive benefit of any religious, educational, charitable, social or fraternal organization. The fee for such license shall be $50.00. For the purpose of preserving and maintaining order, a sufficient number of police officers shall be admitted to any such athletic contest or exhibition free of charge. 
(Code 1978, § 11-6) 
State Law reference- Texas Boxing and Wrestling Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8501-1. 
Secs. 42-43-42-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNK DEALERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Automotive wrecking and salvage yards in counties of less than 2,000,000, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 2372dd-1. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-76. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Junk means scrap iron, tin, brass, copper, lead, zinc and all metallic substances, except precious metals, handled, purchased, received or offered for sale by dealers in junk; secondhand plumbing, and electric fixtures, wires, globes, brass pipe, lead pipe and pipe of other metals, melted metals of any kind, such parts of machinery or machines that may be identified as such; any fixture pertaining to a residence, business house or other house of any kind; automobile accessories, including horns; prestolite tanks, tires and all detached and detachable parts of any automobile, motorcycle, bicycle or motor vehicle of any kind or any vehicle of any kind; hydrants, faucets, lawn hose, lawn sprinklers, gas fixtures, fittings and appliances, garden tools, mechanical tools of every description; harness, rags, rubber, rope, bottles and utensils of every description. The enumeration of the articles in this definition shall not be held to exclude other articles that may be reasonably included under the general definition of junk, when given its usual trade meaning. 
    Junk dealer means any person who, irregularly or continually, either at wholesale or retail, buys, sells or deals in junk, whether as an itinerant or at a fixed place of business, or who keeps, maintains or allows junk to accumulate on any premises owned, used or controlled by such person in a quantity which exceeds that which can be reasonably used or consumed by such person. 
(Code 1978, § 11-20) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-77. - Declaration of nuisance and illegality. 
    All junkyards are hereby declared to be a public or common nuisance, being obnoxious or offensive to the inhabitants of the city because of their interference with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property by the inhabitants and because of their potential as health and fire hazards, and junkyards are unlawful within the city unless conducted under a valid license in the manner prescribed in this article. 
(Code 1978, § 11-21) 
Sec. 42-78. - Records-Form and contents. 
(a)  Each junk dealer shall keep in a well-bound book an accurate daily record of each article purchased, including an accurate description of each article and whether a finished product or parts of a product, when purchased and the amount paid by the dealer for each of such articles and also an accurate description of the person selling the article, giving the name, color, sex, age and residence. If the dealer is not personally acquainted with such person so offering such article for sale, the dealer, before purchasing the article, shall require such person to furnish evidence of positive identification, such as a driver's license or other such evidence, and shall register in the book the number of such driver's license or the other means of identification and whether or not the person from whom such junk was obtained was an adult or minor, male or female. Such record shall further contain the source and place from which the junk came or was obtained. The dealer shall also make an entry in the book of the disposition made by him of such article and, if sold, he shall state to whom sold and the price paid therefor, together with the time of day, day of the week and month and year. All of the entries shall be made at the time of the purchase or sale. 
(b)  The book shall be securely kept by the dealer and shall be open to the inspection of any peace officer at any time, and the dealer is further required to keep a copy of this article posted in a conspicuous place at his place of business. 
(c)  Any person dealing in junk or purchasing junk who fails or refuses to comply with this section or any person who fails to permit any peace officer to, at any time, inspect the books shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1978, § 11-22) 
Sec. 42-79. - Same-Accessibility to police. 
    The book or record specified in section 42-78 shall be accessible at all times to the police or any other peace officer, and all such police and peace officers shall have the right at all times to examine such record when searching or looking for lost or stolen articles or in determining whether or not the provisions of this article are being faithfully kept and observed. 
(Code 1978, § 11-23) 
Sec. 42-80. - Examination of junk by police officers for lost or stolen property. 
    Every junk dealer shall at all reasonable times allow the chief of police or some other police officer the privilege of examining all articles of junk he may have received, whether at his place of business or elsewhere, for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the articles are lost or stolen property. 
(Code 1978, § 11-24) 
Sec. 42-81. - Keeping junk for certain time. 
    No junk shall be sold or removed from the place of business of any junk dealer within 48 hours after the junk has been purchased or acquired, and all junk received shall be kept separate and apart from all other articles so that the junk may be fully identified for a full 48 hours after the junk is received. This section shall not apply to scrap iron, old tin, rags and bones. 
(Code 1978, § 11-25) 
Sec. 42-82. - Purchases from intoxicated persons or suspicious persons. 
    No junk dealer shall receive or purchase any junk from any intoxicated person or from any suspicious person or from any person under suspicious circumstances. 
(Code 1978, § 11-26) 
Sec. 42-83. - Business hours; purchase site restricted. 
    No junk dealer shall receive, handle, purchase, sell or otherwise dispose of any junk from a fixed place or location of business except during the hours between sunrise and 11:00 p.m. No junk dealer shall receive, handle, purchase, sell or otherwise dispose of any junk at a place other than a fixed place or location of business except during the hours between sunrise and sunset. 
(Code 1978, § 11-27) 
Sec. 42-84. - Fencing. 
    The property and premises upon which any junk dealer carries on his business or upon which any person keeps or accumulates junk in a quantity which exceeds that which can be reasonably used or consumed by such person shall be enclosed by a fence not less than six feet in height, which fence shall be so constructed that no dust or other objectionable material may pass through the fence. The fence shall be kept in a good condition at all times and shall be kept in a neatly painted condition at all times, and no junk of any character or parts or machinery of any kind shall be allowed to remain or project outside of such fence. The fence shall be constructed of wood, metal or other substantial opaque material. Any junkyard or other place where junk is kept or maintained in a quantity which exceeds that which can be reasonably used or consumed by such person shall comply with this section, whether or not licensed. 
(Code 1978, § 11-28) 
Secs. 42-85-42-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 42-101. - Required. 
    No junk dealer shall transact or engage in the business of a junk dealer or maintain a junkyard within the city until he shall have secured an annual license therefor. 
(Code 1978, § 11-30) 
Sec. 42-102. - Application-Contents. 
    An applicant for a junk dealer's license shall make request therefor in writing, addressed to the chief of police, which application shall contain the name, residence and street number of the applicant. For a firm or partnership, the statement shall show the individual members of the firm or partnership; and for a corporation, the names of the officers thereof. The application shall contain the following words: 
"The license hereby applied for shall be subject to all of the provisions and regulations of the ordinances of the City of Wharton relating to junk and junk dealers." 
(Code 1978, § 11-31) 
Sec. 42-103. - Same-Oath. 
    The application for a junk dealer's license shall be signed and sworn to by the person applying therefor, before a notary public or other officer authorized by law to administer oaths, or for a firm or partnership or corporation, by one member of the firm or partnership or officer or agent of the corporation. 
(Code 1978, § 11-32) 
Sec. 42-104. - Grant and refusal. 
    The application for a junk dealer's license, when so made out, shall be filed with the chief of police, who shall carefully examine the facts of the application and approve or disapprove the application. If the chief of police shall deem the applicant an unsafe or improper person to be granted a license as a junk dealer, he shall disapprove the application; if he shall disapprove the application, the application shall be referred by him to the city council, which may grant a license to the applicant. If the city council shall be of the opinion that a license should not be granted, it shall order a hearing upon such application, naming the date and hour of the hearing, and notice thereof in writing shall be given by the chief of police to the applicant, at least five days before the date of the hearing, and the applicant may appear and be heard thereupon. If the city council finds such applicant to be an unsafe and improper person to engage in the business of a junk dealer or if it finds that this article has not been satisfied or has been violated, it may in its discretion refuse to grant a license to such applicant. 
(Code 1978, § 11-33) 
Sec. 42-105. - Fee. 
    An annual license fee of $5.00 shall be paid in advance upon January 1 of each year to the city by every junk dealer. 
(Code 1978, § 11-34) 
Sec. 42-106. - Bond. 
    No junk dealer within the city shall engage in business or shall be granted a license therefor, unless and until such junk dealer shall have made and executed a bond in the sum of $1,000.00, with two or more good and sufficient sureties or with a surety company authorized to do business in this state. Such bond shall be approved by the city attorney as to form and by the chief of police as to the sufficiency thereof and shall be made payable to the city, conditioned that such dealer will strictly and faithfully keep and observe the provisions of this article and other ordinances of the city regulating such business of a junk dealer. Such bond may be sued on by the city or by any person aggrieved, in any court of competent jurisdiction; provided, if any article or thing found in the possession of any junk dealer shall be identified and claimed as lost or stolen property and the claimant or owner shall make affidavit as to the ownership of the property and such dealer shall refuse to deliver such property to the claimant or owner, suit may be brought in any court of competent jurisdiction by such claimant or owner against such dealer for the property or for the value of the property upon his bond. Where any suit is maintained by some person other than the city, the city shall not be responsible for the court costs or any other matter therein involved. At any time the bond required in this section shall be by the city manager deemed insufficient, written notice thereof shall be given the principal therein, and if a new bond is not furnished within five days after such notice, the license shall be canceled. 
(Code 1978, § 11-35) 
Sec. 42-107. - Issuance. 
    Upon compliance with this division and upon the approval of the application by the city council, the city secretary shall issue the junk dealer's license and shall number all such licenses consecutively. 
(Code 1978, § 11-36) 
Sec. 42-108. - Display. 
    Each holder of a junk dealer's license shall at all times cause the license to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises described in the application for such license for such period of time as the license shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Code 1978, § 11-37) 
Sec. 42-109. - Identification of vehicles. 
    Each vehicle kept or used by a junk dealer in pursuit of his business shall be plainly marked on each side with the number of his license in plain letters and figures at least two inches high and of such a color as to be plainly legible at a distance of 60 feet, and preceded by the designation "J.D. No." 
(Code 1978, § 11-38) 
Sec. 42-110. - Cancellation. 
    Conviction for violating this article shall be sufficient cause for the cancellation of the junk dealer's license, within the discretion of the city council. 
(Code 1978, § 11-39) 
Secs. 42-111-42-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, SOLICITORS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Home solicitation transactions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5069-13.01 et seq.; criminal trespass, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 30.05. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-151. - Declaration of authority and purpose. 
    This entire article is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the state and of the city, for the public safety, comfort, convenience and protection of the city and citizens of the city, and all of the provisions of this article shall be construed for the accomplishment of that purpose. 
(Code 1978, § 11-50; Ord. No. 2017-04, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 42-152. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial means engaged in commerce. Designed for profit and supported by advertisement. 
    Goods or merchandise means any personal property of any nature whatsoever, except printed material. 
    Home solicitation transaction means a transaction or the purchase of goods or services, payable in installments or cash, in which the home solicitor engages in a personal solicitation of a sale to a person at a residence. A home solicitation transaction shall not include a sale made pursuant to a pre-existing retail charge agreement or a sale made pursuant to prior negotiations between the parties at a business establishment at a fixed location where goods or services are offered or exhibited for sale or a sale of realty, in which transaction the purchaser is represented by a licensed attorney or in which the transaction is being negotiated by a licensed real estate broker. 
    Home solicitor means a person who goes from house to house or from place to place soliciting, selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for any goods, merchandise or services. 
    Itinerant merchant or vendor means a person, as well as their agents and employees, who sets up and operates a temporary business within the premises of another business or any other building, enclosure, vacant lot, vehicle or location in the city, soliciting, exhibiting, selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for any goods or services. The term shall not include or be construed to include anyone engaged in interstate commerce or anyone upon whom the provisions of this chapter would impose a direct and unlawful burden on interstate commerce. This term shall also not include those persons operating vehicles otherwise permitted by this Code, including taxicabs or tow truck services. 
    Residence means any separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure. 
    Soliciting, solicit or solicitation means selling or attempting to sell goods or services or to take or attempt to take orders for services or goods to be performed or furnished in the future. 
    Solicitor, peddler, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor means any person engaged in any activity mentioned in section 42-176. 
    Temporary shall mean any such business transacted or conducted in the city for which definite arrangements have not been made for the hire, rental or lease of premises for at least one month in or upon which such business is to be operated or conducted. 
(Code 1978, § 11-51; Ord. No. 2017-04, 2-13-17) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-153. - Going uninvited on property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to go in and upon the premises of any private residence, business or other property in the city, unless requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of the private residence, business or other property, for the purpose of soliciting, selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, newspapers, magazines or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines. 
(Code 1978, § 11-57; Ord. No. 2017-04, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 42-154. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to go upon any residential or commercial premises and ring the doorbell or rap or knock upon the door or create any sound in a manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the residence for the purpose of engaging in or attempting to engage in a solicitation transaction: 
(1)  Before 10:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. of any day, Monday through Saturday; or 
(2)  At any time on a Sunday, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, July 4 th , Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to a visit to the premises as a result of a request or an appointment made by the occupant. 
(Code 1978, § 11-58; Ord. No. 2017-04, 2-13-17) 
Secs. 42-155-42-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 42-176. - Required; card. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to go from house to house or from place to place or by telephone in the city soliciting, selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, newspapers, magazines or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines without having first registered at the code enforcement department at the City Hall. It shall also be unlawful to sell or solicit in the city, as stated in this section, without carrying a registration card issued by the code enforcement department city secretary while engaged in such soliciting or selling. A canvasser, otherwise exempt from the provisions of this article, may request an identification badge from the city. 
(Code 1978, § 11-52; Ord. No. 2017-04, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 42-177. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to go from house to house or from place to place in the city to sell or solicit orders for goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, newspapers, magazines or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines shall make written application to the code enforcement department for a registration card, which application shall show: 
(1)  The name, address and phone number of the applicant; 
(2)  The driver's license and Social Security number of applicant for a background check; 
(3)  The name and address of the person, if any, that he represents; 
(4)  The kinds of goods offered for sale and whether such applicant, upon any such sale or order, shall demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery; 
(5)  The period of time and the projected hours of operation such applicant wishes to sell or solicit in the city; 
(6)  The license plate number, make, model and year of any and all vehicles to be used; and 
(7)  Proof of liability insurance (as required by state law) for any vehicle to be used by the applicant. 
(b)  Any person applying for a registration card must submit to a background check of that person's criminal record by the City of Wharton. 
(c)  Any person who has been convicted of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the three-year period immediately preceding the date of that person's application for a registration card or a felony involving moral turpitude within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of that person's application for registration shall be ineligible to receive a registration card. In these circumstances, the code enforcement department shall reject the application and shall not issue a registration card to that person. 
(Code 1978, § 11-53; Ord. No. 2017-04, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 42-178. - Bond. 
    The application for registration as a peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant shall be accompanied by a bond in the penal sum of no less than $5,000, signed by the applicant as principal and signed, as surety, by some surety company authorized to do business in the state, conditioned for the final delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, magazines and newspapers in accordance with the terms of any order obtained prior to delivery and also conditioned to indemnify all purchasers or customers for all defects in material or workmanship that may exist in the article sold by the principal of the bond, at the time of delivery, and that may be discovered by such purchaser or customer within 30 days after delivery. The bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons who may make any purchase or give any order to the principal on the bond or to an agent or employee of the principal. If the applicant is engaging in any such activity through one or more agents or employees, such persons shall be required to enter into only one bond, in the sum required in this section, which bond shall be made to cover the activities of all such agents or employees. 
(Code 1978, § 11-54; Ord. No. 2017-04, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 42-179. - Fees; term. 
    The application for registration as a solicitor, peddler, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee of $55.00, which registration will be valid for one year form the date of issuance. However, when any person engages in any such activity through more than one agent or employee, such person shall, in addition to such fee, pay a registration fee of $20.00 for each additional agent or employee so engaged. The registration card shall be issued to the individual agent or employee and shall not be used by any other agent or employee. The fees provided for in this section shall be used for the purpose of defraying expenses incident to the registering of such vendors and merchants and the administration of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 11-55; Ord. No. 2017-04, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 42-180. - Exemptions. 
    The registration required in this division shall not apply to: 
(1)  Sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or sales agents in the usual course of business or to sales made under authority and by order of law; or 
(2)  Sales or exhibits at fairs, conventions or events sponsored by one or more city civic organizations, school, church or the Chamber of Commerce; or 
(3)  Charitable solicitations; or 
(4)  Insurance or alarm companies carrying a current Texas state license; or 
(5)  Persons who permanently reside in or within ten miles of the city will be exempt from background checks and fees, however will be required to register with the code enforcement department and carry a registration photo identification card. 
(Code 1978, § 11-56; Ord. No. 2017-04, 2-13-17) 
Secs. 42-181-42-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STREET PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT VENDORS 

Sec. 42-201. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charitable purpose shall mean philanthropic, religious or other nonprofit objective, including the benefit of poor, needy, sick, refugee or handicapped persons; the benefit of any church or religious society, sect, group or order; the benefit of a patriotic or veterans' association or organization; the benefit of any fraternal, social or civil organization, or the benefit of any education institution. "Charitable purpose" shall not be construed to include the direct benefit of any political group or political organization which is subject to financial disclosure under state or federal law. 
    Consumer shall mean an individual who acquires real or personal property, services, money or credit for personal, family or household purposes. 
    Merchant shall mean a party to a consumer transaction other than a consumer. 
    Nonprofit organization shall mean any organization that does not seek to make a profit and that is not a public body. This definition includes, but is not limited to, entities such as the Multiple Sclerosis Association of America, the American Heart Association, the Muscular Dystrophy Association, the American Cancer Society, City of Wharton Public Safety Departments, the Boy Scouts of America, the Girl Scouts of the United States of America, etc. 
    Person shall mean any individual, firm, company agency, partnership, corporation, association, trust, society, religious sect, organization, league or other legal entity and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or similar representative. 
    Religious organization shall mean any organization that is dedicated to the support of a church, religious society, or any other religious sect, group or order. 
    Solicitors shall mean any person or its agent, member or representative engages in action dictated in section 42-176. 
    Street peddler shall mean a person who sells tangible commodities on the public streets, sidewalks, public rights-of-way or other places from more than one established location and who makes delivery at the time of the sale. 
    Transient vendor shall mean a person who sells commodities from private premises, such as a parking lot or vacant lot, using a cart, a motor vehicle, a trailer, a tent or other temporary shelter. 
(Code 1978, § 11-61; Ord. No. 2017-04, 2-13-17) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-202. - Registration-Required; application; issuance of card. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any street peddler, transient vendor or solicitor to make any sales or to conduct any business as a street peddler, transient vendor or solicitor in the city without having first registered at the office of the code enforcement department at the City Hall and without carrying a registration card, issued by the code enforcement department, while engaged in such activities as a street peddler, transient vendor or solicitor. The application to the code enforcement department for a registration card shall show: 
(1)  The name, address and phone number of the applicant; 
(2)  The driver's license and Social Security number of applicant for background check; 
(3)  The name and address of the owner of the property upon which the applicant will be engaged in such activities; 
(4)  The name and address and the state general sales tax permit number of the person, if any, that he represents; 
(5)  The kind of goods offered for sale; 
(6)  Whether such applicant upon any such sale or order shall demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery; 
(7)  The period of time and the projected hours of operation such applicant wishes to sell or solicit in the city as a street peddler, transient vendor or solicitor; 
(8)  The license plate number, make, model and year of any and all vehicles to be used; 
(9)  Proof of liability insurance (as required by state law) for any vehicle to be used by applicant; 
(10)  Name of individual, firm, company or organization represented, if any, and the permanent address and local address thereof; 
(b)  Any person applying for a registration card must furnish the code enforcement department evidence of written permission from the owner of the property for the applicant to conduct such activities on the property. 
(c)  Any person applying for a registration card must submit to a background check of that person's criminal record by the City of Wharton. 
(d)  Any person who has been convicted of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the three-year period immediately preceding the date of that person's application for a registration card or a felony involving moral turpitude within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of that person's application for registration shall be ineligible to receive a registration card. In these circumstances, the code enforcement department shall reject the application and shall not issue a registration card to that person. 
(Code 1978, § 11-62; Ord. No. 2017-04, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 42-203. - Same-Bond. 
    The application for registration as a street peddler, transient vendor or solicitor shall be accompanied by a bond in the penal sum of no less than $5,000.00, signed by the applicant as principal and by a surety company authorized to do business in the state, conditioned on the final delivery of goods, wares, merchandise or services in accordance with the terms of any order obtained prior to delivery and also conditioned on indemnifying all purchasers or customers for any defects in material or workmanship that may exist in the article sold by the applicant, at the time of delivery, and that may be discovered by such purchaser or customer within 30 days after delivery. The bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons who may make any purchase from or place any order with the applicant on the bond or to an agent or employee of the applicant. 
(Code 1978, § 11-63; Ord. No. 2017-04, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 42-204. - Same-Fees; cards nontransferable. 
(a)  The application for registration as a street peddler, transient vendor or solicitor shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $55.00, which registration shall be valid for one year from the date of its issuance. The registration fee for selling agricultural product, which shall not include meat, poultry, fish, shrimp or any similar product shall be $25.00, and shall be valid for 60 days from its issuance. 
(b)  All registration cards shall be nontransferable. 
(c)  The fees provided for in this section shall be used for the purpose of defraying expenses incident to the registering of the applicants. 
(Code 1978, § 11-64; Ord. No. 2017-04, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 42-205. - Exceptions. 
    Notwithstanding any term contained in this division to the contrary, this division shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Merchants having permanent businesses located within the city who may wish to display or sell merchandise from sidewalks, parking lots or other vacant property adjoining their own premises; or 
(2)  Sales or exhibits at fairs, conventions or events sponsored by one or more city civic organizations, school, church or the Chamber of Commerce: or 
(3)  Charitable solicitations; or 
(4)  Any persons who are residents of the city will be exempt from background checks and fees; however will be required to register with the code enforcement department and carry a registration photo identification card; or 
(5)  Insurance or alarm companies carrying a current Texas state license; or 
(6)  A canvasser, otherwise exempt from the provisions of this article, may request an identification badge from the city. 
(Code 1978, § 11-65; Ord. No. 2017-04, 2-13-17) 
Secs. 42-206-42-219. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MOBILE FOOD COURTS AND MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2019-03, adopted Jan. 14, 2019, amended div. 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 4, §§ 42-220-42-228 was entitled "Mobile Food Vendors and Temporary Food Vendors," and derived from Ord. No. 2010-12, adopted Sept. 27, 2010. 

Sec. 42-220. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Food truck court means a property used or developed to accommodate more than one food truck as the primary use of the property while possibly accommodating areas on the property for entertainment or recreational opportunities. Food truck courts must have a valid certificate of occupancy in addition to all other applicable permits and inspections. 
    Ice cream truck means a motor vehicle in which ice cream, popsicles, ice sherbets, or other frozen desserts of any kind are carried for the purpose of retail sale on the streets of the city. 
    Mobile food establishment means an operator of a vehicle mounted, self or otherwise propelled, self-contained food service operation designed to be readily moveable (including, but not limited to, catering trucks, trailers, push carts and roadside vendors) used to store, prepare, display, serve or sell food that requires temperature control. The mobility of a mobile food establishment unit must be completely maintained at all times. No drive-through service shall be permitted from a mobile food establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2019-03, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 42-221. - Scope. 
    This division shall regulate all mobile food establishments operating within the city's corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 2019-03, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 42-222. - Registration-Permit requirements. 
(a)  No person shall operate a mobile food establishment who does not possess a valid, current mobile food establishment permit. 
(b)  A mobile food establishment shall make application on a form provided by the code enforcement department, and shall provide all of the information listed in subsections (b)(1)-(7) as part of the application: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner and/or operator; 
(2)  If the applicant represents a corporation, association or partnership, the names and addresses of the officers or partners; 
(3)  Name which the food vending operation will operated; 
(4)  A description of the type of food or the specific foods to be vended; 
(5)  A description of the vehicle to be used in the mobile food vending operation along with the license or registration and vehicle identification number of the vehicle; 
(6)  Except ice cream trucks, the locations within the city where the mobile food establishment will operate. Should such locations not yet be established, an updated list of locations shall be provided to the code enforcement department at the time of issuance of permit; 
(7)  An original written instrument, executed by each real property owner, verifying that the mobile food establishment is authorized to operate at such location or locations. Should the mobile food establishment acquire additional locations, an updated list shall be provided to the code enforcement department along with written permission from real property owner. 
(c)  Any person applying for a mobile food court permit or mobile food establishment permit must submit to a background check of that person's criminal record by the City of Wharton. 
(d)  Any person who has been convicted of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the three-year period immediately preceding the date of that person's application for a mobile food establishment permit or mobile food court permit or a felony involving moral turpitude within a five-year period immediately preceding the date of that person's application for registration shall be ineligible to receive a mobile food establishment permit or mobile food court permit. In these circumstances, the code enforcement department and shall reject the application and shall not issue a permit to that person. 
(e)  If the application is rejected for any reason, the applicant must wait 12 months from date of denial before a subsequent application can be filed. 
(f)  Upon receiving a completed application for a mobile food court permit or mobile food establishment permit, the administer may make appropriate inspections of the location, equipment, vehicle, and other reasonable inspections concerned and shall issue a permit only if; 
(1)  The application complies with subsection (b); and 
(2)  Any inspection reveals compliance with the applicable requirements of all federal and state statutes and regulations, and city ordinances governing the proposed mobile food establishment operation. 
(g)  Mobile food establishments during recovery from a declared natural disaster shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  Applicant must possess a current mobile food vendor licensed and certified food manager certificate by Texas Department of State Health Services. 
(2)  An original written instrument, executed by each real property owner, verifying that the mobile food establishment is authorized to operate at such location or locations. 
(3)  Approval from either the code enforcement department or emergency management. 
(4)  Upon approval, applicant may set up for two weeks, depending on severity of the disaster. 
    Immediately following the two-week period applicant must submit all the information required in subsection (b) and must follow all the subject regulations of this section as to location and rules excluding allowable times and storage on-site. 
(Ord. No. 2019-03, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 42-223. - Exceptions. 
    Notwithstanding any term contained in this division to the contrary, this division shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  A nonprofit organization, as defined by the Texas Department of State Health Services. 
(2)  Vendors under the auspice of a festival/event sponsor. 
(Ord. No. 2019-03, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 42-224. - Operation requirements. 
(a)  Mobile food establishments shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Mobile food establishments shall comply with all sanitation and construction regulations as outlined in TAC § 229.169 of the Texas Food Establishment Rules, as amended. 
(2)  All mobile food establishments are subject to comply with food and beverage certificate as outlined with TABC Section 11.46 General Grounds for Refusal, Section 11.49 Premises Defined; Designation of Licensed Premises, Section 61.43(5), Section 109.31 Municipal Regulation of Liquor, of the Texas Alcohol Beverage Commission, as amended. 
(3)  The issuing, suspension and revocation of licenses for the handling of food by mobile food establishment owners, operators or their employees shall be regulated by the food handling administrator. 
(4)  In order to ensure equal treatment of all mobile food establishment permit holders, variances from this division will not be granted. 
(5)  Except for ice cream trucks, mobile food establishments are prohibited from operating on public rights-of-way. Exception: city-sponsored events. 
(6)  A permitted mobile food establishment may operate at construction sites. 
(7)  Mobile food establishments, including ice cream trucks, may operate on private property provided: 
a.  The mobile food establishment permit holder has filed with the code enforcement department written permission of the property owner for the operation of the mobile food establishment; and 
b.  The applicant provides the original written instrument or no objection letter verifying that the mobile food establishment is authorized to operate at such location or locations as required in subsection 42-222(b)(7). 
(8)  Any properly permitted mobile food establishment may operate in a location in or immediately adjacent to city-sponsored civic events. 
(9)  May not use structures that are not intended for mobile food establishments. Examples of acceptable vehicles include, but are not limited to, vehicles equipped with serving windows, merchandise display equipment, kitchen preparation areas, and advertisement display section. Approved structures must adhere to the following: 
a.  No cracked windows; 
b.  No visible rust or disrepair; 
c.  No emission of noxious gases, odors, and/or fumes. 
(10)  Portable fire extinguishers shall be provided. A minimum 2-A, 10-BC multi-purpose fire extinguisher shall be currently inspected and tagged by a licensed technician. 
(11)  Mobile food establishments shall have a Type 1 hood installed at or above all commercial cooking appliances and domestic cooking appliances which include flat grills, fryers, char grills, and pits used for commercial purposes that produce grease vapors. Type 1 hood systems shall be installed with an approved and inspected fire suppression system. A Type K fire extinguisher is also a requirement in the installation of a fire suppression system. 
(12)  Mobile food establishments shall comply with all commercial building line setback requirements set forth in chapter 18 (Building and Construction) of the Code of Ordinances in subsection 18-77(e), as amended. 
(13)  Mobile food establishments leasing property shall be properly screened by privacy fence of a height not less than six feet in a way to avoid adverse impact upon adjoining properties and the uses thereof. 
(14)  Mobile food establishments are not allowed to operate between two residential structures, with the exception of construction sites or special events. Properly permitted ice cream trucks are allowed within residential neighborhoods if compliant with subsection (a)(15) below. 
(15)  Ice cream trucks may stop on public streets or rights-of-way provided such stops: 
a.  Are not in or within 50 feet of an intersection; 
b.  Not an area prohibited to the standing or parking of vehicles; 
c.  All items are vended from the curbside of the vehicle or the rear of the vehicle; and 
d.  The ice cream truck is vending in a safe manner. 
(b)  Mobile food establishment inspections are conducted at the City of Wharton Permit Office. An appointment will be made for specific day-date-time. Missed appointments will result in a re-inspection fee. No inspections are conducted off-site. Re-inspection fees shall be $50.00. 
(1)  Permit revocation. 
a.  If the permittee fails to comply, then the mobile food establishment permit may be revoked. 
b.  If a mobile food establishment permit is revoked, any fees paid to the city will be forfeited. 
c.  The former permittee may appeal the revocation of a mobile food establishment permit by submitting a written request for appeal to the code enforcement department within ten days of receiving the notice of revocation. The city manager will hold a hearing within a reasonable time of receipt of the appeal, but no later than 30 days after receipt, at which time the former permittee will have an opportunity to explain why the permit should not be revoked. The city manager shall render a decision within 30 days of the date of the hearing. The city manager's decision shall be final. 
d.  Mobile food establishment permits shall not be transferred or assigned and shall be considered revoked should the character of the food vending operation be changed from that specified in the permit. 
(2)  Permit renewal and fees. 
a.  Unless sooner revoked, a mobile food establishment permit is valid from date of issue until December 31 st of that calendar year. Prior to operating a mobile food establishment, the mobile food establishment will submit the required information along with a fee of $12.50/unit per month from the date of the application through December 31 st of that calendar year. 
b.  The mobile food establishment fee for the period January 1 st through December 31 st shall be $150.00/unit. 
c.  Such permits shall be issued on the earliest date of submission of the completed application. 
d.  Every mobile food establishment permit shall be renewed at least each year in like manner as the original permit application. 
e.  All funds collected for permits under the provisions of this division shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
f.  Mobile food establishment permits shall be valid for special events. 
(Ord. No. 2019-03, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 42-225. - Food truck courts. 
(a)  Food truck courts shall be permitted land use with the city council's discretionary approval of a specific use permit on property as outlined in subsections 42-224(a)(12) and (13). 
(b)  A specific use permit for a food truck court may be revoked by the city council if it finds that any condition imposed at the time of granting the permit is not met, or if thereafter ceases to exist. The city council may deny a specific use permit for a food truck court if the development of said use would be detrimental or offensive to the surrounding area or otherwise be contrary to the health, safety or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants. In approving or denying a specific use permit for a food truck court, the city council shall consider: 
(1)  The nature of the proposed use; 
(2)  Proximity to other food trucks; 
(3)  Proximity to existing "brick and mortar" restaurants; 
(4)  The number of food trucks allowed within the food truck court at a single time; 
(5)  Existing uses in surrounding areas; 
(6)  Noise, dust, light, and traffic generated; 
(7)  Health and sanitary condition; and 
(8)  Compliance with other regulations of the Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Food truck courts shall be $75.00 per space/per calendar year and payable upon issuance. Fees will not be prorated. 
(d)  All food trucks utilizing food courts must possess a current mobile food establishment permit issued by the City of Wharton. 
(Ord. No. 2019-03, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 42-226. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Mobile food establishments. 
(1)  Food trucks shall only be allowed to engage in sales operations between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(b)  Food truck courts. 
(1)  Food truck courts shall only be allowed to engage in sales operations between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. with the exception of a city-sponsored event. 
(Ord. No. 2019-03, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 42-227. - Signage. 
    All signage pertaining to or advertising a food truck and/or its menu shall be attached to the food truck. There shall be no limit to the amount of signage that is allowed on a food truck while the food truck is parked at a food truck court or operation site. A food truck shall not be outfitted with "changeable signage" as defined and/or set forth in chapter 66 (Signs) of the Code of Ordinances. With an exception of one sandwich board which may be placed during business hours, but must be removed daily. 
(Ord. No. 2019-03, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 42-228. - Off-street vehicle parking. 
(a)  Mobile food establishments. 
(1)  One off-street vehicle parking space shall be required for each table that is provided for use by food truck customers. If no tables are provided, no off-street vehicle parking shall be required. 
(b)  Food truck courts. 
(1)  Two off-street vehicle parking shall be required for each table that is provided for use by the food truck customers. If no tables are provided, no off-street vehicle parking shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2019-03, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 42-229. - Authority to enforce. 
    The code enforcement department shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this division, and to enlist the assistance of all appropriate agencies in the enforcement effort. 
(Ord. No. 2019-03, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 42-230. - Permit and license revocation. 
    Nothing in this division shall prevent the code enforcement department from immediately revoking a mobile food establishment and food truck court permit should such vendor be in violation of this division or any other city code or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2019-03, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 42-231. - All codes and ordinances effective. 
    In addition to the provision of this division, all other applicable city codes and ordinances shall apply to the operation of any mobile food establishment and food truck court, and shall be in full force and effect. This policy shall be effective even if the vendor has applied for and obtained a valid license and permit to operate, should the violations occur either prior or subsequent to obtaining such permit. 
(Ord. No. 2019-03, 1-14-19) 
Secs. 42-232-42-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1995-12, § 1, adopted Dec. 11, 1995, repealed art. V in its entirety and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new art. V as herein set out. The former provisions of art. V pertained to massage establishments and derived from Code 1978, §§ 11-71-11-79, 11-91-11-93, 11-95, 11-96, 11-98-11-107, and 11-109. 

Sec. 42-236. - Definitions. 
    Within this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Adult arcade means a commercial establishment where coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained, to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion picture, videocassettes or videos reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas;" or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which at any time features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities;" or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slices, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas;" and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity of live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities." 
    Chief of police means the Chief of Police of the City of Wharton or his designated agent. 
    Church means a building used principally for religious worship in which persons assemble for religious purposes at least once each week, which is owned by such persons or leased by them for a period of at least one year. 
    Disqualifying offense means any crime involving an offense against the person, such as those described in title 5 of the Texas Penal Code; an offense against the family, such as those described in title 6 of the Texas Penal Code; an offense involving prostitution, obscenity or controlled substances; an offense involving organized crimes, such as those described in Title 11 of the Texas Penal Code; or an offense involving a violation of the provisions of this article. 
    Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    Escort agency means a person or business association who furnished, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
    Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business; and 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
    Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
    Massage business means any premises or business location at which massage therapy is offered or performed for the purpose of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer for any form of consideration; provided that the premises or business location at which massage therapy is offered or performed solely for therapeutic purposes shall not be included within the definition of this term of purposes of this article. Within this definition, massage therapy shall have the meaning given in article 4512k, V.T.C.S., or in any successor or amendment thereto. 
    Nude model studio means a commercial establishment where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
    Nudity or a state of nudity means: 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast; or 
(2)  A state of dress that fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or any part of the female breast below the top of the areola. 
    Operates or causes to be operated means to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
    Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and any part of the female breast below the top of the areola, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
    Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, sexual encounter center, massage business, or nude model studio. 
    Specified anatomical areas means human genitals in a state of sexual arousal. 
    Specified sexual activities includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsection (1) through (3) above. 
(Ord. No. 1995-12, § 2, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 42-237. - Location. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business within 2,000 feet of: 
(1)  A church; 
(2)  A public, private or parochial elementary or secondary school; 
(3)  A lot devoted to residential use; 
(4)  Another sexually oriented business; or 
(5)  A public park. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest property line of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, elementary or secondary school, residential lot, other sexually oriented business, or public park. 
(Ord. No. 1995-12, § 2, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 42-238. - Existing businesses. 
    The location restrictions contained in section 42-237 shall not apply to sexually oriented businesses lawfully operating as of the date of annexation within areas annexed by the city subsequent to December 11, 1995; provided, that should any such place of business discontinue operation for a continuous period of more than thirty (30) days, then the location restrictions in section 42-237 shall thereafter apply to the business. 
(Ord. No. 1995-12, § 2, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 42-239. - License-Required. 
    No person shall operate a sexually oriented business without first obtaining a sexually oriented business license issued by the city pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1995-12, § 2, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 42-240. - Same-Applications. 
(a)  Applications for sexually oriented business licenses shall be filed with the city secretary on a form to be furnished by the city secretary. Applications shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  The type of ownership of the business; i.e., whether individual, partnership, corporation or otherwise; 
(2)  The trade name under which the business is to be conducted and the type(s) of sexually oriented businesses to be operated on the premises; 
(3)  The address and all telephone numbers to be used in connection with the business; 
(4)  The following information concerning the applicant if an individual or concerning each stockholder holding more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation and each officer and each director if the applicant is a corporation or concerning each partner, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership and concerning the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business: 
a.  Name, residence address and residence telephone number; 
b.  The two most recent previous addresses; 
c.  Date of birth and driver's license number; 
d.  Height, weight, color of hair and eyes and sex; 
e.  Business history and experience in connection with sexually oriented businesses, including whether or not the person has previously or is currently participating in the ownership or operation of a sexually oriented business in this or another city or state; and if a license or permit was or is required for the business, whether a permit has ever been denied, revoked or suspended and, if so, the reason for that action; [and] 
f.  Any convictions for any felony or for any misdemeanor involving prostitution, obscenity or controlled substances, indicating the type of crime and the date and place of conviction. 
(5)  Such other information as the police chief deems necessary to determine the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application; 
(6)  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the applicant and the qualifications of the applicant for the license; and 
(7)  A statement by the applicant under oath that the information contained in the application is true and correct. For this purpose, an authorized corporate officer may execute the statement on behalf of a corporation, and an authorized partner may execute the statement on behalf of a partnership. 
(b)  Each application shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Payment of license fee of $500.00 per year. License fee shall not be refundable. 
(2)  Proof that an assumed name certificate has been filed with the county clerk, if the applicant is to operate the massage establishment under an assumed name. 
(3)  Proof that the applicant is authorized to do business in the state, if the applicant is a foreign corporation. 
(4)  Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the date of the application and at least two inches by two inches in size, for each individual listed in subsection (a)(4) of this section. 
(c)  The applicant shall provide such other information, identification and physical examination of the person as shall be deemed necessary by the chief of police to determine the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application. 
(Ord. No. 1995-12, § 2, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 42-241. - Same-Investigation; approval of applications by chief of police. 
(a)  Upon the city secretary's receipt of an application for a sexually oriented business permit, the chief of police shall conduct an investigation into the applicant's business and personal history. The chief of police may require a personal interview of the applicant and such further information as shall bear on the investigation. 
(b)  The chief of police shall also conduct an investigation of the premises where the sexually oriented business is to be operated to determine whether the premises comply with the requirements of this article as well as all other applicable building and health regulation. 
(c)  Before any license is issued under this article, the chief of police shall provide written approval of the application. 
(Ord. No. 1995-12, § 2, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 42-242. - Same-Issuance or denial. 
(a)  The city secretary shall issue a sexually oriented business license within 30 days of receipt of the application unless the chief of police finds that: 
(1)  The premises do not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the requirements of this article and the city's building and health regulations and all other applicable laws; 
(2)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders holding more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation or any of the officers and directors if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is partnership or the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business has been convicted of any disqualifying offense unless the conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of the application; provided, that if the person was incarcerated in a penal facility in connection with the conviction, then the five-year period shall run from the date of release from incarceration; 
(3)  Any employee of the applicant's business has been convicted of any disqualifying offense in connection with the business unless the conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of the application; provided, that if the person was incarcerated in a penal facility in connection with the conviction, then the three-year period shall run from the date of release from incarceration; 
(4)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the course of the application procedure or in any document required by the city in connection therewith; or 
(5)  The applicant has had a sexually oriented business license or permit denied or revoked by the City of Wharton or any other state or local agency within five years prior to the date of the application. 
(b)  Sexually oriented business licenses shall contain the name and address of the licensee, the name, address and type(s) of business for which the license is issued and the expiration date of the license. 
(Ord. No. 1995-12, § 2, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 42-243. - Same-Appeal from denial. 
(a)  Any applicant denied a license shall have the right of appeal to city council. This appeal shall be taken by filing with the city secretary a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal within ten days after notice of the denial is given to the applicant. 
(b)  The city secretary shall provide for a hearing for the appeal at the earliest convenient regular council meeting and shall notify the applicant by certified mail and the police chief of the date and time of the hearing. The police chief may file a written response to the appeal with the city secretary, a copy of which shall be provided by the city secretary to the applicant. The issue at the hearing shall be to determine whether grounds for the denial exist under section 42-242. 
(c)  The council shall by majority vote either sustain the action of the chief of police or direct the issuance of the license. 
(Ord. No. 1995-12, § 2, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 42-244. - Same-Display of. 
    Every sexually oriented business shall display its business license at all times in an open and conspicuous place on the premises of the business. 
(Ord. No. 1995-12, § 2, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 42-245. - Same-Separate location; term; renewal. 
(a)  Should any sexually oriented business have more than one location, then a separate license shall be required for each location. 
(b)  All sexually oriented business licenses shall expire on December thirty-first of the year in which issued. No proration of license fees shall be made for issuance of license during the course of the year. 
(c)  Sexually oriented business licenses shall not be renewed without following the procedures for applying for the original license. 
(Ord. No. 1995-12, § 2, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 42-246. - Same-Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police shall suspend a sexually oriented business license upon the licensee or the manager of the business being charged with any disqualifying offense or upon any employee of the business being charged with any disqualifying offense in connection with the business. This suspension period shall coincide with the time during which the charges remain pending. 
(b)  The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 90 days if he determines that a licensee or an employee of the licensee has: 
(1)  Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(2)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter; 
(3)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; [or] 
(4)  Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, this necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(c)  The chief of police shall revoke a sexually oriented business license for the remainder of its term upon the licensee or the manager of the business being convicted of any disqualifying offense or upon any employee being convicted of any disqualifying offense in connection with the operation of the business. 
(d)  The chief of police shall revoke a sexually oriented business license for the remainder of its term if the chief of police determines that: 
(1)  A cause of suspension in subsection (b) of section 42-245 occurred and the license was suspended within the preceding 12 months; 
(2)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the chief of police during the application process; 
(3)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(5)  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(6)  On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person or persons committed a disqualifying offense occurring in or on the licensed premises for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; 
(7)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as it is defined in section 21.02, Texas Penal Code; or 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business. 
(e)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(f)  Subsection (d)(7) does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view. 
(g)  The chief of police shall notify the licensee of any suspension or revocation at least ten days in advance of its effective date. Within ten days of receipt of a notice of suspension or revocation, a licensee may appeal the police chief's action to the city council by filing a written notice with the city secretary setting forth specifically the grounds for the appeal. The city secretary shall provide for a hearing on the appeal at the earliest convenient regular council meeting and shall notify the licensee by certified mail of the date and time of the hearing. The issue at the hearing shall be whether grounds exist under subsections (a) through (e) of this section for the suspension or revocation. The council shall by majority vote either sustain or rescind the action of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1995-12, § 2, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 42-247. - Same-Transfer prohibited. 
    Sexually oriented business licenses are not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 1995-12, § 2, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 42-248. - Miscellaneous regulations. 
(a)  All sexually oriented businesses. All premises used in connection with sexually oriented businesses shall be periodically inspected by the chief of police for compliance with the requirements of this subsection: 
(1)  Separate toilet facilities for men and women shall be provided on the premises. 
(2)  Persons under the age of 18 shall not be permitted on the premises of the business. 
(3)  Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold or provided on the premises of the business except in compliance with a current valid license or permit issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission. 
(4)  For businesses where no alcoholic beverages are sold or provided, the business shall not operate between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on a Sunday or between 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any other day. For businesses where alcoholic beverages are sold or provided, the business shall operate at any time when the sale of alcoholic beverages is not prohibited. No customer shall be permitted to enter upon or remain on the business premises at any time other than during the permitted hours of operation. 
(5)  The business shall not have any bedroom, sleeping quarters, residence or living quarters on the premises of the business. 
(6)  The business hours of the premises shall be plainly posted at each entrance to the business. 
(7)  Doors to individual customer service areas, rooms, viewing booths or cubicles shall not be capable of being locked. 
(8)  Massage therapists shall wear clothing that covers the anus, female breast and the entire genitals during the performing of massage therapy. 
(b)  Escort agencies: 
(1)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to act as an escort or agree to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. 
(c)  Nude model studios: 
(1)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a state of nudity or knowingly allow another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(4)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(d)  Adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly allow a person under the age of 18 years to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to knowingly appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(3)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (1) and (2) of this section if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(e)  Adult motels: 
(1)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, to rent or subrent a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, rent or subrent the same sleeping room again. 
(3)  For purposes of subsection (1) of this section, the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(f)  Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos: 
(1)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blue print shall not be required; however each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
b.  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
c.  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the chief of police or his designee. 
d.  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
e.  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
f.  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (e) remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
g.  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
h.  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above, is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person having a duty under subsections (f)(1)a. through (f)(1)h. of this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 1995-12, § 2, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 42-249. - Public places; inspections. 
(a)  The entire premises of every sexually oriented business shall be deemed to be a public place and shall not during business hours have its entrances or exits locked or obstructed in any way so as to prevent free ingress or egress of persons. 
(b)  The licensee of every sexually oriented business shall allow the inspection of the premises by the police chief at any time during business hours. 
(Ord. No. 1995-12, § 2, 12-11-95) 
Sec. 42-250. - Enforcement 
(a)  The violation of any provision of this article, including the doing of anything which is herein prohibited or declared to be unlawful or the failure to do anything or perform any duty which is required herein, shall be punishable as provided by section 243.010 of the Local Government Code, as amended, as a Class A misdemeanor. 
(b)  To prohibit the violation of a regulation in this article, the city attorney may file suit in the district court for an injunction. 
(Ord. No. 1995-12, § 2, 12-11-95) 
Secs. 42-251-42-325. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGE SERVICE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic laws apply to persons driving animal-drawn vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 25. 

Sec. 42-326. - Permit-Required. 
    No horse-drawn carriage service may be operated for hire on city streets without a permit having been first obtained from the city. 
(Code 1978, § 11-141) 
Sec. 42-327. - Same-Duration; form. 
    The two-year permit, attached to Ordinance No. 84-9 as exhibit A and incorporated by reference in this section, is hereby approved for issuance to operators of horse-drawn carriage services on city streets. 
(Code 1978, § 11-142) 
Editor's note- The document referred to in the above section as exhibit A, attached to Ord. No. 84-9, is not set out herein, but is on file and available for reference in the offices of the city. 
Sec. 42-328. - Violation. 
    Violations of this article and of the terms and conditions of the permits authorized in this article shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-5. 
(Code 1978, § 11-143) 
Secs. 42-329-42-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CABLE TELEVISION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 42-351-42-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1997-23, adopted Dec. 8, 1997, included Federal Communications Commission Customer Service Standards (47 CFR 76.309). These standards have not been set out herein. 

Sec. 42-371. - Standards. 
(a)  The cable operator shall provide subscribers a toll-free or local telephone number for installation, service, and complaint calls. 
(b)  Telephone and office availability. The cable operator must have telephone lines, either adequately staffed or with answering capability, providing at least emergency referral information, which are operational 24 hours a day, every day, including weekends and holidays. 
(c)  (1)  Under "normal operating conditions" and when phones are staffed, subscriber calls to the cable operator will be answered on average within 30 seconds 90 percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis; and subscribers will receive a busy signal three percent of the time or less. Failure to meet these standards, within a reasonable time, after notice of failure to do so, shall subject cable operator to appropriate enforcement actions for default under the franchise ("enforcement action"). 
(2)  0n weekdays, during normal business hours the cable operator must have telephone lines and its office(s) located within the city's service area ("service area") open and adequately staffed to respond to subscribers in at least four ways: 
a.  To accept payments; 
b.  To exchange or accept return of cable operator provided equipment; 
c.  To schedule and conduct technical calls; and 
d.  To answer subscriber inquiries. 
(3)  On Saturdays, cable operator must have adequate staff available: to accept equipment, such as converters, at the option of the cable operator either at its office or in the field, to schedule and perform emergency service or emergency technician calls; must have the capability to accept payments (this may be done through arrangements with unaffiliated retailers); and to answer subscriber inquiries which may be answered by advising the caller when and to what number to call back during weekdays. 
(4)  The cable operator shall notify the city manager or his or her designee ("city manager") as promptly as possible, by any available means including accessing telephones away from the cable operator's premises, whenever there is a total interruption of telephone service which affects the cable operator's subscriber service phone lines. 
(d)  Cable operator shall have an office located within the service area at which they shall be able to respond to subscribers a minimum of 48 hours a week, with a minimum of eight hours per day, on weekdays. 
(Ord. No. 1997-23, § I, 12-8-97) 
Sec. 42-372. - Handicapped access. 
    The cable operator shall comply with all rules and regulations pertaining to the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(Ord. No. 1997-23, § II, 12-8-97) 
Sec. 42-373. - Employee identification. 
    All personnel of the cable operator contacting subscribers or potential subscribers outside the office of the cable operator must be clearly identified as associated with the cable operator. 
(Ord. No. 1997-23, § III, 12-8-97) 
Sec. 42-374. - Installations. 
(a)  (1)  Standard installation charges will apply to those installations which are within serviceable addresses and consists of an aerial or underground drop of no more than 125 feet in length running from the nearest feeder cable of the system to the terminal of the subscriber, utilizing exposed wiring inside the subscriber's premises. Installations requiring materials or procedures which exceed those minimum lengths, or in the case of any underground drop which involves unforeseen or extraordinary conditions, could be subject to additional charges, as determined by the cable operator, provided that such additional charges shall be fair, reasonable, and nondiscriminatory, to the extent applicable law and regulations provide. 
(2)  All installations will be in accordance with FCC rules, including but not limited to, appropriate grounding, adjustment of the television set in order to receive service, and the provision of required consumer information and literature to instruct the subscriber in the utilization of the services. 
(b)  Under normal operating conditions, if the cable operator cannot perform standard installations as defined above within five business days of request by a subscriber (provided that the schedule or preferences of the person requesting installation have not been responsible for the delay), the subscriber may request and is entitled to receive a free standard installation. If the cable operator fails to provide this free standard installation and the request was made by the subscriber within 30 days of the installation request, the city may direct the cable operator to issue a credit for the installation. Failure to comply with the city directive will subject cable operator to appropriate enforcement actions. This section does not apply to the introduction of new products and services when cable operator is utilizing a phased introduction. 
(Ord. No. 1997-23, § IV, 12-8-97) 
Sec. 42-375. - Service interruptions and other service problems. 
(a)  The cable operator shall make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only if necessary and for the shortest period possible. 
(b)  The cable operator shall promptly notify the city manager of any "significant service interruption" in the operation of the system. For the purposes of this section, a "significant service interruption in the operation of the system "shall mean any outage a duration of at least four continuous hours between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and eight continuous hours between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. to at least 200 of the subscribers in the area served by cable operator. 
(c)  The cable operator shall exercise its best efforts to limit any significant service interruption for the purpose of maintaining, repairing, or construction of the system. Except in an emergency or other situation necessitating a more expedited or alternative notification procedure, the cable operator may schedule a significant service interruption only after the city has been given reasonable prior notice of the proposed interruption. 
(d)  Technicians employed by the cable operator and capable of performing service-related emergency repairs and maintenance must be available 24 hours a day, including weekends and holidays. 
(e)  The cable operator shall provide a monthly summary of service calls received by category to the city manager. The definitions used to classify service calls shall be agreed to by the city manager and the cable operator. 
(1)  Under normal operating conditions, the cable operator will begin repairing service interruptions promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known (including weekends and holidays) unless the consumer requests an appointment later than 24 hours after the interruption. 
(2)  Under normal operating conditions, the cable operator must begin actions to correct service problems other than service interruptions the next business day after notification by a subscriber of the service problem unless the consumer requests an appointment at a later date. 
(3)  Under normal operating conditions, service-related subscriber complaints, if possible, must be resolved within 48 hours (provided that the schedule or preferences of the person requesting service have not been responsible for the delay) and in any event, resolution must occur within one week. A complaint shall be considered to be resolved when signals received by the subscriber have been brought into compliance with applicable FCC standards. Those matters requiring additional maintenance, repair, or technical adjustments that necessitate an excess of one week to reasonably complete, must be finally resolved, if technically feasible, within 30 days of the initial complaint if the complaint has been determined to be the fault of the cable operator. The city manager may require reasonable documentation to be provided by the cable operator to substantiate the additional time to resolve a complaint. The foregoing does not apply to minor service interruptions which occur on an intermittent basis. 
(f)  (1)  Under normal operating conditions, upon request by the subscriber or city manager, the cable operator shall provide a credit to subscriber when there is an outage of all channels for a period of 24 consecutive hours or more which affects the discrete definable service area. The credit for such an outage shall equal, at a minimum, the value of one-thirtieth of subscriber's current monthly bill, excluding premium, pay-per-view and special events, for the first 24-consecutive-hour period and prorated for each additional four-hour period or portion thereof that the outage continues. 
(2)  Under normal operating conditions, upon request by the subscriber or city manager, the cable operator shall provide a credit to subscriber when there is an outage of any premium service for a period of 24 consecutive hours or more which affects a discrete, definable service area. The credit shall equal, at a minimum, the value of one-thirtieth of subscribers current monthly bill, for affected premium services, for the first 24-consecutive-hour period and prorated for each additional four-hour period or portion thereof that the outage continues. 
(3)  Under normal operating conditions, upon request of the subscriber or city manager, the cable operator shall provide a credit to the subscriber whenever an outage for a period of 24 consecutive hours or more has affected fewer than all of the non-premium channels received by the affected subscriber as part of their service. The credit shall equal the value of one-thirtieth of the prorated portion of the rate per affected channel times the number of affected channels. 
(4)  The cable operator shall, upon request, provide information to the city manager, regarding the amount of credits that were issued to subscribers for loss or degradation of service. 
(5)  Repeated failure to provide the proper credit for outages shall be grounds for enforcement as provided by this franchise. 
(Ord. No. 1997-23, § V, 12-8-97) 
Sec. 42-376. - Installation and service appointments. 
(a)  The "appointment window" alternatives for installations and service calls which require subscriber presence, will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour scheduled time block during normal business hours. The schedule time block may be longer if the subscriber consents. (The cable operator may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer.) This provision does not apply to disconnects, service upgrades or downgrades which do not require access to the subscriber's premises or to special request orders. 
(b)  Under normal operating conditions, if the cable operator does not arrive for installations or service calls by appointment within the scheduled four-hour time frame agreed to by the subscriber, the subscriber may request and is entitled to receive a free standard installation, or $20.00 credit respectively. If the cable operator fails to provide such free standard installation, and the request was made by the subscriber within 30 days of the missed appointment, the city may direct the cable operator to issue the credit. Failure to comply with the city's directive will subject cable operator to appropriate enforcement action. 
(c)  Under normal operating conditions, the cable operator may not cancel an appointment with a subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment without the subscriber's consent. 
(d)  If the cable operator's representative is running late for an appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the cable operator will make a diligent effort to contact the subscriber directly. If, however, the subscriber is unavailable at the time the contact attempt is made, the cable operator will attempt a second contact at least one more time during the previously agreed upon appointment window. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient to the subscriber. Contacting the subscriber will not necessarily negate the requirement for a free standard installation. 
(Ord. No. 1997-23, § VI, 12-8-97) 
Sec. 42-377. - Notices and customer communications. 
(a)  Any opportunity for review and comment by the city manager required under this section shall not imply that prior approval of the city manager is required. However, in the event of an error concerning city information, the cable operator shall not be in compliance with notification requirements. 
(b)  The cable operator shall send annually written notice to all subscribers informing them that any complaints or inquiries not satisfactorily handled by the cable operator may be referred to the city manager. Such notification shall be either: 
(1)  A separate document which may be included with a billing statement; or 
(2)  Included on the portion of the monthly bill that is to be retained by the subscriber. 
The cable operator's telephone number for service and the telephone number for the city manager shall be contained in the notice. This notice shall also fully describe the cable operator's telephone hours and, when applicable, the lobby hours and shall include the telephone number(s) available to subscribers after the cable operator's normal business hours through which subscribers can obtain, at a minimum, emergency referral information. No promotional material may be included on the separate document or the portion of the bill containing this notice. When practicable, a draft of this notice shall be forwarded to the city manager, for review and comment, after which the city manager shall respond with comments within 3 business days. The annual notice may be combined with the notice delineated in subsection (b). 
(c)  The cable operator shall notify affected subscribers of any pricing changes or additional charges (excluding temporary marketing and sales discounts or offers) and/or any changes in programming services (including the scrambling or descrambling of channels-except the descrambling of a channel(s) for promotional purposes). 
(d)  The cable operator shall provide written information to subscribers on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to all affected subscribers, at any time upon request, and for affected subscribers, at least ten days prior to making significant changes in the information required by this section: 
(1)  Products and services offered; 
(2)  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services and facilities; 
(3)  Installation and maintenance policies including, when applicable, information regarding the subscriber home wiring rights and information describing ownership or internal wiring during the period service is provided; 
(4)  Instructions on how to use the service; 
(5)  Channel positions of programming offered on the system; 
(6)  Billing and complaint procedures, including the name, address and telephone number of the city manager; 
(7)  The availability of a signal control device; 
(8)  The cable operator's practices and procedures for protecting against invasions of privacy; 
(9)  The address and telephone number of the cable operator's office to which complaints may be reported; and 
(10)  When applicable, the cable operator's community unit identifier, as specified by the FCC. 
In all subscriber communications, the cable operator shall be as clear and precise as possible. 
(e)  (1)  Whenever practicable, all required subscriber notices shall be submitted for review and comment to the city manager. 
(2)  Notices of changes in rates shall indicate the new rate and the amount the rate has increased or decreased from the current rate. Specific words such as "increase" or "decrease" must be used to describe the changes (as opposed to less specific terms, such as "adjustment"). 
(3)  Notices of changes of programming services and/or channel locations shall include a concise description of the new programming service and the specific dial location, of that programming service. In addition, should the dial location be affected by the introduction of a new service, such information must also be included in the notice. 
(f)  (1)  In order that subscribers are fully apprised of the charges they may incur, cable operators will generally be required to note that advertised rates are subject to additional taxes and fees. 
(2)  In order that subscribers are fully apprised of the charges they may incur, telephone communications with subscribers that quote rates, fees, and/or other charges shall inform subscribers that the rates, fees, and/or charges are subject to additional taxes and fees. 
(g)  Every notice of termination of service shall include all of the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the subscriber whose account is delinquent; 
(2)  Current account balance; 
(3)  The date by which payment is required in order to avoid termination of service; and 
(4)  The telephone number of a representative of the cable operator who can provide additional information and handle complaints or initiate an investigation concerning the service and charges in question. 
(h)  For informational purposes only, a listing of the cable operator closings or holidays will be provided to the city manager annually, by no later than January 1 and by no later than every anniversary thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 1997-23, § VII, 12-8-97) 
Sec. 42-378. - Bills. 
(a)  Bills must be itemized, in accordance with service or services purchased by subscribers and related equipment charges as provided by law and regulations. If, on bills, a cable operator chooses to itemize as a separate line item franchise fees and/or other governmentally imposed fees attributable to the total bill, such fees must be shown in accordance with any applicable law concerning the cable operator's ability to itemize such fees. 
(b)  Every residential subscriber sending payment directly to the cable operator shall have at least ten business days from the postmarked date of the initial bill for the delinquent amount for services to pay the listed charges prior to disconnect for non-payment. 
(c)  A specific due date shall be indicated on every subscriber bill. This provision applies only to active accounts not those accounts pending disconnect. 
(d)  Any subscriber who, in good faith, disputes all or part of any bill has the option of withholding the disputed amount without disconnection until cable operator has investigated the dispute and has made a determination that the amount is owed provided that: 
(1)  The subscriber pays all undisputed charges; 
(2)  The subscriber provides written notification of the dispute to the cable operator in a timely manner and includes identifying information; and 
(3)  The subscriber cooperates in determining the appropriateness of the charges in dispute. 
(e)  Subscriber bills from cable operator shall include the name, address and telephone number of the city manager. The city manager will provide the required information to cable operator on an annual basis by January 1, or as needed. 
(f)  The cable operator shall forward, on a monthly basis, a sample bill for the current billing period to the city manager. 
(g)  The cable operator shall forward all regulatory billing inserts and copies of all other mailings required by governmental authorities to subscribers to the city manager prior to or at the same time that they are provided to subscribers. (Copies of notices to subscribers must be forwarded to the city manager pursuant to the applicable sections of these consumer service standards.) 
(Ord. No. 1997-23, § VIII, 12-8-97) 
Sec. 42-379. - Disconnection/denial of service. 
(a)  The cable operator shall not terminate residential service for nonpayment of a delinquent account unless the cable operator provides initial notice of the delinquency and impending termination at least ten days prior to the proposed termination. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the subscriber to whom the service is billed. This notice shall not be sent until the twenty-eighth day after the initial bill for services was mailed to the subscriber. The notice of delinquency and impending termination may be part of a billing statement. This section does not apply to subscribers disconnected due to NSF checks. 
(b)  The cable operator shall only terminate service on days when subscriber can reach a representative of the cable operator either in person or by telephone. Service terminated without good cause must be restored without charge for the service restoration. Good cause includes, but is not limited to, signal leakage, failure to pay, payment by check for which there are insufficient funds, theft of service, abuse of equipment or system personnel or other similar subscriber actions. 
(c)  Subject to provisions of the franchise agreement, the cable operator shall furnish and maintain services to each person, in the service area, who qualify for service, who makes a request to receive any programming service. Nothing in these standards shall limit the right of the cable operator to deny service to any household or individual which has a negative credit or service history with the cable operator, which may include non-payment of bills or theft or damage to the cable operator's equipment, or who has threatened or assaulted employees of the cable operator in the course of their employment. Provided that in the event service is denied, the cable operator will give notice to the subscriber of the right to contact the appropriate regulatory authority, providing name, address, and phone number as directed by the office of cable and regulatory affairs. 
(Ord. No. 1997-23, § IX, 12-8-97) 
Sec. 42-380. - Deposits, refunds, and credits. 
(a)  The cable operator may require refundable deposits for service or equipment. Upon termination of service for any reason, subscribers will be entitled to receive a refund or credit against amounts owed by the cable operator equal to the deposit. 
(b)  On all deposits, cable operator shall be required to pay simple interest at a rate of one-half percent per month (six per year). Such interest shall be accrued and payable upon termination of service. Upon termination of service for any reason, subscribers will be entitled to receive a refund or credit against amounts owed the cable operator equal to the deposit plus accumulated interest. The rate may be modified to reflect prevailing market rates upon approval by the city which shall not be unreasonably withheld. Such interest shall be accrued on deposits charged to subscribers after January 1, 1998. Cable operator will not be required to pay simple interest on deposits received prior to such date. 
Refund checks will be issued promptly following the resolution of the event giving rise to the refund within 45 days. 
(c)  In addition to a refund, if the cable operator fails to mail a check for a refund to any subscriber disconnecting service with an outstanding credit of $3.00 or more within 45 days of the date service is ended, and the subscriber has returned all cable operator owned equipment, the subscriber is entitled to receive a $10.00 penalty payment, in addition to the total refund due. Failure to comply with the $10.00 penalty provision shall be grounds for appropriate Enforcement action. Refunds will be provided to subscribers with outstanding credits of less than $3.00 upon request. 
(d)  Credits for service will be issued no later than the subscriber's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
(Ord. No. 1997-23, § X, 12-8-97) 
Sec. 42-381. - Rates, fees, and charges. 
(a)  The cable operator shall not, except to the extent permitted by law, impose any fee or charge on any subscriber for service calls to said subscriber's premises to perform any repair or maintenance work related to cable operator installed equipment necessary to receive service, except any such work which was necessitated by a negligent or wrongful act of said subscriber. 
(b)  Where the actions of the cable operator, its agent(s) or subcontractor(s) can be shown upon a reasonable demonstration of evidence to have contributed to the theft, loss or damage of a converter or other equipment lawfully used by a subscriber, the subscriber's liability with respect to said converter or other equipment shall be reduced to the extent of such contributing actions. 
(c)  All charges for residential services must be applied on a nondiscriminatory basis as provided by law, allowing however, for reasonable discounts to senior citizens and/or the economically disadvantaged and that the cable operator may conduct promotional campaigns in which rates are discounted or waived, and may offer commercial rates or bulk rate discounts for multiple dwelling units, hotels, motels and similar institutions. 
(d)  The cable operator shall not assess late fees until at least 30 days after the initial bill for current services has been mailed. 
(e)  The cable operator shall be entitled to recover a fee for all checks returned due to non-sufficient funds. 
(Ord. No. 1997-23, § XI, 12-8-97) 
Sec. 42-382. - Privacy protections. 
    The cable operator shall comply fully with all applicable state and federal laws relating to the protection of subscriber privacy. The cable operator shall not disclose the telephone number of any subscriber for any purpose that is not directly related to the provision of services offered by cable operator. The cable operator shall not require more personally identifiable information than is necessary to confirm the identity of a subscriber and any past due amounts owed the cable operator. The type of information considered to be necessary, may vary depending on the individual subscriber. The cable operator may deny service if a subscriber fails to produce any verifiable personally identifiable information after being requested to do so. 
(Ord. No. 1997-23, § XII, 12-8-97) 
Sec. 42-383. - Enforcement. 
    The city may seek all rights and remedies under the franchise and/or injunctive relief or any other judicial remedy available pursuant to state or federal law in order to enforce compliance with these standards. 
(Ord. No. 1997-23, § XIII, 12-8-97) 
Sec. 42-384. - Rights reserved by the city. 
    The city reserves the right to establish additional, reasonable customer service standards from time to time, as may be necessary, after making a finding of need and after notice and opportunity to be heard from the cable operator. The city reserves the right to regulate rates for video or cable service to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 1997-23, § XIV, 12-8-97) 
Secs. 42-385-42-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and public ways, § 70-1 et seq. Telecommunications services tax, § 74-136 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-401. - Base compensation for use of rights-of-way. 
(a)  Texas Local Government Code Chapter 283 establishes the method to calculate the municipal fee "base amount" of compensation to be paid to municipalities by certificated telecommunication providers. 
(b)  In determining a compensation level for the use of the public rights-of-way by certificated telecommunication providers that is fair and equitable, the council has considered: 
(1)  The historic level of compensation received; 
(2)  The actual and projected percentage of growth in revenue from the compensation model in the existing telecommunication ordinance; and 
(3)  Annual growth in number of lines. 
(c)  The council finds that the base amount level established in subsection (d) of this section fairly compensates the city by certificated telecommunication providers for their use of the public rights-of-way, and will be applied in a competitively neutral and non-discriminatory manner. 
(d)  In accordance with Chapter 283 of the Local Government Code, the city council has calculated that $103,330.00 as the base amount of compensation for certificated telecommunication providers' use of the public rights-of-way, which shall be filed with the Public Utility Commission (PUC). 
(Ord. No. 1999-15, Part I(b)-(d), Part II, 11-22-99) 
Secs. 42-402-42-420. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USE OF CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 42-421. - Findings and purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to: 
(1)  Assist in the management of the rights-of-way in order to minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact and other adverse effects, and the costs to the citizens resulting from the placement of telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way; 
(2)  Govern the provider's use and occupancy of the rights-of-way; 
(3)  Compensate city for the private commercial use and occupancy of the rights-of-way by telecommunications providers in a non-discriminatory and competitively neutral manner; 
(4)  Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
(5)  Facilitate competition among telecommunications service providers and encourage the universal availability of advanced telecommunications services to all residents and businesses of the city; 
(6)  Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held in public trust by the city; 
(7)  This division may be referred to as the "Telecommunications Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 1, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-422. - Granting clause. 
    Subject to the restrictions set forth herein, the city may grant to a provider the non-exclusive right and privilege to use the public rights-of-way in the city for the operation of a telecommunications system, consisting of both telecommunications facilities and transmission media. The terms of this division shall apply throughout the city and to all operations of the provider within the city, and shall include all operations and telecommunications facilities and transmission media used in whole or in part in the provision of telecommunications services in any newly annexed areas upon the effective date of any annexation. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 2, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-423. - Authority; scope. 
(a)  This division applies to all telecommunications service providers under Title 47, Chapter 5, Subchapter II of the United States Code (47 U.S.C. Sec. 201 et seq.) ("Title 47") that uses or otherwise places facilities in, on or over rights-of-way, excluding services provided solely by means of a wireless transmission. No consent granted under this chapter authorizes the provision of any services not covered by Title 47. Cable service and open video systems as defined in Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 [Title 47, Chapter 5, Subchapter V-A of the United States Code (47 U.S.C. Sec. 521, et seq.)] and any other content service are expressly excluded. 
(b)  The right of a person to apply for or to use utility infrastructure shall be governed by other provisions of the city Code. The granting of a municipal consent under this division does not grant attachment rights or authorize the use of utility infrastructure. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 3, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-424. - Definitions. 
    In this division: 
(1)  Access line means: 
a.  Each access line consisting of provider's transmission media that are located between the end user customer's premises network interface within the city and the provider's local serving facilities (these serving facilities include central office facilities, distribution frame facilities or other similar facilities) and that allow delivery of telecommunication services within the city; and 
b.  Each termination point or points within the city of a non-switched telephone circuit consisting of provider's transmission media dedicated for use between specific locations identified by an end user customer. Interoffice-transport of the provider and other transmission media that do not terminate at an end user customer's network interface device are not access lines that would be separately identified and counted for the purposes of assessing the monthly line fee. 
(2)  Affiliate means a person who controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with a provider. Affiliate does not include a person who serves end use customers by means of a wireless transmission. There is a rebuttable presumption of control if a provider owns at least 25 percent of the affiliate's stock or assets. 
(3)  Certified telecommunications utility means any entity that has been granted or applied for a certificate under Title III of Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann. Art. 1446c-0 or other successor authorizing certificate to provide local exchange telephone service. 
(4)  City means The City Of Wharton, Texas. As used throughout, the term city also includes the designated agent of the city. 
(5)  City manager means the city manager of the city or the city manager's designee. 
(6)  Direction of the city means all ordinances, laws, rules, and regulations of the city that are not inconsistent with this division and that are now in force or may hereafter be passed and adopted. 
(7)  Facilities means any and all of the provider's duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, underground and overhead passageways and other equipment, structures, plant and appurtenances and all associated transmission media. 
(8)  Line fee means a monthly fee that is assessed on each access line owned by the provider and that is paid by the provider to the city as compensation for the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way. 
(9)  Municipal consent means the individual agreement entered into by and between the city and individual providers under this division governing the provider's use of the rights-of-way and the payment of compensation. 
(10)  Person means a natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company or association, and other such entity. 
(11)  Provider means a person that intends to or does deliver telecommunications services within the city to the public and: 
a.  Is a certified telecommunications utility; and 
b.  Places facilities in, on or over the public rights-of-way or otherwise has a property interest in a telecommunications network within the city. Provider does not include persons who are authorized by the city to occupy the rights-of-way in specifically approved routes within the city, unless they also have a consent under this division. 
(12)  Rights-of-way means all present and future public streets, highways, lanes, paths, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards, drives, bridges, tunnels, easements or similar property in the city limits in which the city holds a property interest or exercises rights of management or control. 
(13)  Telecommunications network or network means all facilities placed in the rights-of-way and used to provide telecommunications services to the public. 
(14)  Telecommunications services means the providing or offering to provide transmissions between or among points identified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, including voice, video or data, without change in content of the information as sent and received, if the transmissions are accomplished through a telecommunications network. Telecommunications services include ancillary or adjunct switching services and signal conversions rendered as a function of underlying transmission services, but excludes long distance transmissions (inter-LATA [Local Access Transport Area] and intra-LATA toll transmissions). Telecommunications services includes all communications services capable of being provided over a telephone system and permitted to telecommunications providers under the Public Utility Regulatory Act of 1995, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann. Art. 1446c-0, as amended, and Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, expressly excluding cable services or open video systems as defined in Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended. Also excluded are "wireless services" as defined by law. 
(15)  Transmission media means any and all of the provider's cables, fibers, wires or other physical devices used to transmit and/or receive communication signals, whether analog, digital or of other characteristic, and whether for voice, data or other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 4, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-425. - Municipal consent required. 
(a)  Persons seeking to place facilities in, on or over the rights-of-way or which otherwise have a property interest in the facilities to be placed in, on or under the rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services must obtain a municipal consent. 
(b)  The use of rights-of-way for the delivery of any service not covered by this division is subject to all other applicable city requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 5, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-426. - Application for municipal consent. 
(a)  A person must submit an application to the city manager with a duplicate copy to the city attorney to grant, renew, extend, amend, or transfer a municipal consent. 
(b)  The application must be on a form prescribed by the city manager, and it must include the following: 
(1)  The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant that may use the network and the identity of any other certificated telecommunications utility that may use in any manner the telecommunications network, to the extent known at the time of the application; 
(2)  A general description of the services to be provided initially; 
(3)  With respect to post-application construction, an outline of the applicant's proposed network, if any; and 
(4)  A description of the effect on the rights-of-way, if any, including: 
a.  The location and route required for applicant's proposed telecommunications network; 
b.  The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the rights-of-way along the proposed route; 
c.  The location(s), if any, for interconnection with other telecommunications facilities or networks of other telecommunications providers; 
d.  The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate; 
(5)  Evidence that the applicant holds or has applied for a Public Utility Commission of Texas Certificate and information to establish that the applicant will obtain all other governmental approvals and permits prior to construction and operation of the telecommunications network and prior to offering or providing the telecommunications services; 
(6)  Information in sufficient detail that evidences the applicant will provide or ensure a seamless interconnection with or through other telecommunications service providers to the local emergency number district and evidence of compliance with Chapters 771 and 772 of the Texas Health and Safety Code on Emergency Communication, and the Texas Public Utility Council Substantive Rules on interconnection, particularly Section 23.97(a), (d) and (e), as amended; 
(7)  Such other and further information as may be reasonably requested by the city manager. 
(c)  Each applicant shall submit a non-refundable application fee of $850.00 with the applications; however, such fee shall be applied as a credit against the annual municipal consent fee, as described in section 42-431, for the first year of the municipal consent. 
(d)  The city manager shall review an application submitted under this division and shall recommend to the city council that it grant or deny the application. The city manager shall make recommendation to the city council no later than the 120th day after an application is filed. Upon mutual written agreement between the city and the provider, action may be postponed for periods not exceeding 30 days each. 
(e)  Except for delay by the applicant, the city council must act on the city manager's recommendation within 60 days after receipt by the council of the city manager's recommendation or the city manager's recommendation to grant an application shall be deemed approved. No city council action is needed on a denial recommendation, except acknowledgement of receipt of the recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 6, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-427. - Municipal consent ordinance. 
(a)  If the city manager finds that the application meets the requirements of this division, the city manager shall request the city attorney to prepare a municipal consent ordinance for the city council's consideration. 
(b)  A municipal consent ordinance submitted to the city council must include the following provisions: 
(1)  A term of no less than two years for the consent agreement; 
(2)  A requirement that the provider substantially comply with this division; 
(3)  A requirement that the provider's municipal consent is subject to termination by the city council, after notice and hearing, for the provider's failure to comply with this chapter or on a showing that the provider has breached the terms of the municipal consent; 
(4)  A provision that incorporates the requirements of section 42-434 of this division; 
(5)  A provision that incorporates the requirements of sections 42-437, 42-438, and 42-439 of this division if applicable. 
(c)  Review and approval by the city does not constitute a guarantee of sufficiency of the design of the telecommunications network. The applicant retains full responsibility for the adequacy of the design of the telecommunications network. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 7, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-428. - Petition for reconsideration. 
    The act of granting, amending, denying or terminating a municipal consent is a legislative function within the discretion of the city council. A person whose application for a municipal consent is denied, or whose application is not considered by the city council on or before the 60th day after the city manager submits a recommendation under section 42-427 or whose municipal consent is terminated must petition the city council for reconsideration before seeking judicial remedies. A petition for reconsideration is considered denied if the city council does not act within 60 days after the petition is filed with the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 8, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-429. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The city manager shall administer this division and enforce compliance with a municipal consent conveyed under this division. 
(b)  A provider shall report information that the city manager requires in the form and manner prescribed by the city manager relating to the use of rights-of-way for the telecommunications services authorized by a municipal consent conveyed under this chapter. 
(c)  The city manager shall report to the city council the city manager's determination that a provider has failed to comply with this division. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 9, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-430. - Applicability. 
(a)  Sections 42-437, 42-438 and 42-439 of this division apply only to a provider that owns or controls physical facilities in the rights-of-way. 
(b)  Section 42-440 of this division applies to a provider that has a property interest in a network. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 10, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-431. - Compensation to city. 
(a)  Line fee. To compensate the city for the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way, a provider shall pay the city a monthly line fee for each access line owned or used by provider as calculated as of month-end, that is activated for use by an end use customer or by another provider, or by a certificated telecommunications utility, by lease or otherwise, subject to subsection (f) below. 
(1)  Line fee: 
a.  Following the effective date of this division, a provider shall submit to the city manager on a quarterly basis, a certified statement with the line fee payment under section 42-432, indicating the number of access lines, for the customer classes identified herein, used to provide telecommunications services at month end, for each month of the quarter. The statement shall be provided on a form prescribed by the city manager. 
b.  For each month of the quarter for the first year following the effective date of the consent, a provider shall pay a municipal consent fee based on its number of access lines calculated as follows: 
Access Line      Monthly Amount Per Access Line 
Residential ..... $0.85 
Non-residential ..... 2.76 
Private line termination ..... 2.76 
(For purposes of this section only, lines terminating at customers with "lifeline," "tel-assistance," or other service that is required to be similarly discounted pursuant to state or federal law or regulation for the purpose of advancing universal service to the economically disadvantaged shall not be included in the lines upon which the fee is calculated.) 
(2)  Annual adjustment to line fee: At the beginning of each successive anniversary year following the year of adoption of this division, the monthly line fee shall increase by four percent over the amount of the monthly line fee fixed for the prior year. 
(b)  Number of access lines. Subject to city's agreement not to disclose this information unless required by law, provider agrees to provide annually or as requested by the city, within a reasonable time after receipt of the city's written request, a report showing the number of access lines being maintained or operated by provider that are serving premises within the city. The city agrees that the report shall be used solely for the purposes of verifying the number of provider's access lines serving premises within the city. Upon written request, provider shall verify the information in the report and, upon reasonable advance notice, all non-customer specific records and other documents required for such verification shall be subject to inspection by the city expressly excluding any records, documents or other writings the disclosure of which is prohibited by state or federal law, including the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 18 U.S.C. § 2701 et seq. 
(c)  Confidential records. If the provider notifies the city of the confidential nature of any information (including, but not limited to the information in paragraph (b) of this section), reports, documents, or writings, the city agrees to maintain the confidentiality of the information, reports, documents, and writings to the extent permitted by law. Upon receipt by the city of requests for the provider's confidential information, reports, documents, or writings, the city shall notify the provider of the request in writing by facsimile transmission. The city shall furnish the provider with copies of attorney general opinion requests it makes pertaining to the provider's confidential information, reports, documents or writings. 
(d)  No other fees. Unless otherwise provided in this division, the payments due hereunder shall be in lieu of fees charged for the use of rights-of-way, but does not exclude permit, license, approval, inspection, or other similar fees or charges or general business license fees customarily assessed by city against a person operating a business similar to that conducted by the provider. 
(e)  Uncollectibles. City and provider understand and agree that provider has a statutory right to pass through to its customers on a pro rata basis any compensation paid to the city for access to the rights-of-way. Any other provision of this agreement notwithstanding, provider shall not be obligated to pay the city for any access lines or private line termination points the revenues for which remain uncollectibles. 
(f)  Other telecommunications carriers and providers. Other provisions of this section notwithstanding, provider shall not include in its monthly count of access lines, and shall not remit a line fee to the city on such lines and points, those access lines that are leased or otherwise provided to another telecommunications carrier, certificated telecommunications utility or another provider ("telecommunications carrier") for consideration if the other telecommunications carrier declares its intent to the city to both include the leased or otherwise used access lines in its own monthly count of such facilities to the city and remit to the city a line fee on those lines and points and provide the city with all applicable payments and reports as required herein of a provider. A telecommunications carrier that does not own or operate a network and that demonstrates to the city manager that the lines it utilizes for resale of services from other providers are included in the other provider's fee calculations is not required to comply with the requirements of this division. The provider that leases or otherwise provides the lines to a telecommunications carrier excluded under this section shall report the existence of those lines to city, such lines to include, but not be limited to, lines leased or otherwise provided to any certificated telecommunications utility. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 11, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-432. - Fee payments. 
    A provider shall remit the line fee on a quarterly basis together with the certified statement required in section 42-431(a)(1)a. Payment shall be made on or before the 45th day following the close of each calendar quarter for which the payment is calculated and shall be paid by wire transfer to an account designated by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 12, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-433. - Audits. 
(a)  On 30 days' notice to a provider the city may audit a provider at any time. The provider shall furnish information to demonstrate its compliance with the consent and/or other provisions of this division. 
(b)  A provider shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts and records of business and operations in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles for a period of five years. If the Federal Communications Council requires, a provider shall use the system of accounts and the forms of books, accounts, records, and memoranda prescribed in 47 CFR Part 32 or its successor. The city manager may require the keeping of additional records or accounts that are reasonably necessary for purposes of identifying, accounting for, and reporting the number of lines used to deliver telecommunication services. The city may examine the provider's books and records, expressly excluding any records, documents or other writings the disclosure of which is prohibited by state or federal law, including the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 18 U.S.C. § 2701 et seq. 
(c)  A provider shall make available to the city or the city's designated agent (hereinafter "agent"), for the city or its agent to examine, audit, review and copy, in Wharton, Texas, on the city manager's written request, its books and records including papers, books, accounts, documents, maps, plans and other provider records pertaining to a municipal consent conveyed under this division. A provider shall fully cooperate in making records available and otherwise assist the city examiner. The city examiner shall not inspect or copy or otherwise demand production of customer specific information or any records, documents or other writings the disclosure of which is prohibited by state or federal law, including the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 18 U.S.C. § 2701 et seq. 
(d)  The city manager may, at any time, make inquiries pertaining to providers' performance of the terms and conditions of a consent conveyed under this division. Providers shall respond to such inquiries on a timely basis. 
(e)  Upon written request by the city manager, providers shall furnish to the city within 14 business days from the date of the written request copies of all public petitions, applications, written communications and reports submitted by providers, to the FCC and to the PUC or their successor agencies, relating to any matters affecting the use of City of Wharton public rights-of-way and/or the telecommunications services authorized pursuant to a consent under this division. 
(f)  Without limiting the above paragraph, provider shall furnish to the city, within 14 business days from the date of the written request by the city manager, a copy of the initial registration and any updated registrations, required by PUC Substantive Rule Section 23.61(i), as amended, and a copy of the initial, any update of the annual information filing required by PUC Substantive Rule Section 23.61(j), as amended. 
(g)  The provisions of this section shall be continuing and shall survive the termination of the consent granted under this division and shall extend beyond the term of the consent granted to the provider and city shall have all the rights described in this section for so long as provider is providing any telecommunications services within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 13, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-434. - Transfer. 
(a)  No consent granted under this chapter, the assets held by providers for use under such consent which are in the public rights-of-way, any rights or privileges of providers under a consent, either separately or collectively, shall be sold, resold, assigned, transferred or conveyed by providers to any other person, without the prior written consent of the city by ordinance or resolution. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Should the provider sell, assign, transfer, convey or otherwise dispose of any of its rights or interests under this consent, including such provider's telecommunications network, or attempt to do so, without the city's prior consent, the city may revoke the consent for default, in which event all rights and interest of the provider shall cease. 
(b)  Any transfer in violation of this section shall be null and void and unenforceable. Any change of control of a provider shall constitute a transfer under this section. 
(c)  There shall be a rebuttable presumption of a change of control of a provider upon a change of 15 percent or greater in the ownership of such provider. Such a change in control shall be deemed a transfer which requires consent of the city. 
(d)  A mortgage or other pledge of assets to a bank or lending institution in a bona fide lending transaction shall not be considered an assignment or transfer. 
(e)  Every consent granted under this division shall specify that any transfer or other disposition of rights which has the effect of circumventing payment of required consent fees and/or evasion of payment of such fees by non-collection or non-reporting of revenues derived from telecommunications services, bartering or any other means which evade the actual collection of revenues for business pursued by a provider is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 14, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-435. - Notices to city. 
(a)  A provider shall notify the city manager in writing contemporaneously with the transmittal of all petitions, applications, and reports submitted by the provider to the Federal Communications Commission and the Public Utility Commission, or their successor agencies; relating to matters affecting both the use of rights-of-way in the city and the telecommunications services authorized by a municipal consent conveyed under this division. A provider shall furnish the city manager copies of the documents upon request. 
(b)  If a provider notifies the city of the confidential nature of information, the city manager shall maintain the confidentiality of the information to the extent permitted by law. Upon receipt of requests for confidential information, the city shall notify the affected providers of the request by facsimile transmission. The city shall furnish providers with copies of Attorney General opinion requests it makes pertaining to the confidential information. 
(c)  A provider shall give written notice to the city not later than 15 days before a transfer or change in operations that may affect the applicability of sections 42-438, 42-439, 42-440, and 42-441,to the provider. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 15, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-436. - Circumvention of fee prohibited. 
    A person may not circumvent payment of line fees or evade payment of fees by bartering, transfer of rights, or by any other means that result in undercounting a provider's number of lines. Capacity or services may be bartered if the imputed lines are reported in accordance with section 42-431. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 16, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-437. - Construction obligations. 
(a)  A provider is subject to the police powers of the city, other governmental powers, and the city's rights as a custodian of public property under state and federal laws. A provider is subject to city requirements and federal and state rules in connection with the construction, expansion, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of facilities in the rights-of-way. 
(b)  At the city's request, a provider shall furnish the city accurate and complete information relating to the construction, reconstruction, removal, maintenance, operation and repair of facilities performed by the provider in the rights-of-way. 
(c)  The construction, expansion, reconstruction, excavation, use, maintenance and operation of a provider's facilities within the rights-of-way are subject to applicable city requirements. 
(1)  A provider shall place certain facilities within the rights-of-way underground according to applicable city requirements absent a compelling demonstration by the provider that, in any specific instance, this requirement is not reasonable or feasible nor is it equally applicable to other similar users of the right-of-way. 
(2)  A provider shall perform excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way in accordance with all applicable city requirements, including the obligation to use trenchless technology whenever practical and consistent with obligations on other similar users of the right-of-way. The city shall waive the requirement of trenchless technology if it determines that the field conditions warrant the waiver. A provider shall minimize interference with the use of public and private property and shall follow the construction directions given by the city. 
(3)  When a provider completes construction work, a provider shall promptly restore the rights-of-way in accordance with applicable city requirements. A provider may excavate only for the construction, installation, expansion, repair, removal, and maintenance of the provider's facilities. 
(4)  The city may require a provider to allow attachment of another provider's facilities to its poles and conduits, in accordance with the city charter, state and federal law, provided that the parties agree to any necessary attachment agreement. 
(5)  A provider shall furnish the city with construction plans and maps showing the routing of new construction at least 15 days before beginning construction that involves an alteration to the surface or subsurface of the public rights-of-way. A provider may not begin construction until the plans and drawings have been approved in writing by the city manager. 
(6)  For construction that involves a minor alteration to the surface or subsurface of the rights-of-way, and does not involve the routing of new facilities, the city shall implement a streamlined permitting process of less than five days. 
(7)  If the city manager declares an emergency with regard to the health and safety of the citizens and requests by written notice the removal or abatement of facilities, a provider shall remove or abate the provider's facilities by the deadline provided in the city manager's request. A provider and the city shall cooperate to the extent possible to assure continuity of service. If a provider, after notice, fails or refuses to act, the city may remove or abate the facility, at the sole cost and expense of the provider, without paying compensation to the provider and without the city incurring liability for damages. 
(8)  Except in an emergency, a provider may not excavate the pavement of a street or public rights-of-way without first complying with city requirements. 
(9)  Within 120 days of completion of each new segment of a provider's facilities, a provider shall supply the city with a complete set of "as built" drawings for the segment in a format prescribed by the city. A provider must obtain the city's approval before relocating the provider's facilities in the rights-of-way. The city may not unreasonably withhold approval. 
(d)  In determining whether any requirement under this section is unreasonable or infeasible, the city manager or his/her designee shall consider, among other things, whether the requirement would subject the provider or providers to an unreasonably increased risk of service interruption, or to an unreasonably increased liability for accidents, or to an unreasonable delay in construction or in availability of its services, or to any other unreasonable technical or economic burden. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 17, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-438. - Conditions of rights-of-way occupancy. 
(a)  In the exercise of governmental functions, the city has first priority over all other uses of the rights-of-way. The city reserves the right to lay sewer, gas, water, and other pipe lines or cables and conduits, and to do underground and overhead work, and attachment, restructuring or changes in aerial facilities in, across, along, over or under a public street, alley or rights-of-way occupied by a provider, and to change the curb, sidewalks or the grade of streets. 
(b)  The city shall assign priorities among competing uses of the rights-of-way according to the order of completed permit applications. 
(c)  If, during the term of a municipal consent, the city authorizes abutting landowners to occupy space under the surface of any public street, alley, or rights-of-way, the grant to an abutting landowner shall be subject to the rights of the provider. If the city closes or abandons a rights-of-way that contains a portion of a provider's facilities, the city shall convey the land in the closed or abandoned rights-of-way subject to the rights conveyed in the municipal consent. 
(d)  If the city gives written notice, a provider shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of provider's facilities that are in the rights-of-way within 120 days. For projects expected to last beyond 120 days, the city will confer with provider before determining the alterations to be required and the timing thereof. The city shall give notice whenever the city has determined that removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction, operation, repair, maintenance or installation of a city public improvement in the rights-of-way. This section shall not be construed to prevent a provider's recovery of the cost of relocation or removal from private third parties who initiate the request for relocation or removal, nor shall it be required improvements are solely for beautification purposes without prior joint deliberation and agreement with provider. 
(e)  During the term of its municipal consent, a provider may trim trees in or over the rights-of-way for the safe and reliable operation, use and maintenance of its network. All tree trimming shall be performed in accordance with standards promulgated by the city. When ordered by the city, tree trimming shall be done under the supervision of the city. 
(f)  Providers shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial facilities to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures, if the city gives written notice of no less than 48 hours. The expense of these temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting and benefiting from the temporary rearrangements. Provider may require prepayment or prior posting of a bond from the party requesting temporary move. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 18, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-439. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  A provider shall obtain and maintain insurance in the amounts prescribed by the city with an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas acceptable to the city throughout the term of a municipal consent conveyed under this division. A provider shall furnish the city with proof of insurance at the time of filing the acceptance of a municipal consent. The city reserves the right to review the insurance requirements during the effective period of a municipal consent, and to reasonably adjust insurance coverage and limits when the city manager determines that changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims history of the industry or the provider require adjustment of the coverage. For purposes of this section, the city will accept certificates of self-insurance issued by the State of Texas providing the same coverage. 
(b)  The city may, on request and at no cost to the city, receive copies of certificates of insurance evidencing the coverage required by this section. The city may request the deletion, revision or modification of particular policy terms, conditions, limitations or exclusions, unless the policy provisions are established by a law or regulation binding the city, the provider, or the underwriter. If the city requests a deletion, revision or modification, a provider shall exercise reasonable efforts to pay for and to accomplish the change. 
(c)  An insurance certificate shall contain the following required provisions: 
(1)  Name of the city and its officers, employees, board members and elected representatives as additional insureds for all applicable coverage; 
(2)  Provide for 30 days' notice to the city for cancellation, non-renewal, or material change; 
(3)  Provide that notice of claims shall be provided to the city manager by certified mail; and 
(4)  Provide that the terms of the municipal consent which impose obligations on the provider concerning liability, duty, and standard of care, including the indemnity section, are included in the policy and that the risks are insured within the policy terms and conditions. 
(d)  A provider shall file and maintain proof of insurance with the city manager during the term of a municipal consent or an extension or renewal. An insurance certificate obtained in compliance with this section is subject to city approval. The city may require the certificate to be changed to reflect changing liability limits. A provider shall immediately advise the city attorney of actual or potential litigation that may develop [or] may affect an existing carrier's obligation to defend and indemnify. 
(e)  An insurer has no right of recovery against the city. The required insurance policies shall protect the provider and the city. The insurance shall be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies. 
(f)  The policy clause "other insurance" shall not apply to the city if the city is an insured under the policy. 
(g)  The provider shall pay premiums and assessments. A company which issues an insurance policy has no recourse against the city for payment of a premium or assessment. Insurance policies obtained by a provider must provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the city in connection with damage covered by the policy. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 19, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-440. - Indemnity. 
    Each consent conveyed under this chapter shall contain provisions whereby providers agree to defend, indemnify and hold city harmless from and against all damages, costs, losses or expenses (i) for the repair, replacement, or restoration of city's property, equipment, materials, structures and facilities which are damaged, destroyed or found to be defective as a result of such provider's acts or omissions, (ii) from and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action, and judgments for: (a) damage to or loss of the property of any person (including, but not limited to such provider, its agents, officers, employees and subcontractors, city's agents, officers and employees, and third parties); and/or (b) death, bodily injury, illness, disease, loss of services, or loss of income or wages to any person (including but not limited to the agents, officers and employees of such provider, provider's subcontractors and city, and third parties), arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting from the negligent or willful act or omissions of such provider, its agents, employees, and/or subcontractors, in the performance of activities pursuant to such consent. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 20, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-441. - Renewal of municipal consent. 
    A provider shall request a renewal or a new consent by making written application to the city manager at least six months before the expiration of the consent. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 21, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-442. - Annexation; disannexation. 
    Within 30 days following the date of the passage of any action effecting the annexation of any property to or the disannexation of any property from the city's corporate boundaries, the city agrees to furnish provider written notice of the action and an accurate map of the city's corporate boundaries showing, if available, street names and number details. The provider shall have 180 days from the date on which the city provides all necessary notice of the annexation in which to start including access lines within the affected area in the provider's count of access lines for the purpose of calculating the monthly line fee. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 22, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-443. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this division are severable. However, in the event this division or any tariff that authorizes the provider to recover the fee(s) provided for this division or any procedure provided in this division or any compensation due the city under this division becomes unlawful, or is declared or determined by a judicial, administrative or legislative authority exercising its jurisdiction to be excessive, unrecoverable, unenforceable, void, illegal or otherwise inapplicable, in whole or in part, or is exchanged for another means of compensation under higher authority, the provider and city shall meet and negotiate a new agreement that is in compliance with the authority's decision or enactment. Unless explicitly prohibited, the new agreement shall provide the city with a level of compensation comparable to that set forth in this division as long as the agreed-to compensation is recoverable by the provider in a manner permitted by law for the unexpired portion of the term of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 23, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-444. - Governing law. 
    This division shall be construed in accordance with the city Code(s) in effect on the date of passage of this division to the extent that such Code(s) are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 24, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-445. - Termination. 
(a)  The city shall reserve the right to terminate any consent and any rights or privileges conveyed under this division in the event of a material breach of the terms and conditions of the consent or of this division, subject to a 30-day written notice and the opportunity to cure the breach during that 30-day period. 
(b)  Material breaches of a consent specifically include, but are not limited to, continuing violations of sections 42-431, 42-437 and/or 42-438, and the furnishing of service of any kind not authorized by the consent. 
(c)  A material breach shall not be deemed to have occurred if the violation occurs without the fault of a provider or occurs as a result of circumstances beyond its control. Providers shall not be excused from performance of any of their obligations under this division by economic hardship, nor misfeasance or malfeasance of their city managers, officers or employees. 
(d)  A termination shall be declared only by a written decision of the city council after an appropriate public proceeding before the city council, which shall accord the provider due process and full opportunity to be heard and to respond to any notice of grounds to terminate. All notice requirements shall be met by giving the provider at least 15 days' prior written notice of any public hearing concerning the proposed termination of its consent. Such notice shall state the grounds for termination alleged by city. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 25, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-446. - Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly use the public rights-of-way that has not been authorized by the city in accordance with the terms of this chapter and a municipal consent. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place any facilities on, in or over the public rights-of-way, city property, city structures or utility infrastructure unless expressly allowed under this chapter or other applicable terms of a city ordinance. 
(c)  Each unauthorized use shall be deemed to be a distinct and separate offense. Each day a violation of this division continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(d)  The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense. The penalty for any violation of this division shall be as provided in Chapter 1, section 1-14 of the city Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 26, 10-13-97) 
Sec. 42-447. - Preemption. 
    No provision of this division or a municipal consent shall be deemed void or unenforceable as a result of state or federal preemption unless and until so determined by a final, non-appealable order of a state or federal agency or court. 
(Ord. No. 1997-16, § 27, 10-13-97) 
Secs. 42-448-42-470. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TOWER REGULATIONS 

Sec. 42-471. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed below, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning: 
    Alteration means any modification, replacement, or reconstruction that increases the height or materially increases the dimension of a tower structure. 
    Antenna means a device or system of wires, poles, rods, dishes, discs or similar devices used for the transmission and/or receipt of electromagnetic waves. 
    Building official means the building official of the code enforcement department or the city manager's designee. 
    Camouflage design or camouflage tower means the design of a tower or tower structure that blends into the surrounding environment and is visually unobtrusive. Examples of a camouflage design or tower are architecturally screened, roof-mounted antenna/array/equipment, building-mounted antenna/array/equipment that is painted and treated as an architectural element to blend with the existing building, designs that conceal the antenna/array/equipment, man-made trees, clock towers, bell towers, steeples, light poles, and similar alternative-design mounting structures. 
    Department means the code enforcement department of the City of Wharton. 
    FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Grade means the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building or structure and a line five feet from the building or structure. 
    Height of the building means the vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater height of the building: 
(1)  The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface with a five-foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building when the sidewalk or ground surface is not more than ten feet above the lowest grade. 
(2)  An elevation ten feet higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described in item (1) above is more than ten feet above the lowest grade. 
The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building. 
    Height of the tower means the vertical distance between the finished grade at the base of the tower or the lowest point of contact with the building, and the highest point of the tower structure, excluding the antenna, if any. 
    High mast light structure means a fixed, freestanding uninhabitable structure of a minimum height of 100 feet, specifically designed to carry light fixtures that is built on land on, along or adjacent to streets, roads, highways and bridges maintained by the state or political subdivision of the state. 
    Park means any property of the state or political subdivision thereof that is designated for and restricted to use by the public for park purposes. 
    Public utility means any person, company, corporation, cooperative corporation, partnership, or any combination thereof, that is subject to the comprehensive regulatory system established by and defined in the Texas Public Utility Regulatory Act, that owns or operates for compensation equipment or facilities for: 
(1)  Producing, generating, transmitting, distributing, selling, or furnishing electricity; or 
(1)  The conveyance, transmission, or reception of communications over a telephone system. 
The term "public utility" shall not include, as is defined in the Public Utility Regulatory Act, telegraph services, television stations, radio stations, community antenna television services, general radio-telephone services, or radio-telephone services authorized under the Public Mobile Radio Services rules of the Federal Communications Commission or private water companies. 
    Residence means any permanent building or structure containing habitable rooms for nontransient occupancy, designed and used primarily for living, sleeping, cooking and eating, which is intended to be used or occupied as a dwelling place for residential purposes, whether or not attached, including homes, town homes, patio-homes, duplexes, triplexes, quadraplexes, condominiums and apartments. Multi-unit complexes shall be included at a ratio of one-eighth acre of land, or any fraction thereof, as being equivalent to one residential tract. For purposes of calculating the ratio of multi-unit complex acreage to residential tracts, only that portion of the multi-unit complex acreage within the residential test area shall be considered. Hotels, motels, boarding houses, group homes, half way houses, nursing homes, hospitals, nursery schools, schools, and child care facilities shall not be considered residences. A building or structure located on a lot or tract of land used as the site of a tower shall not be considered a residence so long as its primary use is to contain, house, store, and protect materials or equipment directly related to the purpose and use of the tower. 
    Residential means pertaining to the use of land for a residence as is defined in this section. 
    Residential lot means: 
(1)  A lot which is included within a recorded residential subdivision subject to any enforceable, valid and unexpired residential deed restrictions upon which a residence exists or may be constructed pursuant to those valid and applicable deed restrictions; or 
(2)  An unrestricted lot upon which a residence exists. 
    Residential restrictions means one or more restrictive covenants limiting the use of the property to residential purposes that are contained or incorporated by reference in a properly recorded map, plat, replat, declaration, deed, judgment or other instrument filed in the county real property records, map records or deed records. 
    Residential area means the area around a proposed tower site that, within the residential test area, contains 50 percent or more tracts wholly or partially therein that are subject to residential restrictions or are in use for residential purposes. 
    Residential test area means the circular area, as described herein, surrounding a proposed tower structure. The radius of the circle shall be at least 375 feet and not more than 800 feet, and the center of the circular area shall correspond to the center of the base of the proposed tower structure. The radius of the circular area shall conform to the following ratios: 
(1)  375 feet radius at a tower height of 100 feet or less; 
(2)  600 feet radius at a tower height of more than 100 feet but not more than 150 feet; 
(3)  800 feet radius at a tower height of more than 150 feet. 
    Setback area means the circular area surrounding a proposed tower structure and which delineates the area between the site of the proposed tower and the nearest residential structure or residential restricted tract of land as established in subsection 42-474(g). 
    Subdivision means all land encompassed within one or more maps or plats of land within the city that is divided into two or more parts and are recorded in the deed, map or real property records of the county or counties in which the land covered by the map or plat is located. 
    Tower or tower structure means a fixed, freestanding or guyed, uninhabitable structure, not designed as a shelter or to be occupied for any use. This definition includes, but is not limited to, any such structure supporting antennae that transmit or receive any portion of the electromagnetic spectrum of radio waves. The following are, by way of example but not limitation, towers or tower structures: guyed or freestanding monopole structures, lattice or open framed structures, antennae supports, water towers, and other similar self-supporting, trussed, or open framed structures. 
    Tract means a contiguous parcel of property under common ownership. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 42-472. - Tower permit required. 
(a)  An application for a tower permit shall be submitted to the department and approved in accordance with the provisions of this division prior to the construction, placement or alteration of any tower or tower structure, as defined in this division and not specifically excluded herein, that is located within the boundaries of the municipality. 
(b)  A tower permit shall not be required for any tower repaired, replaced, or modified with no resulting increase in height or dimension and any tower repaired, replaced or modified in order to comply with the requirements of any statute, regulation, order, or rule of the FCC, the FAA, or any other federal, state or governmental agency or authority. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, the owner of an antenna tower for which a tower permit and building permit were issued prior to August 28, 2000, may, without obtaining a new permit upon written notice to the building official, replace the tower with a new tower if the new tower structure complies with the requirements of sections 42-476 through 42-479 and: 
(1)  Is specifically designed to accommodate additional antenna arrays; 
(2)  Is not more than 20 feet higher than the tower structure being replaced; 
(3)  Is not more than 50 feet from the location of the tower structure being replaced; and 
(4)  The center of the tower structure is no closer to the nearest residence than the center of the tower structure it replaces. The new tower structure shall be assigned the same permit number as the tower structure it replaces. A tower structure may be replaced only once under this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 42-473. - Exemptions. 
    This division does not apply to the following structures: 
(1)  Church bell towers and religious symbols associated with a place of worship; 
(2)  Tower structures less than 60 feet in height; 
(3)  Tower structures used primarily for the support of amateur and citizens' band radio antennae less than 60 feet in height; 
(4)  Tower structures that are attached to, placed upon, or constructed on top of a building provided that the height of the tower structure does not exceed 60 feet or the height of the building upon which the tower is constructed, whichever is less; 
(5)  Tower structures on real property owned, leased, held or used, or dedicated for use by a public utility for rendering its service, such as tower structures used primarily for the transmission of electrical power by a public utility or the conveyance of communications over a telephone wire-line system operated by a public utility; 
(6)  High mast light structures or antennas built on land on, along or adjacent to streets, roads, highways and bridges maintained by the state or a political subdivision of the state; 
(7)  Tower structures constructed or placed on land or other structures owned, leased, held or dedicated for use by the state or federal government or any political subdivision thereof, which land or other structures are used by the governmental entity primarily for rendering fire, police or other public protection services or utility services, whether or not the tower structure is used jointly by the governmental entity and any other public or private person or entity for other and additional public or private purposes; and 
(8)  Temporary tower structures used as or in conjunction with construction cranes. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 42-474. - Location of towers. 
(a)  A tower permit shall not be approved for the construction of a tower on a lot tract or parcel of land where the construction of a tower is prohibited, expressly or impliedly, by duly recorded and unexpired deed restrictions or covenants running with the land. 
(b)  In a residential area, a tower permit shall not be approved for the construction or alteration of a tower structure. 
(c)  A tower permit shall not be approved for the construction or alteration of a tower structure unless the proposed tower structure is located a distance at least equal to the applicable setback area established by subsection (g). 
(d)  In a city council designated historic district a tower permit shall not be approved for the construction or alteration of a tower structure unless the proposed tower conforms to the specific requirements for a camouflage design. 
(e)  In an area within one-quarter mile of a state, federal or city council designated landmark, a tower permit shall not be approved for the construction or alteration of a tower structure unless: 
(1)  The proposed tower is located from the landmark, as applicable, a distance at least equal to the applicable setback area established by subsection (g), which shall for this limited purpose apply without regard to the existence of any residential lot; for purposes of this requirement, measurements shall be made from the perimeter of the landmark; and 
(2)  One or more intervening buildings, structures, topological features or trees will substantially obstruct a person's sight line of the tower structure from ground level at the perimeter of the landmark, as applicable. 
(f)  A tower permit shall not be issued for the construction or alteration of a tower structure in a park or on a tract surrounded by a park. 
(g)  A tower permit shall not be approved for the construction or alteration of a tower structure unless the distance between the center of the base of a tower and the nearest residential lot is at least one and one-half times the height of the tower or tower structure. The foregoing measurement shall be made to the nearest point on the property line of the residential lot, unless the tower permit application includes a category 3, condition II survey, as defined by the Texas Surveyors Association, of all properties within the setback area. If the survey is provided, the measurement shall instead be made as follows: 
(1)  If a residence has been constructed on the lot, the measurement shall be from the tower structure to the nearest outside wall of the residential structure on each lot; or 
(2)  If a residence has not been constructed on the lot, the measurement shall be from the tower structure to the center of the residential lot minus 25 feet. 
(h)  A tower permit shall not be approved for the construction or alteration of a tower structure within 1,000 feet of an approved tower structure, other than a tower structure for which a permit would not be required under this division. For purposes of this requirement, a tower is considered to be "approved" when a tower permit has been issued pursuant to this division and the tower structure has been constructed or any building permit issued thereunder remains in effect. The building official shall promulgate rules and procedures for establishing precedent to the extent of conflict between two or more tower structures. 
(i)  Property uses and distances referred to in this section shall be determined as of the date and time that the completed tower permit application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 42-475. - Tower structure. 
    Each antenna tower structure for which a permit is approved and issued shall be designed, engineered and constructed to accommodate the placement of a minimum of two antenna arrays. This requirement shall not apply to a camouflage tower. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 42-476. - Security fence. 
(a)  The base of a tower shall be completely enclosed by a fence, wall, or barrier which limits climbing access to the tower and any supporting systems, lines, wires, buildings or other structures. 
(b)  The fence, wall or barrier required by subsection (a) shall not be less than eight feet in height with no openings, holes or gaps larger than four inches measured in any direction. Gates and doors opening directly into the area enclosed by a fence, wall or barrier, as required by this section, shall be equipped with a lock to keep and capable of keeping the doors or gates securely closed and locked at all times. 
(c)  The requirements of this section do not apply to: 
(1)  Any tower located on a building that is not designed or built primarily to support the tower, provided that the general public has no physical access to the tower; or 
(2)  Existing tower sites having security fences at least six feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 42-477. - Screening fence. 
(a)  The base of a tower, including all mechanical equipment and accessory structures, shall be screened from view of residential lots by a wooden, substantially opaque screening fence designed and built to provide privacy with a minimum height of eight feet. 
(b)  The screening fence may contain gates or doors allowing access to the tower and accessory structures for maintenance purposes, which shall be kept completely closed except for maintenance purposes and shall be located a minimum of 18 feet from the public right-of-way. 
(c)  The requirements of this section do not apply to: 
(1)  Any tower constructed or placed a distance of more than two times the height of the tower structure from all residential lots; or 
(2)  Any tower located on a building that is not designed or built primarily to support the tower, provided that the general public has no physical access to the tower. 
(d)  When both sections 42-476 and 42-477 of this division are applicable, a single fence conforming to all applicable requirements of both sections may be provided. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 42-478. - Landscaping. 
(a)  A tower site shall have landscaping maintained in a healthy, growing condition at all times and, in compliance with all applicable ordinances, deed restrictions and regulations. 
(b)  At a minimum, a tower site shall have one large shrub capable of reaching a minimum height of four feet for each four linear feet of required screening fence; provided that not less than eight large shrubs shall be provided for each tower site. The shrubs required by this subsection shall be installed at the tower site along the exterior side of the screening fence required in section 42-277. 
(c)  At a minimum, a tower site shall have one tree, with a minimum caliper of four inches, for each 50 linear feet of required screening fence; provided that not less than one tree along each public right-of-way bordering the host tract shall be provided at each tower site. 
(d)  The person or entity in whose name the tower permit is issued shall have complete responsibility for the maintenance of all landscaping required by this section. 
(e)  Any tower site that is excluded from the screening requirements of subsection 42-247(c) shall also be excluded from the landscape requirements of this section for which any amount of linear footage of screening fence is required. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 42-479. - Signs and lights. 
(a)  Lettering, signs, symbols, images or trademarks large enough to be legible to occupants of vehicular traffic on any adjacent roadway shall not be placed on or affixed to any part of a tower, antenna array or antenna, other than as required by FCC regulations regarding tower registration or other applicable law. 
(b)  A tower or tower structure shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required by law or regulation, a design that reasonably minimizes disturbance to any adjacent residence(s) or landmark shall be utilized. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 42-480. - Application procedures for a tower permit. 
(a)  An application for a tower permit shall be submitted to the department in the time and manner prescribed by the building official. The applicant shall, with the filing of the completed tower permit application, submit payment of the appropriate tower permit fees established by the building official that are calculated to reasonably cover the expenses of administering the provisions of this division. 
(b)  The application shall not be considered complete unless accompanied by any drawings, descriptive data, filing fees, ownership information, and other pertinent data that may be required by the building official. Each application for a tower permit or for a waiver shall include envelopes addressed to the owners and a complete list of those owners, as is indicated by the most recently approved tax rolls, of all properties within the residential test area of the proposed tower site. 
(c)  In the event that any of the required documentation, data, reports or drawings contain any false or erroneous information known to the applicant, then any permit issued pursuant to that false or erroneous information shall be void with the same force and effect as if it had never been issued. 
(d)  The building official shall issue a permit for construction, placement or alteration of a tower only if it meets the requirements of this division. 
(e)  On or before the 30th calendar day following the filing of the required application, the building official shall issue to the applicant a written notice of disapproval or preliminary approval of the tower permit. Any notice of disapproval of a tower permit application must include a written report explaining in detail the reasons for disapproval. Any preliminary approval shall be subject to the protest provisions of section 42-483, and, if no protest is timely filed thereunder, shall become a final approval on the business day next following the close of the protest period. The issuance of a written notice to the applicant shall be complete upon the deposit of the properly addressed notice in the United States mail, first class postage paid. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 42-481. - Notice of pending application. 
(a)  The notice requirements of this section apply only to applications for tower permits for the construction, placement or alteration of towers subject to the requirements of this division and for waivers from the requirements of this division, When an application for waiver is not filed as part of the original application for a tower permit, the notice requirements of this section apply separately to the waiver application. 
(b)  The applicant for a tower permit must post and use reasonable efforts to maintain a sign on the subject tower site for a minimum of 30 calendar days beginning no later than the sixth calendar day following the date of the filing of the required completed application with the department. The sign shall be posted no more than 15 feet from the public right-of-way that is used as access to the tower site. The sign shall face each public right-of-way bordering the tower site and the lettering on the sign shall be legible from the public right of way. Each sign shall be a minimum of four by eight feet in size, with lettering that complies with specifications promulgated by the building official. The sign shall contain at a minimum the following items of information: 
(1)  That this is the proposed site of a tower; 
(2)  The proposed maximum height above grade of the proposed tower; 
(3)  The tower permit application number assigned to this project by the department; and 
(4)  The telephone number of the department where additional information concerning this project may be obtained. 
The applicant shall remove the sign from the subject tower site after (i) the permit is obtained or (ii) the appeals process is complete. 
(c)  If, in the opinion of the building official, compliance with the requirements of this section is insufficient to provide adequate notification of the pending tower permit application, the building official may require additional signs to be erected at locations as he deems advisable. 
(d)  Written notice of the filing of each application for a tower permit or an application for a waiver, as provided for herein, shall be given to all property owners within the boundaries of the residential area or setback area, as applicable, determined in accordance with the provisions of subsection 42-474(g), as is indicated by the most recently approved tax rolls. Notice shall also be given to any civic organization, property owners association, or any other interested group, with identifiable boundaries, provided that the organization, association or group is registered with the department in a manner prescribed by the building official. Notice to all owners of record and civic organizations registered with the department shall be deemed given if properly addressed and deposited in the United States mail, with first class postage paid. The required written notice shall be in a form prescribed by the building official and shall be mailed no later than the tenth calendar day following the filing of the required completed application. The written notice shall include a map showing the proposed tower site and the surrounding residential test area or setback area, as applicable. 
(e)  Written notice shall be published at least once in a local newspaper of general circulation by the department not later than the tenth calendar day following the date of filing of the required completed application. The notice shall be published in the section of the newspaper in which other legal notices are commonly published, and shall be headed with the following words (or their reasonable equivalent), in conspicuous type: "NOTICE OF PROPOSED TOWER CONSTRUCTION." The notice shall state the height and location of the proposed tower site, describe the intended use of the tower, and advise that additional information may be obtained by writing or calling the office of the building official of the planning and development department. 
(f)  The "written notice" required in subsection (d) above shall include at a minimum the following: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person or entity that will own the proposed tower structure; 
(2)  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant if different from the owner of the proposed tower; 
(3)  The approximate proposed location of the tower structure including the street address (or nearest street intersection) and the name of the subdivision or survey if there is no recorded subdivision; 
(4)  The proposed use of the tower structure and site; 
(5)  The proposed maximum height above grade of the proposed tower structure; and 
(6)  That additional information may be obtained by writing or calling the office of the building official. 
(g)  The applicant shall be responsible for paying all costs associated with the giving of notice under this division. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 42-482. - Waiver. 
(a)  An application for a tower permit shall not be approved for a tower that is not in conformance with the regulations prescribed in this division unless a written application for a waiver has been submitted to and approved by the commission. 
(b)  An applicant for a tower permit who receives written disapproval from the building official may elect to submit a written application for a waiver to the city council via the city manager or may appeal the denial of the permit as provided in section 42-483. An application for a waiver from the requirements of this division may be filed simultaneously with the filing of the application for a tower permit. An application for a waiver made after the disapproval of the tower permit by the building official shall be submitted not later than 2:00 p.m. on the seventh calendar day following issuance of the notice of disapproval. The building official shall waive this deadline upon a finding of good cause. 
(c)  An application for a waiver shall be submitted in the manner prescribed by the building official citing the specific provision(s) of this division from which a waiver is desired, the extent of the waiver sought, and the specific facts or reasons why the waiver is necessary along with all supporting information or documentation. 
(d)  The city council is authorized to consider and grant a waiver from the provisions of this division, following a public hearing, when the city council finds that each of these conditions exist: 
(1)  That a literal application of this division will result in undue and unnecessary hardship to the applicant, taking into account any federal or state licenses the applicant may have received to conduct its business; 
(2)  The waiver, if granted, will not be contrary to the public interest as implemented in this division; 
(3)  Consistent with the city's police power authority over towers, the waiver, if granted, will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare; 
(4)  The waiver, if granted, will not result in a violation of any other applicable ordinance, regulation or statute enforceable by the city; and 
(5)  The waiver, if granted, will not result in the violation of any applicable deed restriction or zoning regulation or the location of a tower in a park. 
(e)  A waiver from the requirements of section 42-474(h) for an antenna tower shall not be granted unless, in addition to finding that each of the conditions expressed in subsection (d) above is satisfied, the city council, after public hearing, finds that no approved tower or tower structure can accommodate the applicants proposed antenna because the applicant has demonstrated any of the following: 
(1)  The approved tower or tower structure located within 1,000 feet of the proposed tower will not meet the applicants engineering requirements; 
(2)  The approved tower or tower structure located within 1,000 feet of the proposed tower is not of sufficient height to meet the applicants specific engineering requirements; 
(3)  The approved tower or tower structure located within 1,000 feet of the proposed tower does not have sufficient structural strength and cannot reasonably be reinforced to provide sufficient structural strength; 
(4)  The antenna array of the approved tower or tower structure located within 1,000 feet of the proposed tower would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna array of the proposed tower, or the antenna on the proposed tower or tower structure to be located within 1,000 feet of the approved tower would cause interference with the antenna array of the approved tower, 
(5)  The approved tower or tower structure located within 1,000 feet of the proposed tower is not adaptable to accommodate additional antenna arrays or the costs required to share or adapt the approved tower or tower structure are unreasonable; 
(6)  The approved tower or tower structure located within 1,000 feet of the proposed tower is not available for co-location because the owner of the approved tower or tower structure or the owner of the tract on which the approved tower or tower structure is located refuses to agree to reasonable terms necessary to accommodate the requirements for the proposed antenna; or 
(7)  The approved tower or tower structure located within 1,000 feet of the proposed tower is not suitable for the specific requirements for the proposed antenna due to other factors as demonstrated by the applicant, taking into account any federal or state licenses the applicant may have received to conduct its business. 
(f)  The procedures prescribed in subsections (c) and (d) of section 42-483 shall govern the hearing required on an application for a waiver. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 42-483. - Protest and appeal; hearing procedures. 
(a)  Any property owner, association or group within the residential area or setback area, as applicable, who has reasonable grounds to believe that approval of an application for a tower permit, the granting of a waiver, or the proposed construction will violate any applicable restriction, rule, regulation or ordinance may request a hearing before the city council via the city manager to protest and present evidence establishing their allegations. The hearing request must state the specific grounds relied upon and be presented to the office of the building official no later than 2:00 p.m. on the 37th calendar day following the date of filing of the required completed application for a tower permit or waiver, as applicable. Copies of all supporting documents, instruments, or other materials that are to be presented to the city council shall accompany the hearing request and shall be available for inspection and photocopying. 
(b)  An applicant for a tower permit that has been denied by the building official has until 2:00 p.m. on the seventh calendar day following the issuance of a notice of disapproval to file a within notice of appeal in the manner prescribed by the building official. the building official shall waive this requirement upon a finding of good cause. 
(c)  Notice of the time, place and location of the public hearing at which the protest or appeal is to be presented must be given by the department before the tenth day before the date of the hearing by: 
(1)  Publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city in which the land that is the subject of the waiver is located; 
(2)  By written notice delivered to the applicant, which shall be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States Mail, first class postage; and 
(3)  By written notice delivered to each property owner, association or group registered with the department in the manner prescribed by the building official, within the setback area. The written notice shall be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States Mail, first class postage. 
(d)  All properly filed appeals and protests concerning the approval or disapproval of an application for a tower permit or the granting or refusal of an application for a waiver for a particular project shall be considered by the city council in a single public hearing. The public hearing shall be scheduled by the building official at the next available city council meeting, assuming that proper notice has been given. 
(e)  The city council, following a public hearing, is authorized to deny a tower permit that is the subject of a protest under subsection (a) upon finding, based on substantial evidence, any of the following: 
(1)  The tower permit, if granted, will result in the violation of an applicable rule, regulation or ordinance enforceable by the city; 
(2)  The tower permit, if granted, will result in the violation of an applicable deed restriction or zoning regulation; or 
(3)  The information contained in the application is erroneous or the department's analysis of the permit application is based on erroneous information. 
(f)  The city council, following a public hearing, is authorized to deny a tower permit that is the subject of an appeal under subsection (b) upon finding, based on substantial evidence, that the decision of the building official to deny the tower permit is erroneous or the department's analysis of the tower permit application or information therein is erroneous. 
(g)  If the city council denies the appeal of the denial of an application for a tower permit, a waiver or otherwise refuses to approve a tower permit as a result of a protest, the city manager shall issue a written report explaining in detail the reasons for the rejection, disapproval or refusal. The written report shall be issued not later than 30 calendar days from the date the decision was made. 
(h)  The decision of the city council concerning the issuance or denial of a tower permit or the granting or refusal of a waiver shall be the final administrative determination of the issue presented. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 42-484. - Building permit requirement and plan review. 
(a)  A tower permit obtained pursuant to the provisions of this division shall become invalid after the passage of 180 days from the date of final approval of the tower permit unless any required building permit for the construction or alteration of the tower has been obtained before the expiration of that 180-day period. 
(b)  The construction, placement or alteration of a tower is subject to any plan review, permitting requirement or hearing process applicable to commercial construction in general which is required either by ordinance or by the rules promulgated by the building official, provided that the regulation or rules are consistent with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 42-485. - Maintenance and inspection. 
(a)  All buildings, structures, supporting structures, wires, fences or ground areas used in connection with a tower shall be maintained in a safe condition and in good working order. All equipment or machinery required by the building code, the fire code or any other applicable regulation or ordinance for a building or structure or supporting structure or device shall be maintained in good working order. The owner or operator of a tower shall be responsible for the maintenance of the tower, supporting structures, buildings, fences and ground areas. 
(b)  By applying for a tower permit under this division, the applicant specifically grants permission to the city, its duly authorized agents, officials and employees, to enter upon the property for which a permit or waiver is sought, after first providing reasonable notice, for the purpose of making all inspections required or authorized to be made under this division, the fire code, the building code, this division or any other applicable regulation, rule or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 42-486. - Removal of towers. 
    Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of six months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of the antenna or tower shall remove same within 60 days of receipt of notice from the building official notifying the owner of the abandonment. If the antenna or tower is not removed within the 60 days, the city may remove the antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the antenna or tower. The city attorney is hereby authorized to pursue all necessary legal remedies to implement the provisions of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 42-487. - Deed restriction affidavit. 
(a)  Every applicant for a tower permit or a waiver shall furnish to the building official an affidavit setting forth that the applicant is familiar with the title to the real property to which the requested permit appertains and that the intended use will not violate any applicable deed restrictions. The affidavit shall be accompanied with a certified copy of the instruments containing the deed restrictions, the instrument of revocation or termination, the declaratory judgment or any other recorded document containing restrictions that affect the use of the property. 
(b)  A tower permit shall not be issued until the requested affidavit and supporting documentation has been produced. Any permit issued on the basis of erroneous documentation known to the applicant or an affidavit which contains false information known to the applicant is void with the same force and effect as if it had never been issued and without the necessity of any action by the city or any other person or agency. A tower permit shall not be issued for the construction or alteration of a tower if the use or the intended use will be in violation of the recorded deed restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 42-488. - Permitted hours for construction and maintenance. 
    Construction, placement, removal and maintenance of, and alterations or modifications to, a tower or equipment storage facility for a tower shall not be performed except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. of any day, except in a bona fide emergency; provided however, that the owner, operator or his agents may perform regular maintenance between the hours of 9:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. as long as it does not create an unreasonable noise. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 42-489. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    Violation of this division is unlawful. Failure of any person to comply with any provision of this division shall be punishable upon conviction by a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. All authority granted to the city attorney and the building official and their designees under this division shall be exercised uniformly on behalf of and against all citizens and property of the city. Prior to the issuance of a citation under this division, the building official shall furnish notice to the last known address of the tower owner of the alleged violation and shall afford the owner a reasonable opportunity to cure the violation, consistent with the risks posed by the violation and the efforts that would be required to cure it. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 42-490. - Cumulative effect. 
    This division is cumulative of other requirements imposed by ordinances and regulations of the city. To the extent of any inconsistency, the more restrictive provision shall govern. Without limitation, the issuance of a permit under this division shall not excuse compliance with the building code, including permits required thereunder. 
Sec. 42-491. - City attorney authorized to file suit to abate violation. 
    The city attorney is hereby authorized to file suit on behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin or abate a violation of this division. All authority granted to the city attorney under this division shall be exercised uniformly on behalf of and against all citizens and property in the city. This authorization shall be cumulative and in addition to any other civil or criminal penalty provisions. The city, acting through the city attorney or any other attorney representing the city, may file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover damages from the owner or the agent of the owner of a tower or tower structure in an amount adequate for the city to undertake any activity necessary to bring about compliance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Sec. 42-492. - Transitional provision. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply only to towers constructed, placed, or altered after the effective date of this division or amendments thereto, as applicable, except for the fencing requirements of section 42-476 which shall be applicable to all towers subject to this division. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 8-28-00) 
Chapter 46 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to define offenses and punish therefor, § 17(25); jurisdiction of municipal court, § 24. 
Cross reference- Fighting animals, § 14-15. 
State Law reference- Preemption of criminal offenses by Penal Code, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.08. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Radios capable of receiving signals on frequencies assigned to governmental agencies. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the authorized agency, to equip a vehicle with a radio receiving set capable of receiving signals on radio frequencies allocated for use by the city police or other authorized governmental agencies. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess a vehicle equipped in such a manner as defined in subsection (a) of this section as being unlawful. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, purchase, build, alter, repair or adjust a mobile radio receiving set capable of receiving signals or to render a set capable of receiving signals on the frequencies enumerated in subsection (a) of this section, except to or for the authorized agency. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a mobile radio receiving set in a vehicle or permit such to remain therein if the receiving set is capable of receiving such signals prohibited in subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install a mobile radio receiving set capable of receiving such signals prohibited in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1978, § 12-1) 
State Law reference- State bureau of communications, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 411.043. 
Sec. 46-2. - Location restrictions for carnivals, circuses and other exhibitions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, conduct or exhibit in the city, within 100 feet of any church, school or private residence, any circus, carnival, tent theater, minstrel show or any dramatic representation or musical performance exhibited or shown within or under a tent; any caravan, menagerie, exhibition of natural or artificial curiosities, wax works, sideshow, medicine show, hobby horse, flying jenny, Ferris wheel or similar riding device, shooting gallery, sleight-of-hand performance, wild west show or any exhibition of rough riding or equestrian feats; or any combination of shows, performances or exhibitions known or exhibited as carnival shows, where any of the exhibitions or performances enumerated in this section are shown or exhibited for profit or for which pay for admission or participation therein is demanded or received. 
(Code 1978, § 12-2) 
State Law reference- License required for circus, carnival or zoo, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 824.003. 
Sec. 46-3. - Discharging firearms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or otherwise discharge any gun, pistol, rifle or other firearm within the city. This section shall not apply to peace officers or authorized military personnel in the performance of their duties or to persons discharging firearms in the lawful protection of person or property. 
(Code 1978, § 12-3) 
State Law reference- Discharge of firearm in a public place or on or across a public road, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.01(a)(9), (11). 
Sec. 46-4. - Throwing stones or other missiles; discharging airguns. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, cast, shoot or otherwise propel any stone, arrow or other missile or discharge any airgun or spring gun upon or across any public street or other public place within the city. 
(Code 1978, § 12-4) 
Sec. 46-5. - Arrest of suspicious persons. 
    Those duly commissioned police officers shall have authority to arrest without warrant, in order to be detained to answer for their actions, those persons found in suspicious places and under circumstances which reasonably show that such persons have been guilty of some felony or breach of the peace or threaten or are about to commit some offense against the laws. 
(Code 1978, § 12-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 14.03. 
Sec. 46-6. - Disturbing of public assemblies. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, by boisterous talking, whistling or any rude or indecent act or conduct, to disturb the audience of any show, theater, exhibition, performance, assemblage for religious worship or other lawful public assembly or meeting. 
(Code 1978, § 12-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.05. 
Sec. 46-7. - Painting of signs or advertisements on sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to paint any sign or advertisement on any sidewalk within the city. 
(Code 1978, § 12-7) 
Sec. 46-8. - Advertising banners across streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hang or place any advertising banner across any street within the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city council. 
(Code 1978, § 12-8) 
Sec. 46-9. - Placing obstructions on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any obstruction of any kind in or upon any street or sidewalk or other public way which may prevent or does prevent free passage of pedestrians or vehicles upon all parts thereof. 
(Code 1978, § 12-10) 
State Law reference- Authority to remove obstructions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175(5); obstructing highway or other passageway, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.03. 
Sec. 46-10. - Loitering. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be found loitering about the property or upon the premises of another without being able to give a good account of himself. 
(Code 1978, § 12-11(b)) 
Sec. 46-11. - Loitering on school grounds. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf or remain upon any public school grounds or within any public school building after being requested by the principal or other authorized person responsible for school discipline at the time to leave such public school grounds or building. 
(Code 1978, § 12-12) 
State Law reference- Loitering on school property, V.T.C.A., Education Code § 4.23; trespass on school grounds, V.T.C.A., Education Code § 21.484. 
Sec. 46-12. - Reward for information leading to conviction for vandalism or destruction of city property. 
    For information furnished to it leading to the conviction of a person for vandalism or destruction of city property, the city shall pay a reward totaling $200.00 per conviction. In its discretion, the city may divide the reward among one or more persons furnishing such information. Law enforcement officials and city employees shall not be eligible for reward payments. 
(Code 1978, § 12-18) 
Sec. 46-13. - Smoking on premises designated as no smoking areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to smoke or carry lighted tobacco on any enclosed premises where the owner or person in charge thereof has had signs posted stating that smoking is not permitted or allowed on the premises in accordance with this section. 
(b)  An individual adjudged guilty of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00 for each separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1993-01, 1-12-93) 
Sec. 46-14. - Security fee charged to persons convicted of misdemeanors in municipal court. 
    Any defendant convicted of a misdemeanor in municipal court must pay a three-dollar security fee as a cost of court. The fee will be administered and used for the purposes authorized by article 107.017 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 1998-07, § 1, 4-27-98) 
Sec. 46-15. - Fee for municipal court technology fund. 
(a)  The city council hereby establishes a municipal court technology fund in accordance with state law. 
(b)  The city council authorizes the municipal court to collect a fee of $4.00 for the municipal court technology fund as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 1999-08, § I, 9-13-99) 
Secs. 46-16-46-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOTION PICTURE RATING SYSTEM 

Sec. 46-46. - Ratings required; system adopted. 
(a)  Motion pictures exhibited within the city shall carry a rating given to such motion picture by the Motion Picture Code and Rating Administration of the Motion Picture Association of America. This rating system, with its standards for production, titles and advertising, is hereby adopted except as amended in this article. The review and rating of all motion pictures, its advertising and title shall be administered by the Motion Picture Code and Rating Administration, unless otherwise provided in this article. 
(b)  Exhibitors may apply a more restrictive rating, such as "PG," "PG-13," "R" or "X" to any film exhibited by such exhibitor whenever the exhibitor feels that the subject matter or scenes in the film warrant such change. However, exhibitors shall not place a less restrictive rating on any film. 
(Code 1978, § 12-20) 
Sec. 46-47. - Ratings specified. 
    The ratings to be given to motion pictures exhibited in the city are as follows: 
(1)  G-Suggested for general audiences. 
(2)  PG-Parental guidance suggested. 
(3)  PG-13-Persons under 13 not admitted, unless accompanied by parent or adult guardian. 
(4)  R-Restricted, persons under 17 not admitted, unless accompanied by parent or adult guardian. 
(5)  X-Persons under 18 not admitted. 
(Code 1978, § 12-21) 
Sec. 46-48. - Films not rated. 
    Motion pictures films which are produced and released for viewing without being rated by the Motion Picture Association of America board shall be rated by the local theater manager exhibiting such film in accordance with the MPAA standards. Such rating shall be displayed in the same manner as the rating applied to films reviewed by the board. The failure of a local theater manager to rate any film shall result in such film being considered as an X-rated film. 
(Code 1978, § 12-22) 
Sec. 46-49. - Display of rating. 
    The motion picture rating applied to any current film engagement or any coming attraction shall be displayed as follows: 
(1)  The film rating shall be prominently displayed in the box office and in the front of the theater building exhibiting such film. A rating shall be displayed for each film being exhibited adjoining the film name. 
(2)  The film rating shall be prominently displayed on all film advertising, including but not limited to posters, boards, circulars and newspapers. The rating symbol in newspaper advertising shall be in type no less than ten-point in size and shall be adjoining the film advertised. 
(3)  Coming attraction film ads, trailers or film tapes advertising motion picture attractions shall display the rating symbol. Videotapes that are produced without the rating symbols shall have the rating symbol superimposed on the videotape or film and shall also have an audio announcement of such rating. If such rating cannot be superimposed on the videotape or film, a slide showing the rating shall be inserted and shown at the end of the videotape of the film and an audio announcement of such rating shall also be made. 
(4)  Script, tapes or records used in radio broadcasting of film advertising shall include the rating of each film advertised. If the rating is not included in the script, tape, record or advertising material, the broadcasting station shall add an announcement of the film rating. 
(Code 1978, § 12-23) 
Sec. 46-50. - Offenses. 
(a)  Exhibitors, employees. It shall be unlawful for any exhibitor or his employee to: 
(1)  Exhibit any film which has not been rated as provided in this article. 
(2)  Exhibit any film rated "PG," "PG-13," "R" or "X" if any current advertisement of such film by such exhibitor fails to state clearly the rating of such film. 
(3)  Exhibit any film rated "PG," "PG-13," "R" or "X" without keeping such rating posted prominently in the box office and in front of the theater building in which such film is being exhibited. 
(4)  Exhibit any film rated "R" or "X" or any scene from such a film or from an unrated film, whether moving or still, in the same theater and on the same program with a film rated "G" or to offer any scene from such a film to any person for the purpose of exhibiting on a television screen before general audiences; provided, however, any advertising preview or trailer containing a scene from an unrated film or a film rated "R" or "X" may be shown at any time if such preview has been separately rated "G" under this article. 
(5)  Permit any motion film, slide or exhibit rated "X" to be visible from any public street or highway within the city, when such film is being shown or exhibited at any outdoor theater, drive-in theater or any other location within the city. It is the intent of this subsection to prohibit such rated films, slides or exhibits from being viewed by persons under 18 years of age occupying such street or highway. 
(6)  Sell or give to any person under 18 a ticket for any film rated "X," which ticket is used by such person under 18 to gain admittance to view such rated film. 
(7)  Sell to or give to any person under 17 a ticket to any film rated "R," which ticket is used by such person under 17 to gain admittance to view such rated film. The parent or adult guardian of a person under 17 must purchase the ticket for admission to view any film rated "R." 
(8)  Sell or give any person under 13 a ticket to any film rated "PG-13," which ticket is used by such person under 13 to gain admittance to view such rated film. The parent or adult guardian of a person under 13 must purchase the ticket for admission to view any film rated "PG-13." 
(9)  Permit any person under 18 to view the exhibition of any film rated "X." 
(10)  Permit any person under 17 to view the exhibition of any film rated "R," unless such person under 17 is accompanied by a parent or adult guardian. 
(11)  Permit any person under 13 to view the exhibition of any film rated "PG-13," unless such person under 13 is accompanied by a parent or adult guardian. 
(b)  Persons under 18. It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 to: 
(1)  Give his age falsely as 18 years of age or over for the purpose of gaining admission to an exhibition of a film rated "X." 
(2)  Remain in the viewing room of any theater where a film rated "X" is being exhibited. 
(c)  Persons under 17. It shall be unlawful for any person under 17 to: 
(1)  Give his age falsely as 17 years of age or over for the purpose of gaining admission to an exhibition of a film rated "R." 
(2)  Remain in the viewing room of any theater where a film rated "R" is being exhibited, unless such person under 17 is accompanied by a parent or adult guardian. 
(3)  State falsely that a person is his parent or adult guardian for the purpose of gaining admittance to the exhibition of a film rated "R." 
(d)  Persons under 13. It shall be unlawful for any person under 13 to: 
(1)  Give his age falsely as 13 years of age or over for the purpose of gaining admission to an exhibition of a film rated "PG-13." 
(2)  Remain in the viewing room of any theater where a film rated "PG-13" is being exhibited, unless such person under 13 is accompanied by a parent or adult guardian. 
(3)  State falsely that a person is his parent or adult guardian for the purpose of gaining admittance to the exhibition of a film rated "PG-13." 
(e)  Any person. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to: 
(1)  Make any false statement for the purpose of enabling any person under 18 to gain admittance to the exhibition of a film rated "X." 
(2)  Make any false statement for the purpose of enabling any person under 17 to gain admittance to the exhibition of a film rated "R." 
(3)  Make any false statement for the purpose of enabling any person under 13 to gain admittance to the exhibition of a film rated "PG-13." 
(Code 1978, § 12-24) 
Sec. 46-51. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00, and each offense shall be deemed to be a separate violation and punishable as a separate offense. 
(b)  If it is shown on the trial of any person charged with violating any provision of this article that the defendant has been once before convicted of the same offense, he shall on a second conviction be fined not less than $50.00 and not to exceed $500.00 and upon a third or any subsequent conviction for the same offense shall be fined not less than $100.00 and not to exceed $500.00. 
(Code 1978, § 12-25) 
Sec. 46-52. - Nuisance abatement. 
    The act of any exhibitor continuing to exhibit motion picture films in a manner contrary with this article after such exhibitor has been convicted of as many as three violations of this article shall constitute a public nuisance, and application shall be made to a court of competent jurisdiction for the abatement of such nuisance by restraining the exhibitor from continuing such act. 
(Code 1978, § 12-26) 
Secs. 46-53-46-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Fair Housing Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1f. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-76. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator means the person designated housing director by the city manager. 
    Committee means the city committee on human relations. 
    Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under section 46-77, 46-78 or 46-79. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as or designed and intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
    Family includes a single person. 
    Person means one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in cases under title 11, receivers and fiduciaries. 
    To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let or otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Code 1978, § 12-30) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-77. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
    Except as exempted by division 2, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any person because of race, color, sex, religion, familial status, national origin or disability. 
(2)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith because of race, color, sex, religion, familial status, national origin or disability. 
(3)  Make, print, publish or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement regarding the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, sex, religion, familial status, national origin or disability or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(4)  Represent to any person because of race, color, sex, religion, family status, national origin or disability that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  For profit or with the hope or expectation of profit, induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, sex, religion, familial status, national origin or disability. 
(6)  For profit or with the hope or expectation of profit to influence or attempt to influence, by any words, acts or failure to act, any seller, purchaser, landlord or tenant of a dwelling so as to promote the maintenance of racially segregated housing or so as to retard, obstruct or discourage racially integrated housing. 
(Code 1978, § 12-31; Ord. No. 2005-07, 8-8-05) 
Sec. 46-78. - Discrimination in financing of housing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part of the making of commercial or residential real estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying for a loan or assistance for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against any such person in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, brokerage points, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or their financial assistance because of: 
(1)  The race, color, sex, religion, familial status, national origin or disability of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance; or 
(2)  The race, color, sex, religion, familial status, national origin or disability of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling for which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Code 1978, § 12-32; Ord. No. 2005-07, 8-8-05) 
Sec. 46-79. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deny access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate broker's organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation because of race, color, sex, religion, familial status, national origin or disability. 
(Code 1978, § 12-33; Ord. No. 2005-07, 8-8-05) 
Sec. 46-80. - Familial status. 
    A discriminatory act is committed because of familial status if the act is committed because the person who is the subject of discrimination is: 
(1)  Pregnant; 
(2)  Domiciled with an individual younger than 18 years of age in regard to whom the person: 
a.  Is the parent or legal custodian; or 
b.  Has the written permission of the parent or legal custodian for domicile with that person; or 
(3)  In the process of obtaining legal custody of an individual younger than 18 years of age. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1f, § 1.04. 
Sec. 46-81. - Complaints. 
(a)  Only the person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that has occurred or is occurring (referred to as "person aggrieved") may file a complaint with the administrator. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The administrator shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge to any person, upon request. 
(b)  If at any time the administrator shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person has committed or is committing a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed, the administrator may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and in his own name, and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(c)  The administrator shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, PL 90-284, and shall treat such complaints in the same manner as complaints filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  All complaints shall be filed within 60 days following the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the administrator shall provide notice of the complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the persons named therein who allegedly committed or were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The accused may file an answer to the complaint within 15 days of receipt of the written complaint. 
(e)  All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(Code 1978, § 12-35) 
Sec. 46-82. - Investigation. 
(a)  Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as provided in this article, the administrator shall cause to be made a prompt and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint. 
(b)  During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of complaint, the administrator shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with this article. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the administrator, by the complainant or by any other party to the proceedings without the written consent of all persons concerned. 
(Code 1978, § 12-36) 
Sec. 46-83. - Committee hearing. 
(a)  Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the administrator but within 30 days of the filing of the complaint with the administrator under this article and if conciliation has not been effected, the administrator shall refer the complaint to the committee on human relations, together with the answer of the respondent, if any, and a full report of his investigation and activities in the matter. 
(b)  The committee shall promptly set a date for the hearing. This date shall be within 30 days of the date on which the administrator referred the complaint. At least five days' prior written notice of the hearing shall be given to the person alleged to have committed or to be about to commit the discriminatory housing practice. The hearing shall be conducted in a fair and impartial manner and shall be public. Proof of the matters alleged within the complaint may be presented by the administrator. The complainant and the person alleged to have committed or to be about to commit the discriminatory housing practice may appear personally or by representative and with or without legal counsel and shall have the right to present proof and cross examine witnesses in all matters relating to the complaint and subsequent related matters. If a person alleged to have committed or to be about to commit a discriminatory housing practice shall fail to appear at the committee hearing, either personally or by representative, after notice as provided in this section, such hearing shall be deemed waived by such person. 
(c)  If, after such hearing, a majority of the committee shall determine on the basis of the evidence at the hearing that the complaint is well founded, the committee shall forthwith by persuasion, education and entreaty diligently attempt to secure within a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, voluntary discontinuance of any discriminatory housing practice. 
(Code 1978, § 12-37) 
Sec. 46-84. - Certification to city attorney. 
    If the committee on human relations shall determine that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred and if a hearing before the committee on the complaint alleging such violation has been waived or if the committee has held a hearing and the efforts of the committee to secure voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful, the committee shall cause the administrator to certify in writing to the city attorney that such discriminatory housing practice has occurred and request the city attorney to forthwith prosecute such violation in the municipal court. 
(Code 1978, § 12-38) 
Sec. 46-85. - Legal proceedings. 
(a)  Upon certification by the administrator pursuant to the direction of the committee on human relations under this article, the city attorney shall institute a charge in municipal court and prosecute the charge to final conclusion. 
(b)  The certification to the city attorney and the actions to be taken by the city attorney shall be cumulative of all other remedies and procedures for the effectuation and enforcement of this article and the prosecution of alleged violators of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 12-39) 
Sec. 46-86. - Cumulative legal effect. 
    This article is cumulative in its legal effect and is not in lieu of any and all other legal remedies which the person aggrieved may pursue. 
(Code 1978, § 12-40) 
Sec. 46-87. - Unlawful intimidation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize any person because he has complied with the article, because he has exercised his rights under this article or enjoyed the benefits of this article or because he has made a charge, testified or assisted in any manner in any investigation or in any proceeding under this article or has made any report to the administrator. 
(Code 1978, § 12-41) 
Sec. 46-88. - Cooperation with Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. 
    The administrator, the committee on human rights and the city attorney are authorized to cooperate with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and the U.S. Attorney General pursuant to the provisions of title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, PL 90-284, and may render such service to the Secretary as they shall deem appropriate to further the policies of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 12-42) 
Sec. 46-89. - Education and public information. 
    In order to further the objectives of this article, the administrator may conduct educational and public information programs. 
(Code 1978, § 12-43) 
Sec. 46-90. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined as provided in section 1-5 for each violation. Each day a violation continues after passage of 75 days from the date of filing the initial complaint with the administrator shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  Any person violating this article may be enjoined by a suit filed by the city in a court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy is in addition to any other penalty. 
(Code 1978, § 12-44) 
Secs. 46-91-46-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 46-111. - Certain sales and rentals. 
(a)  Subject to subsection (b) of this section, this article does not apply to: 
(1)  The sale or rental of a single-family house sold or rented by an owner if: 
a.  The owner does not: 
1.  Own more than three single-family houses at any one time; or 
2.  Own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to any part of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three single-family houses at any one time; and 
b.  The house was sold or rented without: 
1.  The use of the sales or rental facilities or services of a real estate broker, agent or salesman licensed under The Real Estate License Act (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6573a) or of an employee or agent of a licensed broker, agent or salesman or the facilities or services of the owner of a dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by five or more families; or 
2.  The publication, posting or mailing of a notice, statement or advertisement prohibited by Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1f, § 3.02; or 
(2)  The sale or rental of rooms or units in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other if the owner maintains and occupies one of the living quarters as the owner's residence. 
(b)  The exemption in subsection (a)(1) of this section applies to only one sale or rental in a 24-month period if the owner was not the most recent resident of the house at the time of the sale or rental. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1f, § 1.05. 
Sec. 46-112. - Religious organizations; private clubs. 
(a)  This article does not prohibit a religious organization, association, or society or a nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from: 
(1)  Limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings that it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion; or 
(2)  Giving preference to persons of the same religion, unless membership in the religion is restricted because of race, color or national origin. 
(b)  This article does not prohibit a private club not open to the public that, as an incident to its primary purpose, provides lodging that it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose from limiting the rental or occupancy of that lodging to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. Stat. art. 1f, § 1.06. 
Sec. 46-113. - Housing for elderly. 
(a)  The provisions of this article relating to familial status do not apply to housing for older persons. 
(b)  In this section, "housing for older persons" means housing: 
(1)  That the committee on human relations determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons under a federal or state program; 
(2)  Intended for and solely occupied by persons 62 years of age or older; or 
(3)  Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit as determined by committee on human relations rules. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1f, § 1.07. 
Sec. 46-114. - Appraisal exemption. 
    This article does not prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1f, § 1.08. 
Secs. 46-115-46-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEX OFFENDERS 
DIVISION 1. - RESERVED 

Secs. 46-141-46-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGULATION OF SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY 

Sec. 46-171. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this division, the following terms, words, and the derivations thereof shall have the meanings given herein: 
    Child safety zone. Public parks, private and public schools, public libraries, amusement arcades, video arcades, indoor and outdoor amusement centers, amusement parks, public or commercial and semi-private swimming pools, child care facilities, child care institutions, public or private youth soccer or baseball fields, crisis centers or shelters, public or private youth centers, scouting facilities and offices for child protective services. 
    Database. The Texas Department of Public Safety's Sex Offender Database or the Sex Offender Registration files maintained by the Sex Offender Registration Officer of the Wharton Police Department. 
    Loiter. Standing, sitting idly, whether or not the person is in a vehicle or remaining in or around an area. 
    Measurement. Made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the residence to the nearest property line of the child safety zone. 
    Minor. A person younger than 17 years of age. 
    Park or playground. Any land, including improvements to the land used as a general public as a recreational area. Recreational areas include, but are not limited to, conservation areas, jogging trails, hiking trails, bicycle trails, recreational centers, water parks, swimming pools, soccer fields or baseball fields. 
    Permanent residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more consecutive days. 
    Public way. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, shopping centers, parking lots, transportation facilities, restaurants, shops and similar areas that are open to the use of the public. 
    School. A private or public pre-school, private or public elementary school or private or public secondary school. 
    Sex offender. An individual who has been convicted of or placed on deferred adjudication for a sexual offense involving a person under 17 years of age for which the individual is required to register as a sex offender under Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. ch. 62. 
    Temporary residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where a person routinely abides, resides, or lodges for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1, 7-8-13) 
State Law reference- The meanings in this section have been assigned by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, § 481.134. 
Sec. 46-172. - Offenses. 
(a)  For each person required to register on the Texas Department of Public Safety's Sex Offender Database (the "database") because of a violation involving a victim who was less than 17 years of age, it is unlawful for that person to establish a permanent residence or a temporary residence within 1,500 feet of any premises where children commonly gather, which, for purposes of this division, shall be a park or playground; school; other such facility or location described in a child safety zone; or other places where children regularly congregate; as such terms are defined in this division. 
(b)  A sex offender, shall not, on each October 30th and 31st (or any other date set by the city for trick-or-treaters) between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m., leave an exterior porch light on or otherwise invite trick-or-treaters to solicit the sex offender's permanent or temporary residence. 
(c)  It is an offense for a sex offender to knowingly enter a child safety zone. 
(d)  It is an offense for a sex offender to knowingly loiter on a public way within 300 feet of a child safety zone. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 2, 7-8-13) 
Sec. 46-173. - Evidentiary matters; measurements. 
(a)  If a sex offender is found in a child safety zone by a police officer, the sex offender is subject to punishment in accordance with this division. 
(b)  It shall be prima facie evidence that this division applies to a person if that person's record appears in/on the database and such database indicates that the victim was less than 17 years of age. 
(c)  The distance of 300 feet from a child safety zone shall be measured on a straight line from the closest boundary of the child safety zone. 
(d)  The distance of 1,500 feet from a place where children congregate shall be measured on a straight line from the closest boundary line of the sex offender's residence to the closest boundary line of the park or playground; school; other such facility or location described in a child safety zone; or other places where children regularly congregate. 
(e)  In the case of multiple residences on one property, measuring from the nearest property line of the residences to the nearest property line of the park or playground; school; other such facility or location described in a child safety zone; or other places where children regularly congregate. 
(f)  In cases of a dispute over measured distances, it shall be incumbent upon the person(s) challenging the measurement to prove otherwise. 
(g)  A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be created by the City of Wharton and maintained by the City of Wharton Police Department. The City of Wharton shall review the map annually for changes. Said map will be available to the public at the City of Wharton Police Department or available on the City of Wharton website. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 3, 7-8-13) 
Sec. 46-174. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The person required to register in/on the database established the permanent residence or temporary residence prior to the date of the adoption of this division, and residency has been consistently maintained and the person has complied with all of the sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas; 
(b)  The park or playground; school; other such facility or location described in a child safety zone; or other places where children regularly congregate, as specified herein, within 1,500 feet of the permanent or temporary residence of the person required to register in/on the database, was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas; 
(c)  The information in/on the database is incorrect, and, if corrected, this division would not apply to the person who was erroneously listed in/on the database; 
(d)  The person required to register in/on the database is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile facility or other correctional institution located within 1,500 feet of real property comprising a park or playground; school; other such facility or location described in a child safety zone; or other places where children regularly congregate; 
(e)  The person required to register in/on the database is under 18 years of age or a ward under a guardianship, who resides with a parent or guardian; 
(f)  The person required to register in/on the database has been exempted by a court order from registration as a sex offender under Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. ch. 62; 
(g)  The person required to register in/on the database has had the offense for which the sex offender registration was required, reversed on appeal or pardoned; or 
(h)  The person's duty to register in/on the database has expired. 
(i)  Nothing in this provision shall require any person to sell or otherwise dispose of any real estate or home acquired or owned prior to the conviction of the person as a sex offender. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 4, 7-8-13) 
Sec. 46-175. - Penalty. 
    Any person who intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence violates any provision of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 5, 7-8-13) 
Secs. 46-176-46-200. - Reserved. 
Chapter 50 - OIL AND GAS WELLS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Construction codes, § 18-66 et seq. 
State Law reference- Oil and gas, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6049h et seq. and V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code ch. 81 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Applicability. 
    The rules set out in this chapter shall apply to all oil and gas wells in the city. 
(Code 1978, § 13-1) 
Sec. 50-2. - Drilling in streets, alleys and parks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drill any well for oil or gas within any of the streets, alleys or parks of the city or to block or encumber or close up any street, alley or park in any drilling or producing operations, except by special permit upon order of the city council, and then only temporarily. 
(Code 1978, § 13-2) 
State Law reference- Lease of street, alley or public square for use as oil, gas or mineral land prohibited, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 253.005. 
Sec. 50-3. - Public ways used for access. 
    In the absence of written permission or easements from the owners of the surface concerned, it shall be unlawful for any person to trespass across any properties to enter into the oil or gas well drilling sites or their flow line rights-of-way, other than from an existing street or dedicated highway used by the public and for the public's convenience. 
(Code 1978, § 13-3) 
Sec. 50-4. - Limitations of chapter. 
    Neither this chapter nor any permit issued under this chapter shall be interpreted to grant any right or license to the permittee to enter upon or occupy in any respect in drilling or production operations any land except by the written consent of the owner of the rights of ingress and egress nor shall it limit or prevent the free right of any surface or mineral owner to execute mineral leases or other contracts with respect to his own land or mineral interests or for damages, rights or privileges with respect thereto. 
(Code 1978, § 13-4) 
Secs. 50-5-50-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 

Sec. 50-51. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drill or commence to drill a well for oil or gas within the city or to directionally drill so as to complete the well at a bottom hole location within the city or to complete in a drilling block any portion of which may lie within the city or to work upon or assist in any way in the prosecution of the drilling of any such well without a permit for the drilling, completion and operation of such well having been first issued by authority of the city council, in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 1978, § 13-20) 
Sec. 50-52. - Deepening or sidetracking operations. 
    If the oil or gas well is completed as a producer and thereafter ceases to produce, the permittee shall obtain a drilling permit as provided in this chapter to conduct deepening or sidetracking operations on the well. 
(Code 1978, § 13-21) 
Sec. 50-53. - Application review. 
    All applications and accompanying data submitted in compliance with this chapter for a permit to drill and operate a well for oil or gas within the city will be reviewed by the city council within a 45-day time limit from filing of application and action taken thereon. The city reserves the right to refuse any application for a permit. 
(Code 1978, § 13-22) 
Sec. 50-54. - Refusal. 
    The city council shall have the power and hereby reserves the authority to refuse any application for a permit under this chapter to drill an oil or gas well when the council shall deem such refusal to be in the public interest because of the location of the proposed well and the character and value of the permanent improvements already erected on the drilling block in question or adjacent thereto and the use to which the land and surroundings are adapted for civic purposes. The council may also refuse a permit application for sanitary reasons or when the council shall find that the granting of such permit will be a serious disadvantage to either the health, comfort, convenience, the order, good government, safety, morals or welfare of the city and its inhabitants. When a permit is refused, the fee made with the application shall be returned to the applicant. 
(Code 1978, § 13-23) 
Sec. 50-55. - Form and contents of application; well location restrictions. 
(a)  Every application for a permit to drill, complete and operate a well for oil or gas shall be in writing and signed by the applicant or by some person duly authorized to sign the application on his behalf. It shall be filed with the city secretary and shall state the proposed depth, the drilling block and the particular lot and location in the block where the proposed well is to be located and shall have attached to it a plat showing the well location with a list of owners of leased interests; such list shall be certified as correct to the best knowledge of the party signing the application, but need not be based upon title examination or title policy. However, upon request from the city council, the applicant shall furnish, with no cost to the city, certified or photostatic copies of the deeds, oil and gas leases or drilling contracts with the owners of the land covering the lots, blocks or tracts in the drilling block over which the applicant has control for oil and gas purposes, to the end that the application will show what proportion and what parts of the drilling block the applicant owns in fee or holds under lease or drilling contract from the owners. 
(b)  No wells shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location nearer than 200 feet (or FHA requirements, if greater) of any residence, building, recorded subdivision or site upon which construction has been started on a residence or building without the applicant having first secured the written permission of the owner thereof, signed and acknowledged before notaries public in the manner required for the recording of deeds, or in the alternative, witnessed by two disinterested persons. No wells shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location within 300 feet of any exterior boundary line of land utilized for a public or parochial school, college, university, hospital, church or public building without permission of the owner as set out in this section. No wells shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location which is a part of the city block to which there are public record restrictions or covenants prohibiting the drilling of any oil or gas well in the city block; provided, however, this subsection shall not apply when the permittee is drilling a substitute well or deepening any existing or abandoned well. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, a well may not be drilled in the thickly settled part of the city or within 200 feet of a private residence. 
(Code 1978, § 13-24) 
State Law reference- Wells prohibited in thickly settled part of municipality or within 200 feet of private residence, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 253.005. 
Sec. 50-56. - Notice of application and hearing. 
(a)  Notice of the filing of each application for a permit under this chapter shall be given by the applicant as provided in this subsection. At least ten days prior to the date of hearing on the application, a copy of the notice in the form prescribed in this subsection shall be published at the cost of the applicant in one issue of the official newspaper of the city, which date of publication will be at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. Such notice shall state the lot and block number on which the applicant is asking for a permit to drill and the date and place of hearing and shall be in words and figures as follows: 
Notice is hereby given that ___________, acting under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of Chapter 50, Code of Ordinances, City of Wharton, Texas, did, on the _____ day of _______, 19___, file with the City Secretary of the City of Wharton an application for a permit to drill a well for ___________ (state whether oil or gas) to a depth of _____ feet, upon (use legal description). A hearing upon such application will be held in the City Council chambers of the City of Wharton, Texas, at ___________ on the _____ day of _______, 19___ at _____M. 
(b)  Proof of notice shall be made by the applicant by filing with the city secretary an affidavit of the printer or publisher of the paper in which the notice is published containing a copy of the notice and stating the issue in which and period of time during which the notice was published. 
(c)  The time fixed in such notice of hearing on such application shall be set by the city manager. 
(Code 1978, § 13-25) 
Sec. 50-57. - Bonds and insurance. 
(a)  An application for a permit under this chapter shall be accompanied by a duly executed bond, which must meet the approval of the city manager, given by the applicant as principal and a surety company authorized to do business in the state, as surety. The bond shall run to the city for the benefit of the city and all persons concerned, conditioned that, if the permit is granted and if drilling operations are commenced thereunder, the applicant and his assigns will comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter in the drilling and operation of a well; that the applicant will restore the streets and sidewalks and other public places of the city which may be disturbed in the operations to their former condition and will clear the block and lots of all litter, machinery, derricks and buildings erected or used in the drilling or operation of the well whenever the well shall be abandoned or the operation thereof discontinued. Such bond shall be in the sum of $10,000.00; provided, however, that if, within two years after the drilling and completion of such well, no claims have been presented against the applicant or his assigns under the terms and conditions of such bond, the bond shall be terminated by the city council. 
(b)  In addition to the bond required and set out in subsection (a) of this section, the permittee shall carry a policy of standard comprehensive public liability insurance, including contractual liability covering bodily injuries and property damage, naming the permittee and the city, with an insurance company authorized to do business within the state. The policy in the aggregate shall provide for the following minimum coverages: 
(1)  Bodily injuries, $100,000.00 for one person; $300,000.00 for one accident. 
(2)  Property damage, $200,000.00. 
(c)  The permittee shall file with the city secretary certificates of insurance as required in this section and shall obtain written approval thereof by the city secretary, who shall act thereon within ten days from the date of such filing. The insurance policy shall not be canceled without written notice to the city secretary at least ten days prior to the effective date of such cancellation. If the insurance policy is canceled, the permit granted shall terminate, and permittee's rights to operate under the permit shall cease until the permittee files additional insurance as provided in this section. 
(d)  If, after completion of a well, the permittee has complied with all of the provisions of this chapter, such as removing the derrick, clearing premises, etc., he may apply to the city council to have the property damage insurance policies reduced to $50,000.00 for the remainder of the time the well produces without reworking. During reworking operations the amount of the insurance policy shall be increased to the original amount. 
(e)  If any permit shall terminate and become inoperative as provided in section 50-64 or if the permittee or his assigns shall file with the city council written notice of his election to surrender his permit and abandon the premises covered thereby, if no claims under the bond are filed within two years, the city secretary shall return the bond theretofore furnished by the permittee in connection with such permit. If claims are filed within such time, upon the satisfaction or defeat of such claims, such bond shall thereupon be returned to the permittee or his assigns. 
(Code 1978, § 13-26) 
Sec. 50-58. - Fee. 
    The fee for a permit required by this chapter shall be $500.00, which fee shall accompany the application for the permit. 
(Code 1978, § 13-27) 
Sec. 50-59. - Issuance of permit-Generally. 
    Except as provided in section 50-54, if an application for a permit under this chapter is found by the city council to comply in all respects with the terms of this chapter, the city secretary shall issue a permit for which application was made for the drilling, completion and operation of the well. The granting and issuance of a permit for a well on a drilling block as provided in this chapter shall automatically operate as a rejection and denial of all other pending applications for wells upon the drilling block involved or any portion thereof. 
(Code 1978, § 13-28) 
Sec. 50-60. - Same-Restricted to owner or lessee. 
    No permit shall be granted or issued under this chapter for the drilling of a well except upon ground owned by the applicant or held by him under an oil and gas lease or drilling contract from the owner, giving the owner's permission or authority to drill the well. 
(Code 1978, § 13-29) 
Sec. 50-61. - Maximum required unit ownership. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued under this chapter unless the applicant for the permit shall own in fee or have mineral leases or other contracts covering at least 60 percent of the participating rights in the minerals in the proposed drilling unit to be formed by the applicant. 
(b)  As used in this chapter, the term "unit," "drilling unit" or "drilling block" shall mean a voluntary unit created or to be created by the applicant pursuant to the pooling and unitization and other provisions of the leases and other contracts owned by the applicant. 
(c)  A unit already formed or a proposed unit may form the basis for the applicant's request for a permit and, in the latter case, creation of such unit may await formation until the granting of the permit; in such case a permit may be granted conditioned upon the formation of such pool or unit by the applicant. A permit may be issued upon condition that such unit is formed after production is obtained. 
(Code 1978, § 13-30) 
Sec. 50-62. - Multiple applications for same drilling block. 
    If there should be filed with the city secretary and pending at the same time applications for permits to drill oil or gas wells on any single drilling block within the city made by more than one applicant, that application shall be granted, if otherwise sufficient, which shall be made by the person holding the greater area of ground within the drilling block by ownership in fee or by lease or other contract authorizing the drilling and operation on land for oil or gas. 
(Code 1978, § 13-31) 
Sec. 50-63. - List of income recipients. 
    A list of all parties receiving income from production of an oil or gas well shall be furnished to the city by applicant in January of each year. 
(Code 1978, § 13-32) 
Sec. 50-64. - Termination. 
    A permit issued under this chapter shall terminate and become inoperative without any action on the part of the city council unless, within 12 months from the date of the issue, actual drilling of the well is commenced. After the drilling of the well is commenced, the cessation of drilling operations prior to the completion of the well for a period of six months shall operate to terminate and cancel the permit and the well shall be considered as abandoned for all purposes of this chapter, and it shall be unlawful thereafter to continue the operation or drilling of such well without the issuance of another permit. If the well is completed as a producer and ceases to produce, the permit shall terminate. 
(Code 1978, § 13-33) 
Sec. 50-65. - Revocation. 
(a)  If any person shall violate any provision of this chapter, the city council, at any regular or special session or meeting thereof, may, provided ten days' notice has been given to the permittee that revocation is to be considered at such meeting, revoke or suspend any permit issued under this chapter under which drilling or producing operations are being conducted. If the permit is revoked, the permittee may, upon satisfaction or correction of the violation, make application to the city council for a reissuance of such permit, upon consideration of which the action of the city council thereon shall be final. 
(b)  Such suspension or revocation shall not preclude punishment for the violation as provided in section 1-5. 
(Code 1978, § 13-34) 
Secs. 50-66-50-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATING RULES 

Sec. 50-91. - Storage tanks and separators. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use, construct or operate in connection with any producing oil or gas well within the city any crude oil storage tanks exceeding 1,500 barrels capacity each, and each such tank will be constructed and maintained as to be vaportight and equipped with gas vents. Each tank shall be surrounded with a firewall at such distance from each tank as will under any circumstances hold and retain at least two times the maximum capacity of such tanks. A permittee may use, construct and operate a steel conventional separator and such other steel tanks and appurtenances as are necessary for treating oil, with each of such facilities to be so constructed and maintained as to be vaportight. Each oil and/or gas separator and any other pressure vessel containing oil or gas under pressure shall be equipped with both a pressure relief safety valve and a bursting head. 
(b)  All battery and storage tanks, fired vessels and separators erected or installed shall be at least 100 feet from any residence or building and 150 feet from any public or parochial school, church, theater or public building and 300 feet from any hospital building. 
(Code 1978, § 13-40) 
Sec. 50-92. - Fired vessels. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to install any fired vessel or to operate any equipment with an open flame nearer than 100 feet to any oil or gas well or storage tank, unless equipped with approved spark arresters. 
(Code 1978, § 13-41) 
Sec. 50-93. - Derrick and rig. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate in connection with the drilling or reworking of any oil or gas well within the city any wooden derrick or steam-powered rig or to permit any drilling rig or derrick to remain on the premises or drilling site for a period longer than 60 days after completion or abandonment of the well. All engines shall be equipped with effective mufflers to minimize noise. 
(Code 1978, § 13-42) 
Sec. 50-94. - No smoking signs required. 
    Printed signs reading "Dangerous, no smoking allowed" or similar words shall be posted in conspicuous places on each producing oil or gas well and tank battery. 
(Code 1978, § 13-43) 
Sec. 50-95. - Cleanliness of premises. 
(a)  The premises of any oil or gas well shall be kept clear of high grass, weeds and combustible trash within a radius of 100 feet around an oil tank or Christmas trees around producing oil and gas wells. 
(b)  Any rubbish or debris that might constitute a fire hazard shall be removed to a distance of at least 100 feet from the vicinity of wells, tanks and pump stations. All waste shall be disposed of in such a manner as to avoid creating a fire hazard or polluting streams and freshwater strata. 
(c)  Proper sanitation facilities must be provided for the use of workmen at the site in accordance with the direction of the building official. 
(Code 1978, § 13-44) 
Sec. 50-96. - Open pits. 
    Accumulation and storage of oil in open pits is prohibited. 
(Code 1978, § 13-45) 
Sec. 50-97. - Drill stem testing. 
    Drill stem tests for oil and gas wells may be conducted only if the combustible liquids and gasses shall be disposed of or properly burned and the effluent remaining in the drill pipe at the time the tool is closed is flushed to the surface by circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe. 
(Code 1978, § 13-46) 
Sec. 50-98. - Location of pipelines. 
    No pipelines for the transportation of oil or gas shall be constructed, laid, repaired or replaced within the rights-of-way of the city streets without approval of the city council. 
(Code 1978, § 13-47) 
Sec. 50-99. - Burying pipelines. 
    All oil and gas pipelines laid upon or across a public road or highway must be buried to a reasonably safe depth. 
(Code 1978, § 13-48) 
Sec. 50-100. - Light and power for congested drilling areas. 
    Wherever available and practicable, electric light and power shall be installed in congested oil and gas well drilling areas. All well pump jacks shall be powered with electricity. 
(Code 1978, § 13-49) 
Sec. 50-101. - Casings. 
(a)  The operator of any oil or gas well in any field or area within the city shall be required to set and cement a sufficient amount of surface casing to properly protect all freshwater sands as specified by the state board of water engineers and the state water quality board. The surface casing shall be of new or reconditioned casing and shall be set and cemented in accordance with the rules, regulations and orders of the state railroad commission for the field or area in which the well is to be drilled. Cementing shall be by the pump and plug method, and sufficient cement shall be used to fill the annular space back of the casing to the surface of the ground with full returns or corrective measures to be taken. The cement shall be allowed to set for a period of 12 hours before drilling plug. 
(b)  In lieu of setting the full amount of surface casing required to protect freshwater sands, the applicant may use the multistage cementing process. In using the multistage cementing process, sufficient cement shall be used in the stage cement job that is equivalent to the volume of the annulus from the cementing tool to the surface of the ground. Should the cement not reach the surface of the ground, a temperature survey must be conducted, then corrective measures must be taken. Any applicant using the multistage process must file with the city manager a copy of the state railroad commission letter granting such permit and an affidavit from the company performing the cementing. Failure to file either of these shall be punishable in accordance with this chapter. 
(c)  In any well drilled in any field or area within the city, the producing string casing shall be of new or reconditioned pipe which has been tested and has withstood the maximum anticipated pressures to be encountered. Cementing shall be by the pump and plug method, and sufficient cement shall be used to fill the calculated annular space back of the casing to a point at least 600 feet above the shoe or the highest production zone, whichever is applicable. The cement shall be allowed to stand for a period of 12 hours before drilling plug. After cementing, the casing shall be tested at a pressure in pounds per square inch calculated by multiplying the length of the producing string by two-tenths, being the maximum test pressure required. If at the end of 30 minutes the pressure shows a drop of ten percent or more of the required test pressure, the casing shall be condemned. After corrective operations, the casing shall again be tested in the same manner. 
(Code 1978, § 13-50) 
Sec. 50-102. - Blowout preventer. 
    A blowout preventer, control head and other connections for keeping the oil or gas well under control at all times shall be installed as soon as the surface casing is set. Blowout preventers shall be of dual control or of such type of construction and operation as to satisfy the requirements of the state railroad commission. All blowout preventer equipment shall have been tested under hydraulic test pressure at not less than the test pressure of the string of pipe on which it is installed. Blowout preventers and all control equipment shall be in good working condition and order at all times. Upon installation of the Christmas tree and wellhead connections set forth in section 50-103, the blowout preventer and control head and other control equipment may be removed from the well. 
(Code 1978, § 13-51) 
Sec. 50-103. - Wellhead connections. 
    All completed oil and gas wells within the city shall be equipped with Christmas tree fittings and wellhead connections, with a rated working pressure equal to or greater than the surface shut-in pressure of the well. All wellhead connections shall be assembled and tested prior to installation by a fluid pressure which shall be equal to the test pressure of the fitting employed. 
(Code 1978, § 13-52) 
Sec. 50-104. - Abandoned wells. 
(a)  Whenever any oil or gas well is abandoned within the city, it shall be the obligation of the permittee to plug such well in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state railroad commission and to take any and all additional provisions or precautionary measures prescribed by the state or the state railroad commission in connection with abandonment and plugging of the well. 
(b)  It shall be the further obligation of the permittee or the operator of the well to cut the surface casing off at least three feet below the surface of the ground and to place at least a 25-foot cement plug in the top of the casing and to weld the top of the casing completely shut. The resulting hole in the ground must be completely filled to the surface of the ground and duly tamped. 
(Code 1978, § 13-53) 
State Law reference- Abandoned wells, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 89.001 et seq. 
Sec. 50-105. - Fencing. 
    Any person who completes any oil or gas well as a producer shall have the obligation to fence the well, together with its surface facilities and storage tanks. 
(Code 1978, § 13-54) 
Sec. 50-106. - Waiver. 
    All or any part of the provisions of this article may be waived by the city council. 
(Code 1978, § 13-55) 
Chapter 54 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2007-12, adopted June 27, 2007, amended for Ch. 54 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 54 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1978 and the following: Ord. No. 2001-24, 2-12-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, 9-23-02; Ord. No. 2003-06, 5-27-03. 
Charter reference- Authority of city to establish, maintain and improve parks, § 6; authority of city to police parks and playgrounds within or without the city limits, § 17(13). 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; sale, possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in certain parks, § 10-5. 
State Law reference- Local parks and other recreational and cultural resources, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code chs. 315, 331 et seq.; city parks, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6081h et seq. 

Sec. 54-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  City park means all parks in the corporate limits of the City of Wharton that have been dedicated to the public, including all such parks that are subsequently annexed into the city limits or dedicated to the public in the Wharton corporate limits. 
(b)  Community event means an event in the city that is open to the public in general and approved by city council. 
(c)  Non-profit means an organization that operates in a not-for-profit manner and is classified under the federal tax code as 501(c)(3). Proof of status must be provided to the City of Wharton. Failure to provide proof of status will eliminate the non-profit exemption and the organization shall comply with revenue generating function requirements. Person(s) means an individual, corporation, partnership, entity, or non-profit organization. 
(d)  Special use permit means a permit issued by the City of Wharton for exclusive use of city owned park facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2007-12, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2008-16, 10-27-08) 
Sec. 54-2. - Park property. 
    No person in a city park shall: 
(1)  Interfere with city scheduled park activities. 
(2)  Interfere with an activity operating under a special use permit. 
(3)  Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with any building, table, bench, railing, signs, notices, placards, boundary markers, or other structures or equipment. 
(4)  Dig or remove any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs, or plants or other wood or materials, or make any excavations by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency. 
(5)  Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark. 
(6)  Dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way, injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of the area. 
(7)  Possess, use, or discard any glass containers upon or within any city park or sports fields. 
(8)  Bathe, swim, stand, walk, or jump in any fountain. The fountain shall be kept free from animals and/or persons. The fountain shall be kept free from any foreign substances, liquid and/or solid. 
(9)  Operate or park any motorized vehicle in an area not specifically designated or intended to be used for the parking or movement of motorized vehicles. Vehicles shall not be left in the park when closed. 
(10)  Start a campfire, except for cooking in the designed bar-b-que grills provided at the park sites. 
(Ord. No. 2007-12, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2008-16, 10-27-08) 
Sec. 54-3. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  City parks shall be open to the public daily from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., except for the Santa Fe Trail, which times are provided in subsection (d) below. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to be in a city park except when the park is open to the public. Persons shall obtain a variance from city council to use the park during the hours it is closed to the public. Any person or entity that desires to use the park during closed hours shall file a written application with the city, on a form provided by the city secretary. The city secretary shall present the application to the city council for consideration. if the application is approved, the city secretary or designated personnel shall issue a variance containing the terms and conditions as imposed by the city council as a condition for use of the park during closed hours. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter, loiter, remain, refuse to leave, or be in and on any public park, playground or field in the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless they have obtained a variance approved by the city council, and/or except as provided in subsection (d). 
(d)  The Santa Fe Trail shall be open to the public daily from 4:00 a.m. to midnight. 
(Ord. No. 2007-12, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2008-16, 10-27-08) 
Sec. 54-4. - Exclusive use of park pavilions. 
(a)  The City of Wharton park facilities are intended for general public use; however, upon request and approval, the park pavilions may be made available for the exclusive use of specific persons for a specific period of time, provided the exclusive use does not conflict with the use and policies of the city. 
(b)  Request for exclusive use of pavilions shall be directed to the city secretary's office. An application shall be completed and submitted to the city secretary's office and a special use permit may be issued by the city secretary. 
(c)  All persons requesting the exclusive use of park pavilions shall pay a $50.00 refundable deposit at the time of reservation. If the site and facilities are cleaned and returned to their original condition upon completion of the event, and all debris, paper, cans, signs, decorations, etc, are collected and placed in the trash receptacles, the deposit shall be refunded. However, if the above conditions are not met, the deposit shall be forfeited. 
(c)  City of Wharton residents requesting exclusive use of a city park pavilion will be required to pay a $25.00 non-refundable fee for such use. 
(d)  Persons not residing in the City of Wharton requesting exclusive use of a city park pavilion will be required to pay a $35.00 non-refundable fee for such use. 
(e)  It shall be the user's responsibility to see that all special arrangements for their intended use are made. 
(Ord. No. 2007-12, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2008-16, 10-27-08) 
Sec. 54-5. - Sports fields. 
(a)  Pleasure Park North and Mayfair Park sports fields shall only be used for their intended purpose. Harris Park may be used for other sports (soccer, football, etc.) for baseball or softball practices, games, tournaments, or league play purposes. 
(b)  Persons requesting use of the sports fields at Pleasure Park North, Mayfair Park, or Harris Park must complete an application with the city secretary's office. 
(c)  The application form shall include the name and address of the applicant, the number of persons or number of teams to be using the park, the dates, times requested for use, and the purpose of such use (company picnic, family reunion, non-profit organization fundraiser, revenue generating function. 
(d)  All persons requesting the use of a city maintained sports field shall pay a $50.00 reservation deposit at the time of reservation. If the park is cleaned up in a reasonable manner, all trash is placed in receptacles after use of the park, and any keys are returned by 12:00 noon of the first working day following the reservation, the deposit shall be refunded. However, if the above conditions are not met, the deposit shall be forfeited. 
(e)  All persons requesting to use the city's scoreboard box will pay a $100.00 refundable deposit for score box usage to the city at the time of reservation. If the scoreboard box is returned by 12:00 noon of the first working day following the reservation, the deposit shall be refunded. However, if the above conditions are not met, the deposit shall be forfeited.) Upon completion of an application and payment of reservation deposit(s), the following fees shall also be paid: 
(1)  Fees for any revenue generating function that is not a non-profit organization fundraiser are as follows: 
a.  One-time use (game or practice), per hour ..... $15.00 
b.  Tournament (1-3 days) ..... 100.00 
c.  League play (for each session up to four months) ..... 250.00 
(2)  Fees for use of lights (All applicants to pay for use of lights) 
Charge, per hour ..... 10.00 
Applicants may book the sports fields for practices for a period not to exceed two-weeks. A second reservation may not be made until the first week of the reservation is complete. Wharton Little League, Wharton Girls Softball and Wharton Babe Ruth may apply for use of the sports fields for practice purposes for the entire season. The organization applying will be responsible for scheduling the use of the field to the teams within their organization. 
(f)  Wharton Little League and Wharton Girls Softball sports fields shall be excluded from the requirements of this section. Use of the Wharton Little League and Wharton Girls Softball sports fields must be authorized by the corresponding organizations. 
(g)  Wharton Little League, Wharton Girls Softball, and Wharton Babe Ruth shall be exempt from all fees. 
(Ord. No. 2007-12, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2008-16, 10-27-08) 
Sec. 54-6. - Community events. 
    Use of the city parks for community events shall be approved by city council. The city council may grant the permit for community events, if it finds: 
(1)  A completed application is submitted to the city secretary's office; 
(2)  The event will be open to the public, with or without charge; 
(3)  Adequate arrangements have been made for traffic control, security, restroom facilities, medical care and other services or facilities to support the event; 
(4)  The person has obtained all required state permits for alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2007-12, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2008-16, 10-27-08) 
Sec. 54-7. - Swimming pool. 
(a)  General rules. 
(1)  The City of Wharton provides a Wharton Municipal Swimming Pool located at 2500 Jr. College Blvd. 
(2)  The Wharton Municipal Swimming Pool Rules shall be posted at the Wharton Municipal Swimming Pool. General rules include, but are not limited to the following: anyone under the age of 13 must be accompanied by a parent/guardian or an adult; no smoking or tobacco products allowed in or about the pool area; eating or drinking is allowed in concession and covered areas only; no glass containers; and no alcoholic beverages allowed in or around pool area. 
(3)  All attendees must abide by the posted rules and the lifeguards have the authority to enforce such. 
(b)  Exclusive use of the swimming pool. 
(1)  Persons requesting exclusive use of the swimming pool, during the designated times approved by city council, shall complete an application form provided by the city secretary's office. 
(2)  Group rental must be for non-commercial use only. Family parties, group social functions, non-profit organizations, etc., are acceptable uses. The pool rental is $100.00 plus the cost of lifeguards. 
(3)  Two lifeguards will be provided for up to 30 attendees. One additional lifeguard is required for every 15 additional attendees. The applicant shall be required to pay for additional lifeguards on duty at the rate approved by city council at the time the base fee is paid. Lifeguards will be provided by the city and all members of the groups are subject to all pool rules as enforced by the lifeguards. 
(4)  Reservations shall be made at least seven days in advance of the date requested. The base fee must be paid at the time of reservation and an estimate of the total number in the group must be provided. The base fee may be refunded if cancellation of use is made no later than 48-hours prior to reservation date. In case of total rain out, the pool manager or designated personnel will determine if the base fee will be refunded. 
(5)  "All in and all out policy" is in effect for private usage. The group must remain in the pool area for the duration of use. Open door use of the area is not permitted. The private party will not be permitted to enter until all general public users have left the facility. 
(6)  The group is expected to leave the facility in the same condition as it was upon entry. Trash must be picked up and deposited in the trash cans provided. The individual, in whose name the registration is made, is responsible for all damages incurred. 
(7)  Lifeguards will be provided by the city and all members of the groups are subject to all pool rules as enforced by the lifeguards. 
(Ord. No. 2007-12, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2008-16, 10-27-08; Ord. No. 2018-07, 6-11-18) 
Sec. 54-8. - Operating or parking motor vehicles in parks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or park any motor vehicle, including cars, trucks, campers, buses or motorcycles, in any of the city parks, except in designated parking lots or on public streets through such parks, if any. A variance must be approved by city council to operate or park vehicles in the park. 
(Ord. No. 2007-12, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2008-16, 10-27-08) 
Sec. 54-9. - Harris park. 
(a)  Vehicular traffic is prohibited in Harris Park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., and signs shall be posted stating that this area is closed to vehicular traffic between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverages are prohibited in Harris Park. 
(Ord. No. 2007-12, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2008-16, 10-27-08) 
Sec. 54-10. - Horses and livestock. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse or cause a horse or any livestock to be present on the grounds of any city park that the city owns or operates. 
(Ord. No. 2007-12, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2008-16, 10-27-08) 
Sec. 54-11. - Glass containers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any glass container within the confines of any city park. 
(Ord. No. 2007-12, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2008-16, 10-27-08) 
Sec. 54-12. - Alcoholic beverages in public parks. 
(a)  Possession or consumption in public parks. It is unlawful for any person to consume an alcoholic beverage or to possess an alcoholic beverage in a city park owned, operated or controlled by the city. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person in possession of an alcoholic beverage in an open container intends to consume the beverage. 
(b)  Defense to prosecution. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1)  The person consumed the alcoholic beverage or possessed the alcoholic beverage at a time and place allowing for the consumption or possession under a permit issued by the city; or 
(2)  The person consumed the alcoholic beverage or possessed the alcoholic beverage within a city-owned building when the serving of alcoholic beverages was permitted by the city. 
(c)  Permits for special events generally. A person may request a temporary permit to consume and possess alcoholic beverages at city parks (except Harris Park, which is located on Wharton Independent School District's property) by filing a written application with the city. The application must be filed at least 30 days prior to the date of the event, be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $20.00. 
(d)  Review of application by police department. The application shall be reviewed by the police department to verify the information provided on the application. The police department shall make a recommendation to the city manager. 
(e)  Grant of permit. The city manager may grant the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2007-12, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2008-16, 10-27-08) 
Sec. 54-13. - Compliance. 
    Applicants agree to comply with all applicable state and local alcoholic beverage laws. 
(Ord. No. 2007-12, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2008-16, 10-27-08) 
Sec. 54-14. - Penalty. 
    Penalty for violation. Any person found guilty of intentionally, knowingly or recklessly violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished in accordance with the terms of Section 1-5 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Wharton, Texas. Each day a violation occurs is a separate offense. The applicant shall be held responsible for the exclusive use of the park pavilion and if the applicant fails to document in the application that alcohol will be served or materially misstates the number of people attending, the Wharton Police Department may issue the applicant with a citation. The police department may also issue individuals with a citation for violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-12, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2008-16, 10-27-08) 
Chapter 58 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Departments established, § 22; city manager, department heads, § 42 et seq. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; aircraft and airports, ch. 6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Policy manual. 
(a)  The City of Wharton Employee Policy Manual, as approved by the Wharton City Council, is declared to be the official personnel policies for employees of the city, and the policies are hereby made a part of this chapter. Such rules shall not supersede any rule or regulation for any employees set forth in the Charter or in any statute of the state of any law of Texas. 
(b)  In all other respects, the rules and regulations set forth in the policy manual shall be followed in connection with all procedures and policies therein set forth with respect to city employees. 
(c)  The city council by resolution may modify or amend the employee policy manual. 
(Code 1978, § 15-1; Ord. No. 2013-14, 6-24-13) 
Sec. 58-2. - Affirmative action plan. 
    The city council by resolution may modify or amend the City of Wharton Affirmative Action Plan. 
(Code 1978, § 15-2; Ord. No. 2013-14, 6-24-13) 
Sec. 58-3. - Employee classification and pay plan. 
    The City of Wharton employee classification and pay plan, as approved and established by the Wharton City Council, may be modified or amended from time to time by resolution. 
(Code 1978, § 15-3; Ord. No. 2013-14, 6-24-13) 
Sec. 58-4. - Acceptance of state municipal retirement system. 
    On behalf of the city, the city council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (TMRS), as amended, and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted as to such employees. The Wharton City Council may modify or amend by ordinance the benefits and obligations of participation in the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14, 6-24-13) 
Secs. 58-5-58-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RETIREMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Retirement, Social Security, group insurance, § 144. 
State Law reference- Federal old age and survivors insurance coverage for county and municipal employees, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 695g. 

Sec. 58-36. - Acceptance of state municipal retirement system. 
    On behalf of the city, the city council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments participate in the state municipal retirement system as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq., and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted as to such employees. 
(Code 1978, § 15-20) 
Sec. 58-37. - Participation-Generally. 
    The city manager is hereby directed to have the employees of the city departments participate in the state municipal retirement system. 
(Code 1978, § 15-21) 
Sec. 58-38. - Same-Required. 
    Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department shall become a member of the state municipal retirement system as a condition of his employment. The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to such system, but shall never discontinue as to any participants. 
(Code 1978, § 15-22) 
Sec. 58-39. - Deposit of percentage of earnings. 
    In accordance with state law, the deposits to be made to the state municipal retirement system on account of current service of the employees of the several participating departments are hereby fixed at the rate of five percent of the earnings of each employee of such departments, and in determining the deposits to be made on account of such service the maximum earnings of this city is full salary. 
(Code 1978, § 15-23) 
State Law reference- Member contributions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 855.401. 
Sec. 58-40. - Remittances; reports. 
    The city secretary is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system, at its office in Austin, Texas, the city's contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by such board under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq. The city secretary is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of the city the prior service rendered to the city by each of the employees of the participating departments and the average prior service compensation received by each and to make and execute all prior service certifications and all other reports and certifications which may be required of the city under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq., or in compliance with the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system. 
(Code 1978, § 15-24) 
Sec. 58-41. - Additional rights, credits and benefits. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq., which law shall be referred to as the "TMRS Act," the city adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the state municipal retirement system (which retirement system shall be referred to as the "system"): 
(1)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity, if the member has at least 20 years of credited service in that system performed for one or more municipalities that have adopted a like provision under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.202(g). 
(2)  If a vested member, as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.204, shall die before becoming eligible for service retirement and leaves surviving a lawful spouse whom the member has designated as beneficiary entitled to payment of the member's accumulated contributions in event of the member's death before retirement, the surviving spouse may by written notice filed with the system elect to leave the accumulated deposits on deposit with the system subject to the terms and conditions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.204. If the accumulated deposits have not been withdrawn before such time as the member, if living, would have become entitled to service retirement, the surviving spouse may elect to receive, in lieu of the accumulated deposits, an annuity payable monthly thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse in such amount as would have been payable had the member lived and retired at the date under a joint and survivor annuity (option 1) payable during the lifetime of the member and continuing thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse. 
(3)  At any time before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity, a surviving spouse to whom subsection (2) of this section applies may, upon written application filed with the system, receive payment of the accumulated contributions standing to the account of the member in lieu of any benefits otherwise payable under this section. If such a surviving spouse shall die before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity allowed under this section, the accumulated contributions credited to the account of the member shall be paid to the estate of such spouse. 
(4)  The rights, credits and benefits authorized in this section shall be in addition to the plan provisions adopted and in force on November 16, 1987, pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(5)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a standard occupational disability retirement annuity under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.408 or an optional occupational disability retirement annuity under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.410 upon making application therefor upon such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the board of trustees of the system, provided that the system's medical board has certified to the board of trustees that: 
a.  The member is physically or mentally disabled for further performance of the duties of the member's employment; 
b.  The disability is likely to be permanent; and 
c.  The member should be retired. 
Any annuity granted under this subsection shall be subject to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.409. 
(6)  The provisions relating to the occupational disability program as set forth in subsection (5) of this section are in lieu of the disability program provided for under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.301 et seq. 
(7)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.502, subch. F of chapter 853, title 8, Government Code, as amended, the city hereby elects to allow eligible members in its employment to establish credit in the Texas Municipal Retirement System for active military service performed as a member of the armed forces or armed forces reserves of the United States or an auxiliary of the armed forces or armed forces reserves. Eligible members, as herein used, shall be those employees meeting the criteria set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 853.502(b) and 853.503 of said subch. F, and the amount and use of creditable military service shall be as further set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.505. In order to establish credit for military service hereunder, a member must deposit with the Texas Municipal Retirement System (in that member's individual account in the employees saving fund) an amount equal to the number of months for which credit is sought, multiplied by $15.00. The city agrees that its account in Municipality Accumulation Fund is to be charged at the time of the member's retirement with an amount equal to the accumulated amount paid by the member for military service credit, multiplied by the city' current service matching ratio in effect at the date the member applies for such military service credit. 
(Code 1978, § 15-25; Ord. No. 1996-16, § 1, 11-25-96; Ord. No. 1996-17, §§ 1, 2, 11-25-96) 
Sec. 58-42. - Authorization of updated service credits. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 853.401 through 853.404 of Subtitle G of Title 8, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date had at least 36 months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit" (as that term is defined in section 853.402(d) of the TMRS Act). 
(b)  On the terms and conditions set out in section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the system who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on the 1st day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in such section 853.601 of the Act, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under Ordinance No. 1992-19. 
(c)  The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100 percent of the "base updated service credit" of the member (calculated as provided in section 853.402(c) of the TMRS Act). 
(d)  Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(e)  In accordance with the provisions of section 853.401(d) of the TMRS Act, the deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of Ordinance No. 1992-19 [January 1, 1993] on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1992-19, § 1, 10-13-92) 
Sec. 58-43. - Increase in retirement annuities. 
(a)  On terms and conditions set out in section 854.203 of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by 70 percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is 13 months before the effective date of this section. 
(c)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereunder. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system. 
(Ord. No. 1992-19, § 2, 10-13-92) 
Sec. 58-44. - Dates of allowances and increases. 
    The initial allowance of updated service credit and increase in retirement annuities hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 1993, subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system. An allowance of updated service credits and an increase in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until Ordinance No. 1992-19 ceases to be in effect under section 853.404(e) of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in section 853.404(d) of the TMRS Act. 
(Ord. No. 1992-19, § 3, 10-13-92) 
Sec. 58-45. - Authorization of restricted prior service credit. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.305 of subtitle G of title 8, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of this city shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any of the entities described in said section 853.305; provided that: (1) the person does not otherwise have credited service in the system for that service; and (2) the service meets the requirements of said section 853.305. 
(b)  The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and may not be used in other computations, including computation of updated service credits. 
(c)  A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this section must take the action required under said section 853.305 of the Act while still an employee of this city. 
(Ord. No. 1997-20, § 1, 10-27-97) 
Chapter 62 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; interlocal police assistance, § 2-3; police officers at community/civic center, § 2-215. 
State Law reference- Police force of home rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.003. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1-62-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE NON-PAID FORCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2002-04, adopted Feb. 25, 2002, amended former Art. II, §§ 62-36-62-40, in its entirety which pertained to the police reserve force and derived from the Code of 1978. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Police reserve force, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.012. 

Sec. 62-36. - Established; composition; compensation. 
    A police non-paid force is hereby established, the members of which shall be appointed at the discretion of the chief of police. The members shall serve without pay as peace officers during the actual discharge of official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, 2-25-02) 
Sec. 62-37. - Qualifications; size of force. 
    The police non-paid force shall have such qualifications and standards of training as shall be required by law and as supplemented by order of the chief of police. The size of the police non-paid force shall not exceed the number of officers authorized for the regular police force. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, 2-25-02) 
Sec. 62-38. - Carrying weapons. 
    No person appointed to the police non-paid force may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer until he has been approved by the chief of police. After approval, he may carry a weapon only when authorized by the chief of police and when discharging official duties as a duly constituted peace officer. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, 2-25-02) 
Sec. 62-39. - Service. 
    Members of the police non-paid force serve at the discretion of the chief of police and may be called into service at any time the chief of police considers it necessary to have additional officers to preserve the peace and enforce the law. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, 2-25-02) 
Sec. 62-40. - Uniform compensation. 
    Members of the police non-paid force may serve without compensation but the city council may provide uniform compensation for members of the police non-paid force. The compensation shall be based solely upon time served by a member of the police non-paid force while in training for or in the performance of official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, 2-25-02) 
Sec. 62-41. - Relationship to regular full-time police force. 
    Non-paid police officers shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the regular police force and shall in no case assume the full-time duties of regular police officers without first complying with all requirements for such regular police officers. 
(Ord. No. 2002-04, 2-25-02) 
Chapter 66 - SIGNS AND ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-03, adopted Feb. 13, 2017, amended ch. 66 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 66, §§ 66-1-66-112, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Ord. No. 1991-09, 7-23-91; Ord. No. 1991-24, adopted Nov. 12, 1991; Ord. No. 1999-06, §§ 2-4, adopted Apr. 12, 1999; Ord. No. 2000-15, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Aug. 28, 2000; Ord. No. 2008-07, adopted June 9, 2008; Ord. No. 2012-01, adopted Jan. 9, 2012; and Ord. No. 2013-25, adopted Oct. 14, 2013. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 10; buildings and construction, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Regulation of signs by municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to establish clear and unambiguous regulations pertaining to signs in the City of Wharton and to promote thereby an attractive community, foster traffic safety, preserve and protect the quality of life and real estate values forming the city's tax base, and enhance the effective communication and exchange of ideas and commercial information. The City Council of the City of Wharton hereby finds the following legislative facts: 
(1)  The proliferation of signs creates commercial confusion and makes it difficult for travelers and motorists to locate the goods and services they seek. 
(2)  The increasing height of signs within the city is an endless battle for higher and more visible signs, and a reasonable limitation on the height of signs is necessary to prevent potential visual pollution, windstorm damage, injury or death. 
(3)  Excessive height in signs creates visual clutter and the establishment of a reasonable maximum height for signs will allow effective communication, pedestrian and vehicular safety, and prevent altitude competition. 
(4)  Reasonable provisions pertaining to size, scale, location, design, lighting, permanency, and maintenance are necessary to avoid visual clutter, preserve and improve the appearance and character of the community, to avoid traffic line-of-sight problems caused by signs or structures in close proximity to streets, which compete with traffic signs and signals for the attention of motorists, and to prevent deterioration, disregard, and abandonment of signs or structures. 
(b)  The council recognizes that signs are necessary for visual communication for public convenience, and that businesses and other activities have the right to identify themselves by using signs which are incidental to the use on the premises where the signs are located. The city council herein seeks to provide a reasonable balance between the right of a person to identify his or her business or activity, and the public interest of protecting against visual discord confusion and resulting safety hazards to pedestrians and motoring public that result from the unrestricted proliferation, location and construction of signs. This chapter will insure that signs are compatible with adjacent land uses and with a positive total visual environment in the community. 
(c)  The city council finds that the rights of residents of this city to fully exercise their rights of free speech by the use of signs containing noncommercial messages are subject to minimum regulation regarding structural safety and setbacks for purposes of traffic and pedestrian protection. The council seeks herein to provide for the reasonably prompt removal and disposal of such signs after they have served their purpose and yet to avoid any significant interference with First Amendment freedoms. 
(d)  The council finds that instances may occur in the application of this chapter where strict enforcement would deprive a person of the reasonable use of a sign, or the reasonable utilization of a sign in connection with other related property rights, and herein provides for such persons to have the right to seek variances from the requirements of this chapter for good cause. The council finds that it is imperative that any city representative, agent or official who is responsible for enforcing the ordinance from which this article derives, do so as it is written, in the interest of equality and fair and impartial application to all persons, and that the use of the variance procedure shall remain the sole administrative means to obtain any exception to the terms hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-2. - Definitions. 
    Apartment/condominium/mobile home park identification sign: An attached sign or a freestanding sign with permanent foundation or moorings, designed for identification of a multifamily residential project or a mobile home park project. 
    Area identification sign: A freestanding or wall sign with permanent foundation or moorings, designed for identification of subdivisions of ten to 50 acres, or identification of a distinct area within a subdivision. 
    Attached sign: A sign attached to or applied on and totally supported by a part of a building. 
    Banner: A graphic composed primarily of cloth, paper, fabric or other similar means, not including decorative streamers with no lettering thereon. 
    Building: A structure that has a roof supported by columns or walls for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals or property. 
    Building official: The City of Wharton Building Official as prescribed by chapter 18 Buildings and Construction, article II, Building Official, sections 18-36-18-40 of the City of Wharton Code of Ordinances. 
    Changeable electronic variable message signs (CEVMS): Means a sign which permits lights to be turned on or off intermittently or which is operated in a way whereby light is turned on or off intermittently, including any illuminated sign on which such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use, including a light emitting diode (LED) or digital sign, and which varies in color or intensity. A CEVMS sign does not include a sign located within the right-of-way which functions as a traffic control device and which is described and identified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUCTD), approved by the federal highway administrator as the national standard. 
    Church directional sign: An off-premises sign that furnishes directions to a church. 
    Commercial sign: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment, or attraction sold, offered or existing. 
    Construction sign: An attached or freestanding sign erected upon a lot or parcel of land for the purpose of advertising the furnishing of labor, materials, or the practice of crafts for a subdivision or building project. 
    Corporate signs/flags: A piece of fabric of distinctive design meant to draw attention to the main entrance of an apartment complex, hotel, church, nursing home, home for the aged, business or school. 
    Development sign: A sign announcing a proposed subdivision or a proposed building project. 
    Directional traffic control sign: A sign utilized as a traffic control device in off-street parking or access areas. 
    Finance sign: An attached or freestanding sign erected upon a lot or parcel of land for the purpose of advertising by a bank or other lending institution, the furnishing of interim or permanent financing for a subdivision or proposed building project. 
    Freestanding commercial sign: A sign supported by one or more columns, poles or bars extended from the ground or from an object on the ground, or that is erected on the ground; the term includes all signs which are not substantially supported by a building or part thereof, or which are substantially supported by a building or part thereof, when the sole significant purpose of the building or part thereof, is to support or constitute the sign. 
    Fuel price sign: A sign used to advertise the current price of fuel at locations where fuel is sold. 
    Garage/yard sale sign: A sign used to advertise the sale of personal property at a person's residence. 
    Home occupation sign: A sign used to identify the name and occupation of a person with a legal home commercial enterprise. 
    Low profile sign: A sign with a permanent foundation which is not attached to a building, but is a stand-alone sign and which does not exceed 60 square feet in area and four feet in height. 
    Noncommercial sign: A sign containing a work of art or message which is political, religious or pertaining to a point of view, expression, opinion or idea that contains no reference to the endorsement, advertising of or promotion of patronage, of a business, commodity, service, entertainment, or attraction that is sold, offered or existing. 
    Off-premises commercial sign: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment, or attraction sold, offered, or existing elsewhere than upon the premises where such sign is displayed. 
    On-premises commercial sign: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment, or attraction sold, offered or existing upon the premises where such sign is displayed. This definition does not include noncommercial signs. 
    Pennants/festoons: A piece(s) of fabric or other pliable material used for decoration (contains no copy or logo) or for identification (contains copy and/or logo). 
    Political sign: Any sign which promotes a candidate for any public office or which advocates a position on any social issue as its primary purpose. Political signs shall be considered in the category of noncommercial signs except where there are regulations pertaining to their removal after an election. 
    Portable sign: An on-premises sign which is not permanently affixed or attached to real property by poles, stakes or other members which are placed into the ground or upon some other type of permanent foundation; including trailer signs, any sign with wheels or skids, and any sign which is constructed so as to sit upon the surface of the ground, without subsurface attachment or extension. 
    Premises: An area of land planned and designed as a single comprehensive project, considered from the time the plan is first submitted to the planning department either at plat stage or site plan stage. 
    Real estate sign: An attached or freestanding sign erected upon a lot or parcel of land for the purpose of advertising same for sale or lease. 
    Roof sign: An outdoor advertising display sign erected, constructed, or maintained on the roof of a building or which is wholly dependent upon a building for support, and which projects above the point of a building with a flat roof six feet above the eave line of a building with a shed, gambrel, gable or hip roof, or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof. 
    Sign: Means any written or graphic representation, decoration, form, emblem, trademark, flag, banner, or other feature or device of similar character which is used for the communication of commercial information, or communication of ideas or subjects of political significance, and which: 
(1)  Is a structure or any part thereof, including the roof or wall of a building, or a freestanding wall or fence. 
(2)  Is written, printed, projected, painted, constructed or otherwise placed or displayed upon or designed into a building, board, plate canopy, awning, or vehicle, or upon any material, object or device whatsoever. 
(3)  By reason of its form, color, wording, symbol design, illumination or motion attracts or is designed to attract attention to the subject thereof, or is used as a means of identification, advertisement or announcement. 
(4)  A sign shall be considered to be a single display surface, a double-faced display surface, or display device-containing elements clearly organized, related and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of elements or where there is reasonable doubt about the relationship of elements, each element shall be considered to be a single sign; provided, however, that the display of actual physical merchandise through glass windows in any store where such merchandise may be sold in the ordinary course of business shall not constitute a sign or signs. 
    Spinners: Any sign display or attention-seeking device (that is not a flag) which spins or flutters when contacted by air currents or is propelled by a mechanical fan. 
    Subdivision identification sign: A freestanding or wall sign with permanent concrete foundation or moorings, designed for permanent identification of a subdivision of greater than 50 acres. 
    Voting period: The period beginning when the polls open for voting and ending when the polls close or the last voter has voted, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-3. - Applicability. 
(a)  Any reference to the masculine gender, including but not limited to, him and his in this chapter also includes the feminine gender. 
(b)  This chapter shall apply to all signs within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  This chapter supersedes any conflicting ordinance unless this chapter expressly provides otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-4. - Prohibited acts. 
    Within the corporate limits of the city, it shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts: 
(1)  Post, paint or otherwise exhibit any type of sign or sign support on any property not owned or controlled by him, without the written permission of the person owning or controlling the property. 
(2)  Tear down, remove or otherwise interfere with any type of sign or sign support erected by another, unless the sign or sign support was placed or maintained on the property of the person removing the sign or sign support without written permission. 
(3)  Erect, maintain or paint any type of sign upon a tree, rock or other natural feature. 
(4)  Erect any type of off-premises sign or sign support without having obtained from the city a permit therefore, except as specifically exempted by this chapter. 
(5)  Remove, without the building official's authorization, any official tag that was placed on a sign in accordance with this chapter. 
(6)  Erect or allow any type of off-premises sign or sign support to remain upon any property if the off-premises sign or sign support is in violation of this chapter. 
(7)  Place or cause to be placed anywhere in the city any type of sign, poster, placard, handbill or other advertising material on any motor vehicle or in any location in such a manner that the sign or advertising material may reasonably be expected to move to the ground by the blowing of the wind or any other act of nature. For purposes of this section, it shall be presumed that any sign, poster, placard, handbill or other advertising material placed under the windshield wipers of any motor vehicle shall reasonably be expected to move to the ground. 
(8)  Erect, place or maintain any type of sign, poster, placard, handbill or other advertising material in any public right-of-way or on any public utility poles. 
(9)  Erect or cause to be erected or maintained any sign using any combination of forms, words, colors or lights that imitate standard public traffic regulatory, emergency signs or signals. 
(10)  Erect or cause to be erected or maintained any sign that creates a traffic or safety hazard by virtue of significant distraction, reflection, unusual or excessive lighting or blockage of line-of-sight. 
(11)  Erect or cause to be erected or maintained any sign that contains vulgar, lewd or pornographic figures, pictures, paintings, drawings, words, characters or symbols. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-5. - Permits. 
(a)  Erection permits: A permit shall be required for the following types of signs: 
(1)  All types of off-premises signs, whether commercial or noncommercial. 
a.  The building official, upon filing of an application for a permit to erect a sign, shall examine applicant's sign plans and specifications and other data and the premises upon which the applicant proposes to erect the sign. If it shall appear that the proposed sign is in compliance with this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the city, the building official shall then issue the erection permit. If the work authorized under a sign erection permit has not been completed within six months after the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void and the applicant shall be required to remove any portion of the sign that has been erected. 
b.  The fee for such erection permits shall be established by resolution of the city council and may be changed from time to time. 
(b)  No permit shall be required for the following signs: 
(1)  Real estate signs, finance signs and construction signs. 
(2)  Directional traffic control signs. 
(3)  Home occupation signs. 
(4)  Political signs. 
(5)  Home numbering signs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-6. - Permit number. 
    Every sign registered, shall display its permit number in a conspicuous place on the sign so that the permit number is visible from the ground to the building official and is readable without artificial visual aids while standing at a distance of 30 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-7. - Maintenance. 
    The owner of a sign shall maintain the sign and any leased or owned real estate immediately surrounding the sign in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition and free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-8. - Construction standards. 
    All signs erected or maintained in accordance with this chapter shall be erected and maintained in compliance with all applicable state laws and with the city building code, electrical code and other applicable ordinances of the city. If a conflict exists between this chapter and any other laws, the most restrictive standard applies. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-9. - Lighting. 
(a)  All lighting of signs shall be so shielded as not to produce intensive or excessive light or glare to the traveling public and adjacent property. 
(b)  No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct the public lighting of any street, alley or public property. 
(c)  No sign shall be located in such a manner as to obscure or interfere with the effectiveness of official traffic signs, signals or devices or in such a manner as to obstruct or interfere with the view by a pedestrian or a driver of a motor vehicle or any other type vehicle or approaching, merging or intersecting traffic. 
(d)  Signs that are lighted and that are visible from any public street must be so designed and so maintained that the lights are effectively shielded to prevent beam rays of light from being directed at any portion of the traveled ways and the lights shall not be of such intensity or brilliance to cause glare or to impair the vision of a pedestrian or the driver of a motor vehicle or any other type of vehicle. 
(e)  No sign may be so illuminated that it interferes with the effectiveness of identifying, or obscures an official traffic sign, signal or device. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-10. - Subdivision and area identification signs. 
(a)  Area identification signs shall be permitted upon private property in an area to identify subdivisions of ten to 50 acres in size and subject to the requirements set forth in Table II [located at the end of this chapter]. Area identification signs may also be used within a subdivision consisting of more than 50 acres to identify distinct areas within that subdivision, subject to the requirements in Table II. 
(b)  Subdivision signs shall be permitted upon private property in an area to identify subdivisions of greater than 50 acres, subject to the requirements set forth in Table II. 
(c)  Both area identification and subdivision signs must be located on the premises as identified by a preliminary or master preliminary plat of the subdivision. Subdivision signs will be permitted only at major intersections on the preliminary plat of the subdivision (intersection of two collector type or larger type streets). At each intersection either one or two subdivision signs may be permitted so long as the total area of the signs does not exceed 150 square feet. Banners or flags may be utilized as subdivision identification signs but the overall height of such banners and flags shall not exceed 40 feet. 
(d)  Indirect lighting for area identification and subdivision signs is permissible but no unusually distracting optical effects, moving parts or alternating, sequential erratic or flashing lights shall be permitted for either type of sign. Landscaping when permissible shall be installed around each area identification or subdivision sign. Adequate arrangements for permanent maintenance of all signs and any landscaping in conjunction with area identification and subdivision signs shall be made by the subdivision developer, which may be through an owners association, or related organization if one exists or is created for this purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-11. - Apartment/condominium/mobile home park identification sign. 
    An apartment/condominium/mobile home park identification sign may be either an attached sign or a freestanding sign. It shall be placed upon the private property of a particular multifamily project or mobile home park subject to the requirements set forth in Table II. The apartment/condominium/mobile home park identification sign shall list the name and facilities available and may have leasing or sales information incorporated as a part of the sign. Indirect lighting for apartment/condominium/mobile home park identification signs is permissible, but no unusually distracting optical effects, moving parts, or alternating, sequential, erratic or flashing lights or devices shall be permitted. Any mobile home parks existing at the time of this chapter that are nonconforming may only utilize an identification sign meeting the provisions of this chapter and Table II. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-12. - Development signs. 
(a)  A development sign may be placed only on private property subject to the requirements in Table II. 
(b)  A development sign for a building project shall be removed if the project has not received a building permit at the end of 12 months from the date the sign erected. The building official may renew the sign permit for one additional 12-month period upon application. Once a building permit for the project is received, the sign may stay in place until 75 percent of the project is leased or a permanent sign is installed, whichever comes first. 
(c)  A development sign for a proposed subdivision shall be removed if a preliminary or final plat has not been approved by the end of 12 months from the date the sign erected. The building official may renew the sign permit for one additional 12-month period upon application. Once a plat has been approved, the sign permit is valid as long as a preliminary plat is in effect, or in the absence of a valid preliminary plat, for 24 months from the date of approval of a final plat. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-13. - Directional traffic control signs. 
    Directional traffic control signs may be utilized as traffic control devices in off-street parking areas subject to the requirements set forth in Table II. A logo or copy may be permitted to be placed on a directional traffic control sign but must be less than 50 percent of the area of the sign. No directional traffic control sign shall be permitted within or upon the right-of-way of any public street unless the sign's construction, design, and location have been approved by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-14. - Portable signs. 
    An applicant may seek a permit from the building official for the use of a portable sign. A permit granted for a portable sign will allow the applicant to use the sign for one consecutive 60-day period from the date the permit is issued. An applicant granted a permit under this section may not seek another permit for the use of any portable sign at that location for a 12-month period, which begins the date the permit expires. The fee for such a permit shall be established by resolution of the city council and may be changed from time to time. Any portable sign located on a commercial premises must direct attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment or attraction, sold offered or existing on those premises. Any portable sign allowed pursuant to a permit will be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  All portable signs shall display an affixed tag which identifies the name, address and phone number of the sign owner and of the person in control of the sign, if different from the owner. 
(2)  Portable signs shall be a minimum of 25 feet from any residential property line. 
(3)  The maximum facial display area of all the sides combined of a portable sign shall be no larger than 32 square feet. 
(4)  At least 25 feet of space shall separate all portable signs on the same side of the street regardless of property ownership. 
(5)  Portable signs shall have a front property and side setback from the property line of not less than ten feet. 
(6)  The maximum height of any portable sign from ground to top of sign shall be not greater than six feet. 
(7)  All portable signs shall be staked or otherwise secured in such a manner that they may not be reasonable expected to be blown over or moved by wind gusts not associated with officially declared tropical storms, hurricanes or tornadoes. Extra grounding precautions or removal must be taken by portable sign owners in the event of an approaching tropical storm, hurricane or tornado. 
(8)  All portable signs shall be kept in good repair. 
(9)  Any other requirements as prescribed by the building code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-15. - Real estate signs. 
(a)  One real estate sign not exceeding 16 square feet in total area (exclusive of stakes and posts) may be erected at any time while the property is offered for sale or lease to the public. Properties with a minimum of 150 feet of frontage shall be allowed one real estate sign not exceeding 32 square feet in total area. Properties with a minimum of two acres and frontage on two public streets shall be allowed one real estate sign on each frontage street with the area of the sign to be determined by the amount of frontage as stated above. Such signs must be removed by the owner or person in control of the premises when either the property has been sold or leased. 
(b)  Real estate signs may be either attached or freestanding and only those visible from a public street are limited in number (see exempt signs section 66-31). Real estate signs shall be maintained by the persons in control of the premises so as to remain erect and in good repair. Such signs shall be removed by the property owner or other person in control of the premises if they are damaged, broken or incapable of remaining erect. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-16. - Finance/construction signs. 
(a)  One finance sign and three construction signs (for a total of four signs), not exceeding 16 square feet in total area each (exclusive of stakes and posts) may be erected once a building permit has been issued on a property. Properties with a minimum of ten acres and 1,000 feet of frontage shall be allowed one finance sign and three construction signs not exceeding 32 square feet in total area each. 
(b)  Finance and construction signs may be either attached or freestanding and only those visible from a public street are limited in number (see exempt signs section 66-31). 
(c)  All such signs shall be maintained by the owner or persons in control of the premises so as to remain erect and in good repair. Such signs shall be removed by the property owner or other person in control of the premises if they are damaged, broken or incapable of remaining erect. 
(d)  Such signs must be removed by the owner or person in control of the premises when either the property has sold or been leased and/or when performance under the construction contract or subcontract (in the case of construction signs) has been completed. Financing and construction signs shall be removed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-17. - Noncommercial signs-Political signs. 
(a)  This chapter does not regulate the size, content or location of noncommercial signs, political signs except as follows: 
(1)  No commercial message shall be shown on any noncommercial sign. 
(2)  No noncommercial sign: 
a.  May be located within a public road right-of-way of the State of Texas; or 
b.  May be located off the premises of the property owner who is displaying the sign; or 
c.  May exceed 32 square feet in area and six feet in height measured from the ground to the top of the sign. Noncommercial/political signs exceeding an area of six square feet shall not be allowed in residential neighborhoods; or 
d.  May be located within a city right-of-way or on city property; or 
e.  May be posted at the polling site other than during the voting period during polling hours and in the designated location outside the 100-foot statutory electioneering limit of the polling entrance; or 
f.  May be placed on the polling site with any posts or wire greater than 9-gauge so as to eliminate any damage to existing underground wires, irrigation or property. 
(b)  This provision is necessary to avoid visual clutter, proliferation, resulting rubbish and dangerous distraction to pedestrians and drivers caused by close proximity of such signs to automobile traffic, to avoid damage to automobiles which may leave the paved surface intentionally or by accident, and to avoid the necessity for pedestrians to step into the roadway to bypass such signs or to seek line-of-sight verification of traffic. No regulatory alternative exists to accomplish this police power obligation. 
(c)  In the event that any noncommercial/political sign is located in a prohibited area or exceeds the maximum height or size limitations, it shall be removed by the city. 
(d)  All political signs shall be removed within ten days after the election to which they are applicable. Any private restrictive covenants in real property deeds should be consulted by landowners to determine if their private property may otherwise be regulated regarding posting signage. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-18. - Home occupation signs. 
    A home occupation sign may contain only the name and occupation or commercial enterprise of the resident. It shall be attached directly to the face of the occupant's residence. It shall not exceed two square feet in area, shall not be illuminated in any way, and shall not project more than 24 inches beyond the building or porch. No permit is required. No display of merchandise or other forms of commercial communication shall be allowed in a residential area, unless same are in existence prior to the adoption of this chapter in connection with use which is presently a lawful nonconforming use within the area. Such nonconforming signs may be maintained until the nonconforming uses of the building cease, subject to the requirements for maintenance herein. Discontinuance of the display of such a sign for more than three consecutive months shall prevent future display, even if the nonconforming use of the premises is continuous. Any private restrictive covenants in real property deeds should be consulted by landowner to determine if their private property may be otherwise regulated regarding positive signage. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-19. - Roof signs. 
    Roof signs shall be regulated as freestanding signs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-20. - Freestanding commercial signs. 
(a)  Freestanding commercial signs are allowed only on developed commercial property. One freestanding sign shall be allowed only when the premises has a minimum of two acres, subject to the requirements set forth in Table II. One low profile sign shall be allowed when the premises has less than two acres subject to the requirements set forth in Table II. Height, area and setback from the property line requirements for all other freestanding signs are not found in Tables I and II (located at the end of this chapter). See section 66-23 concerning banners and flags. 
(b)  A premises with less than 75 feet of public street frontage shall be allowed to use one low profile sign. 
(c)  A premises with more than 75 feet of public street frontage shall be allowed to use Table I standards for one freestanding sign rather than one low profile sign. 
(d)  A premises with more than 150 feet of public street frontage shall be allowed to use Table I standards for one freestanding sign or any number of low profile signs as long as there is a minimum separation between signs of 150 feet. 
(e)  Premises with less than 75 feet of public street frontage may be combined in order to utilize signage corresponding to the resulting frontage as described in the preceding two paragraphs. 
(f)  The sign applicant may elect the frontage street where two streets intersect at the corner are classified the same in accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance. If the intersection occurs at two differently classified streets, then the wider street shall be considered the frontage street. 
(g)  No more than one freestanding sign shall be allowed on any premises except when all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The site must be 25 acres or more in area. 
(2)  The site must have 1,000 feet or more of continuous unsubdivided public frontage on any major arterial street (as determined by the city's subdivision ordinance) toward which one freestanding sign is to be displayed. 
(h)  Balloons or floating devices anchored to the ground or structure may be used for display or advertising for special events. Maximum height shall be not greater than 50 feet. One balloon or other floating devices shall be allowed for a period not to exceed a cumulative total of 30 days per calendar year per location. A no-fee permit is required. Party balloons are not included in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-21. - Attached signs. 
    An attached commercial sign shall advertise only the name of, uses of, or goods or services available within the building to which the sign is attached. Such signs shall be parallel to the face of the building, shall not be cantilevered away from the structure, and shall not extend more than one foot from any exterior building face, mansard, awning or canopy (see roof sign definition). There shall be no painted roof signs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-22. - Changeable electronic variable message signs (CEVMS). 
    Changeable electronic variable message sign (CEVMS) regulations: 
(1)  Images or messages shall be static in nature and shall not blink, flash or be animated in such a manner as to constitute a distraction to passing motorists. 
(2)  No image or message may be displayed for less than six seconds. 
(3)  The changeable message portion shall not display images, words or colors so as to be confused for traffic signals or bear such words as "stop," "slow," "caution," "warning," or other similar words. 
(4)  The face or display of the sign shall be placed so as to be easily visible and not cause distraction to passing motorist or pedestrians. 
(5)  Shall automatically adjust the intensity of its display according to natural ambient lighting conditions. 
(6)  Shall not have an intensity after dark so as to be a nuisance to passing motorists or nearby residential areas. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-23. - Corporate flags. 
    One freestanding corporate flag per premises, not to exceed 40 feet in height or 100 square feet in area is allowed in multifamily, commercial and industrial premises. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-24. - Church directional signs. 
    Church directional signs not larger than six square feet in area in size are not prohibited and are not subject to setback, spacing and size requirements contained in this chapter; provided, however, these church directional signs shall be subject to all other provisions of this chapter, including obtaining a permit and a height requirement of seven feet, zero inches, measured from the bottom of the sign to the base of the exposed sign pole, but shall not be subject to a permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-25. - Sports signs. 
    Signs displayed within sports stadiums, parks or fields are not prohibited and are not subject to permit, setback, spacing and size requirements of this chapter. However, these signs shall be subject to all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-26. - Home/business address numbering. 
    Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. 
(1)  The primary location of the address numbers shall be located as near to the front entrance as possible. 
(2)  Numbers shall contrast with their background and shall be Arabic numerals and/or alphabet letters if applicable. 
(3)  Numbers and/or letters shall be four inches high with a minimum stroke width of one-half-inch. 
    In addition to the above building numbering, signs may also be erected for the purpose of identifying the address of residential homes. Such signs shall be no longer than 16 inches in length and eight inches in width and no more than 30 inches in height. Curb numbering can also be used in conjunction with the primary position numbers. These numbers shall have a contrasting background. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-27. - Garage/yard sale signs. 
    Garage/yard sale signs are not prohibited. However, there shall only be a maximum of three signs allowed. One sign shall be located on the property of the sale. Two additional signs can be placed on other private property locations with permission of the property owner. Signs shall not be allowed in city rights-of-way or on utility poles, street sign poles or traffic sign poles. The sign area shall not exceed six square feet and must provide address of sale. Signs may be placed the evening before the sale and must be removed no later than 8:00 p.m. on the final day of the sale. [See § 66-111 for any fine and penalty for violations.] 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-28. - Off-premises signs; commercial and noncommercial. 
    Any commercial or noncommercial off-premises sign erected in accordance with this chapter shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Be a minimum of 80 feet from any residential property line. 
(2)  Have a total area not greater than 150 square feet. 
(3)  Five hundred feet of space shall separate all off-premises signs on the same side of a public street. 
(4)  Have a front setback from the property line of not less than 50 feet. 
(5)  Shall be no greater than 25 feet in height from the ground. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-29. - City-sponsored signs. 
(a)  The city may erect a sign on city-owned property where there is a determination and approval of the city council which finds that the display of the sign: 
(1)  Promotes a positive image of the city for the attraction of business or tourism; and 
(2)  Depicts an accomplishment of an individual or group; and 
(3)  Creates a positive community spirit. 
(b)  Upon such order, the city can authorize, upon approved construction plans, the following: 
(1)  A sign on a city water tower; or 
(2)  An entrance sign to be located on city-owned property such that it is visible from the major thoroughfare as designated in the current major thoroughfare plan; or 
(3)  A sign to be located on city rights-of-way. 
(c)  Said sign shall be displayed for a period ordered by the city council or as may be decided by it from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-30. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  The following signs shall be prohibited within the corporate limits of the city: 
(1)  Signs painted on roof tops. 
(2)  Except as permitted in section 66-23, corporate banners, flags, pennants, festoons or spinners are prohibited. However, if a business holds a grand opening or special event flags, pennants, festoons or spinners may be displayed for a cumulative total of 30 days per calendar year per location. A no-fee permit is required. The flags of any country, state, city, church, or school are not prohibited. 
(3)  Signs and displays with flashing, blinking or traveling lights, or erratic or other moving parts, either internal or external to the premises, and oriented and visible to vehicular traffic, provided that time and temperature signs are permissible if the maximum area and setback requirements of this chapter are met and if the commercial information or content of such sign is restricted to no more than eight square feet. 
(4)  Any signs which are intended to or designed to resemble traffic signals and bear such words as "stop," "slow," "caution," "warning," or other words, and which are erected for purposes other than actual traffic control or warning to the public. 
(5)  Any sign which emits sound, odor or visible matter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-31. - Exempt signs. 
    The following signs are exempt from the requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  Signs that are not easily read from beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel on which they are located or from any public thoroughfare or traveled right-of-way. Such signs are not exempt from the safety regulations contained herein and in city building and electrical codes. 
(2)  Official notices posted by government officials in the performance of their duties and government signs controlling traffic, regulating public conduct, identifying streets, or warning of danger or which perform some other governmental function. (Bulletin boards or identification signs accessory to government buildings or other buildings are subject to the provisions of this chapter.) 
(3)  Temporary signs erected by private property owners for the purpose of warning of a dangerous defect or condition, or other hazard to the public. 
(4)  Noncommercial signs on private property or works of art that in no way identify or advertise a product or business, or by their location and placement impede traffic safety. 
(5)  Temporary decorations or displays, if they are clearly incidental to and are customarily and commonly associated with any national, local, ethnic, sporting or religious event or celebration. 
(6)  Temporary or permanent signs erected by public utilities or construction related companies to warn of the location of pipelines, electrical conduits, or other dangers or conditions in public rights-of-way. 
(7)  Signs that are displayed on motor vehicles that are being operated or stored in the normal course of a business, such as signs indicating the name or the type of business that are located on automobiles, moving vans, delivery trucks, trailers and other commercial vehicles; but only if the primary purpose of such vehicles is not for the display of the signs thereon, and only if such vehicles are parked or stored in areas appropriate to their use as commercial or delivery vehicles, such as service areas or locations close to the business building(s) away from public traffic areas. 
(8)  Signs carried by a person and not set on or affixed to the ground. 
(9)  Off-premises outdoor advertising display signs/banners by sponsors of charitable events. These signs may be displayed for two weeks prior and during the event with written approval of the city manager. 
(10)  Flags used as political symbols including only the United States, Texas, city and church flags. 
(11)  Flags used solely for decoration and not containing any copy or logo and located only in multifamily, commercial and industrial districts or premises developments. In multifamily developments, commercial and industrial premises, flags will be restricted to 25 square feet in area, 30 feet in height, and the number shall be restricted to no more than 12 flags per building plot. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-32. - Fuel price signs. 
    Service stations will be allowed one freestanding sign per site, the area of which shall not exceed 16 square feet per side of the sign and will not be included in the allowable area of any freestanding sign. This sign cannot be located within a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-33. - Structural requirements. 
    For the erection of any sign, a building permit shall be required in addition to the erection permit required under this chapter, in accordance with the provisions of the city building code. If a conflict exists between this chapter and the building code, the most restrictive standard applies. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-34. - Abandoned, damaged or unsafe signs. 
(a)  All abandoned signs and their supports shall be removed within 60 days from the date of abandonment by either user or owner. All damaged signs shall be repaired or removed within 60 days. The building official shall have authority to grant a 30-day time extension where he determines there is a reasonable necessity for same. 
(b)  A nonconforming sign that is damaged and not repaired within 60 days shall be deemed abandoned. A sign is considered damaged if the cost of repairing the sign would be more than 60 percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location. The sign owner will before the repair of an existing sign or the erection of a new sign begins present to the building official cost estimates associated with the repairs or erection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-35. - Removal of signs. 
(a)  The city may, at its option, require the removal, relocation or reconstruction of any sign within its corporate limits in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  If application of a city regulation would require reconstruction for a sign in a manner that would make the sign ineffective for its intended purpose, such as by substantially impairing the sign's visibility, application of the regulation shall be deemed to require removal of the sign for purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-36. - Miscellaneous regulations. 
(a)  No sign shall be placed in or across a city drainage, street or utility easement or a city right-of-way. Any damage to or relocation of signs illegally located in public easements shall be the responsibility of the owner of the sign. Any resulting damages to the traveling public shall be borne by the sign owner. The city, when possible, shall give the sign owner prior notice of the location and use of the public easement or right-of-way which will affect the sign. This is also applicable to all exempt signs. 
(b)  Signs may be internally or externally lighted as long as the light is so designed as to be shielded away from adjoining residential premises and does not impair visibility on adjoining public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
ARTICLE II. - REMOVAL, RELOCATION AND RECONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 66-37. - Illegal nonconforming signs. 
(a)  If the building official determines that a sign or a sign support is not in conformity with this chapter, the owner shall promptly, upon written notice from the building official, remove or repair the sign to bring it into conformity with this chapter. 
(b)  If the owner of any nonconforming sign or sign support refuses or neglects to remove or repair it upon being notified to do so, the building official shall notify the owner or agent of the property on which the nonconforming sign or sign support is located to remove it. 
(c)  If the owner or agent of the property on which the nonconforming sign or sign support is located refuses or neglects to act within 24 hours after the service of such written notice, the building official or his designated assistant may enter on the premises and remove or cause to be removed the nonconforming sign or sign support. The cost of the removal of such sign or sign support shall be taxed against the owner of record of the real property from which it is removed, and such costs shall constitute a lien against the real property. 
(d)  The city shall hold any item impounded by authority of this section for a period of 30 days, after which the city may dispose of any such item in accordance with public surplus property laws and procedure. During this 30-day period, the owner of any such item, after showing proof of ownership, may reclaim the item at the place of storage by paying to the city the actual cost of removal and impounding. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-38. - Legal nonconforming signs-Notice of nonconformity. 
(a)  The building official shall survey the city for signs that do not conform to this chapter. Upon determination that a sign is nonconforming, the building official shall use reasonable efforts to notify, either personally or in writing, the user or owner of the property on which the sign is located of the following: 
(1)  The sign's nonconformity; and 
(2)  Whether the sign is eligible for characterization either as legal, nonconforming, or unlawful. 
(b)  If the building official cannot locate the sign owner, user or owner of the property, the building official may affix the characterization notice in a conspicuous place on the sign or to the business premises with which the sign is associated. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-39. - Eligibility for characterization as legal nonconforming. 
    Any sign located within the corporate limits of the city on September 8, 2000 or located in an area annexed to the city after September 8, 2000 that does not conform with this article is eligible for characterization as a legal nonconforming sign if the sign was in compliance with applicable law on September 8, 2000. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-40. - Loss of designation. 
(a)  A legal nonconforming sign shall immediately lose its legal nonconforming designation if: 
(1)  The sign is altered in any way in structure other than repairing normal wear and tear and providing routine maintenance. 
(2)  The sign structure is relocated or replaced. 
(b)  On the happening of any one of the events described in subsection (a) of this section, the sign shall immediately lose its status as a legal nonconforming sign and shall become an unlawful nonconforming sign. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-41. - Amortization and abatement of non-conforming signs. 
    The following types of signs shall become nonconforming upon passage of this chapter, and shall be brought into compliance or removed within six months of the effective date of this chapter: Prohibited signs as defined in section 66-30. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-42. - Applicability; compensation to owner. 
(a)  The city may, at its option, require the removal, relocation or reconstruction of any sign within its corporate limits in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  The owner of a sign that is required to be relocated, reconstructed or removed is entitled to receive compensation from the city for costs associated with the relocation, reconstruction or removal. 
(c)  If application of a city regulation would require reconstruction for a sign in a manner that would make the sign ineffective for its intended purpose, such as by substantially impairing the sign's visibility, application of the regulation shall be treated as the requiring the removal of the sign for purposes of this chapter. 
(d)  In lieu of paying compensation, the city may, at its option, exempt from required removal, relocation or reconstruction any sign lawfully in place on the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-43. - Sign control board. 
(a)  If the city requires the removal, relocation or reconstruction of a sign within its corporate limits, the mayor shall appoint a municipal board on sign control. This board must be composed of the following: 
(1)  Two real estate appraisers, each of whom must be a member in good standing of a nationally recognized professional appraiser society or trade organization that has an established code of ethics, educational program and professional certification program; 
(2)  One person engaged in the sign business in the city; 
(3)  One employee of the state department of transportation who is familiar with real estate valuations in eminent domain proceedings; and 
(4)  One architect or landscape architect licensed by this state. 
(5)  Two City of Wharton residents. 
(b)  A member of the municipal board on sign control shall be appointed for a term of two years. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-44. - Determination of amount of compensation. 
    The municipal board on sign control shall determine the amount and manner of payment of the compensation to which the owner of a sign that is required to be relocated, reconstructed or removed is entitled. The determination shall be made after the owner of the sign is given the opportunity for a hearing before the board about the issues involved in the matter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-45. - Compensation for a relocated sign. 
    The compensable costs for a sign that is required to be relocated include the expenses of dismantling the sign, transporting it to another site and re-erecting it. The municipal board on sign control shall determine the compensable costs according to the standards applicable in a proceeding under V.T.C.A., Property Code ch. 21. In addition, the city shall issue to the owner of the sign an appropriate permit or other authority to operate a substitute sign of the same type at an alternative site of substantially equivalent value. Whether an alternative site is of substantially equivalent value is determined by standards generally accepted in the outdoor advertising industry, including visibility, traffic count and demographic factors. The city may compensate the owner for any increased operating costs, including increased rent, at the new location. The owner is responsible for designating an alternative site where the erection of the sign would be in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-46. - Compensation for reconstructed sign. 
    The compensable costs for a sign that is required to be reconstructed include expenses of labor and materials and any loss in the value of the sign due to the reconstruction in excess of 15 percent of that value. The municipal board on sign control shall determine the compensable costs according to standards applicable in a proceeding under V.T.C.A., Property Code ch. 21. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-47. - Compensation for removal of off-premises sign. 
(a)  For an off-premises sign that is required to be removed, the compensable costs is an amount computed by determining the average annual gross revenue received by the owner from the sign during the two years preceding September 1, 1985 or the two years preceding the month in which the removal of the sign occurs, whichever is less, and by multiplying that amount by three. If the sign has not been in existence for all of either of the two-year periods, the average annual gross revenue for that period, for the purpose of this computation, is an amount computed by dividing 12 by the number of months that the sign has been in existence and multiplying that result by the total amount of the gross revenue received for the period that the sign has been in existence; however, if the sign did not generate revenue for at least one month preceding September 1, 1985, this computation of compensable costs is to be made using only the average annual gross revenue received during the two years preceding the month in which the removal date of the sign occurs, and by multiplying that amount by three. In determining the amounts under this subsection, a sign is treated as if it were in existence for the entire month if it was in existence for more than 15 days of the month and is treated as if it were not in existence for any part of the month if it was in existence for 15 or fewer days of the month. 
(b)  The owner of the real property on which the sign was located is entitled to be compensated for any decrease in the value of the real property. The compensable cost is to be determined by the municipal board on sign control according to standards applicable in a proceeding under V.T.C.A., Property Code ch. 21. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-48. - Compensation for removal of on-premises sign. 
    For an on-premises sign that is required to be removed, the compensable cost is an amount computed by determining a reasonable balance between the original cost of the sign, less depreciation, and the current replacement cost of the sign, less an adjustment for the present age and condition of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-49. - Method of compensation. 
(a)  To pay the compensable costs required under this article, the city may use only a method or a combination of the methods prescribed by this section. 
(b)  If a sign is required to be relocated or reconstructed, the city, acting in accordance with the Property Redevelopment and Tax Abatement Act (V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 312), may abate municipal property taxes that otherwise would be owed by the owner of the sign. The abated taxes may be on any real or personal property owned by the owner of the sign, except residential property. The right to the abatement of taxes is assignable by the holder, and the assignee may use the right to abatement regarding taxes on any nonresidential property in the same taxing jurisdiction. In a municipality where tax abatement is used to pay compensable costs, the costs include reasonable interest, and the abatement period may not exceed five years. 
(c)  The city may allocate to a special fund in the municipal treasury, to be known as the sign abatement and community beautification fund, all or any part of the municipal property taxes paid on signs, on the real property on which the signs are located or on other real or personal property owned by the owner of the sign. The city may make payments from that fund to reimburse compensable costs to owners of signs required to be relocated, reconstructed or removed. 
(d)  The city may provide for the issuance of sign abatement revenue bonds and use the proceeds to make payments to reimburse costs to the owners of the signs within the corporate limits of the city that are required to be relocated, reconstructed or removed. 
(e)  The city may pay compensable costs in cash. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-50. - Tax appraisal of property with nonconforming sign. 
    For each nonconforming sign, the municipal board on sign control shall file with the appropriate property tax appraisal office the board's compensable costs value appraisal of the sign. The appraisal office shall consider the board's appraisal when the office, for property tax purposes, determines the appraised value of the real property to which the sign is attached. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-51. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This article does not apply to a sign that was erected in violation of local ordinances, laws or regulations applicable at the time of its erection. 
(b)  This article does not apply to a sign that, having been permitted to remain in place as a nonconforming use, is required to be removed because the sign or a substantial part of it is blown down or otherwise destroyed or dismantled for any purpose other than maintenance operations or for changing the letters, symbols or other matter on the sign. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, a sign or substantial part of it is considered to have been destroyed only if the cost of repairing the sign is more than 60 percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location. 
(d)  This article does not limit or restrict the compensation provisions of the highway beautification provisions contained in the Litter Abatement Act. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-52. - Appeal. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the municipal board on sign control may file in district court a verified petition setting forth that the decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. The petition must be filed within 20 days after the date the board renders the decision. 
(b)  On the filing of the petition, the court may issue a writ of certiorari directed to the board to review the decision of the board and shall prescribe in the writ the time within which a return must be made, which must be longer than ten days, and which the court may extend. 
(c)  The board is not required to return the original papers upon which it acted, but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies of the papers. The return must concisely set forth all other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and must be verified. 
(d)  The court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the decision brought up for review. 
(e)  Costs may not be allowed against the board unless it appears to the court that the board acted with gross negligence, in bad faith or with malice in making the decision appealed from. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Secs. 66-53-66-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 66-76. - Variances. 
(a)  Variations of this chapter will be considered by the planning commission when in its judgment special or particular factors and conditions warrant such variation and they do not affect the general application or spirit of this chapter. An application for a variance shall be obtained through the code enforcement department and submitted to the planning commission at the next regularly scheduled meeting for consideration. Advice and cooperation is to be offered and will always be fully given by the members of the city staff and planning commission. For the granting of a variance, a favorable vote of no less than a majority of members of a quorum of the planning commission shall be necessary. 
(b)  Before any initial decision of the planning commission regarding a variance shall become final, such initial decision shall be subject to review by the city council, if within ten days from the date of the planning commission's initial decision, any member of council requests review of such initial decision at the next regularly scheduled council meeting. If the initial decision of the planning commission is not reviewed by the council at its next regularly scheduled council meeting it is deemed a final decision. The council may approve or deny the initial decision of the planning commission. 
(c)  If an the application is denied by the planning commission, an applicant may appeal the final decision to the city council within ten days from the date of the final decision, if the city council also denies the application, the applicant may appeal the final decision to the appropriate local court. 
(d)  If an application is denied, an applicant may not seek another substantially similar variance for a period of 12 months from the date the original variance was denied by the planning commission or city council. 
(e)  The applicant pays a variance fee as established by the City Council of the City of Wharton under separate resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Secs. 66-77-66-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PENALTIES; EFFECTIVE DATE 

Sec. 66-111. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-5, City of Wharton Code of Ordinance, General Provisions for each offense. If the terms or provisions of this chapter are violated by any corporation or firm, the officers and agents actively in charge of the business of such corporation or firm and the person actually performing the work for such corporation or firm shall be subject to the penalties provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Sec. 66-112. - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall become effective on September 8, 2000 at 12:01 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
TABLE I
Allowable Areas For Freestanding Signs 
Frontage (Feet) Maximum Area
(Square Feet) 0-50 25 51-100 50 101-150 75 151-200 100 201-250 125 251-300 150 301-350 175 351-400 200 401-450 225 451-500 250 501-550 275 551-600+ 300  
Notes: 
Frontage: The number of feet fronting on a public street to which a sign is oriented. 
Area: The area in square feet of a single-face sign, or one sign of a double-face sign, or half the sides of a multi-face sign. 
The area of a freestanding sign is the area enclosed by the minimum imaginary rectangle of vertical and horizontal lines which fully contain all extremities, exclusive of supports, or a horizontal view of the sign. 
The maximum area of any freestanding sign may not exceed either that allowed by the chart above. 
On corner lots, the frontage street shall be the greater street as classified on the thoroughfare plan. Where two streets are the same, the applicant may choose the frontage street. 
Allowable Heights For Freestanding Signs 
(Distance From Property Line In Feet) At Least Less Than Height 10 50  
Notes: 
1.  Height: Height of the sign measured from the elevation of the ground to the top of the sign. 
2.  On corner lots only, the frontage street can be used to determine height and area. 
3.  Commercial and Industrial tracts with a minimum of 100 feet of frontage on Highway 59 may have a sign up to a maximum of 50 feet in height. The sign shall not be closer than 200 feet to any residential property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
TABLE II
SUMMARY OF SIGN REGULATIONS 
Sign
Classification Maximum Area Maximum Height Setback Number Allowed Permit Required Subdivision 150 sq. ft. 15' 10' from property line sec. 66-10 yes Area I.D. 16 sq. ft. 4' 10' from Property Line sec. 66-10 yes Apt./condo/mobile home 100 sq. ft. 10' 1/Project yes Development (project) 35 sq. ft. on 
50' ROW 
60 sq. ft. on 
50' ROW 
150 sq. ft. on 
70' ROW 
250 sq. ft. on 
>70' ROW 15' 10' from property line 1 yes Development (Subdivision) 35 sq. ft. on 
50' ROW 
60 sq. ft. on 
50' ROW 
150 sq. ft. on 
70' ROW 
250 sq. ft. on 
'70' ROW 15' 10' from property line 1 yes Traffic control 3 sq. ft. 4' 4' from curb 1/curbcut no Real estate <150' frontage- 
16 sq. ft. 
>150' frontage- 
32 sq. ft. 8' 10' from property line no Finance/construction <150' frontage- 
16 sq. ft. 
>150' frontage- 
32 sq. ft. 8' 10' from property line 2 construction 
1 finance no Political See Table I 10' from property line if area >2 sq. ft. N/A no Roof Shall be treated as commercial freestanding sign Freestanding 100 sq. ft. 10' 10' from property line 1/premises if >1 acre yes Freestanding see Table I sec. 66-20 yes Low profile 60 sq. ft. 4' 10' from property line 1 yes Attached section 66-21 yes Exempt section 66-30 Prohibited section 66-29  
(Ord. No. 2017-03, 2-13-17) 
Secs. 66-113-66-130. - Reserved. 
Chapter 70 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Street powers, § 6; street control and improvements, § 7; fares of vehicles for hire, § 17(11); authority of city to police streets and alleys, § 17(13); regulation of sidewalks and street intersections, § 17(16); animals on streets and public grounds, § 17(17); regulation of firearms, noise and other annoyances on streets and sidewalks; vehicles and railway trains on streets, alleys and other public places, § 17(20); franchises, § 117. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and construction, ch. 18; subdivisions, app. A. 
State Law reference- Street improvements, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1086 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Ordinances continued in effect. 
    All ordinances of a limited or special nature, such as ordinances: 
(1)  Establishing street grades; 
(2)  Opening, closing, accepting or abandoning streets; 
(3)  Providing for street improvements and assessments therefor; 
(4)  Naming, renaming or relocating streets; 
(5)  Providing a building numbering system; or 
(6)  Any other such ordinances; 
are continued in full force and effect as fully as if set out at length in this chapter. 
(Code 1978, § 17-1) 
Sec. 70-2. - Hedges, shrubbery, trees and other obstructions. 
(a)  Nuisances and traffic hazards. Any hedge, tree, shrub, wall, fence or other growth or structure on any property in the city, in such a location or form as to obstruct the view of automobiles or pedestrians or both, is declared to be a nuisance or traffic hazard. 
(b)  Abatement; notice to remedy. Whenever any condition described in this section is found to exist upon any lot or premises in the city, any officer or authorized city employee shall notify the owner of such lot or premises to remove or remedy the condition within ten days after the date of such notice. Such notice shall be in writing and served on the owner in person or mailed to him at his latest known address. If personal service cannot be had and the owner's address is not known, such notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper published in the city at least twice within ten consecutive days. 
(c)  Remedy of condition by city. If the owner of any lot or premises fails to remove or remedy any condition described in subsection (a) of this section within the required period after notice has been given as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the city may do whatever is necessary to remove or remedy the condition or cause the work to be done and may charge the expenses incurred thereby to the owner of such lot or premises. Such expenses shall be assessed against the real estate upon which the work was done. The doing of such work and the charging and assessing of the expenses thereof against the owner shall not relieve the owner or occupant of prosecution for any such violation. 
(d)  Collection of expenses for work performed by city. The city manager shall file a statement with the county clerk of expenses incurred by the city, giving the amount of such expenses and the date on which the work was done and describing the property. The city shall then have a privileged lien on such lot or real estate upon which the work was done to secure the expenditures so made in accordance with V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq., which lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. The amount of such expenses shall bear ten percent interest from the date of payment by the city. For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of such lien may be had in the name of the city, and the statement of expenses so made or a certified copy thereof shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-5. Each day that the nuisance, obstruction, traffic hazard or violation remains shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1978, § 17-2) 
Secs. 70-3-70-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURES FOR REQUESTS TO RENAME CITY STREETS 

Sec. 70-36. - Submission of request. 
    Any person requesting the city to change the name of any city street shall submit the request in writing to the planning commission. The request shall include the present name of the street, as well as the proposed new name of the street, and the reason for the proposed change. 
(Code 1978, § 17-11) 
Sec. 70-37. - Public hearings; deposit; notification of property owners; publication. 
(a)  Before making any recommendation to the city council regarding the request for a change of the street name, the planning commission shall conduct at least two public hearings regarding the request. 
(b)  Prior to the public hearings, the city shall require the proponent of the name change to deposit an amount to be specified by the city to cover the estimated costs of mailing and publishing notices and installing new street signs. 
(c)  At least 15 days prior to the date of the first public hearing, the city shall send notice, by United States mail, postage prepaid, to the following persons of the proposed change of name: 
(1)  All persons, whether owners, renters or lessees, living in premises fronting on the street; 
(2)  All owners of businesses, whether property owners, lessees or renters, located on premises fronting on the street; and 
(3)  All owners of any property fronting on the street. 
(d)  At least 15 days prior to the date of the first public hearing, the city shall publish notice of the dates, times and places of the public hearings. This notice shall be published one time in a newspaper having general circulation within the city. 
(Code 1978, § 17-12) 
Sec. 70-38. - Recommendation of planning commission. 
    After the completion of the public hearings on the change of the name of any city street, the planning commission shall submit a recommendation to the city council either for or against the proposed renaming of the street. 
(Code 1978, § 17-13) 
Sec. 70-39. - Expenses for change. 
    If the city council approves the request to rename the street, the city council shall require the proponent of the change of name to pay for the expenses of changing the name of the street. These expenses shall include costs of labor and materials in installing new street signs, as well as the costs of mailing and publishing notices. Regardless of whether or not the city council approves the request, the proponent of the name change shall be required to pay for the cost of the notices described in section 70-37. 
(Code 1978, § 17-14) 
Sec. 70-40. - Street designation upon approval of name change. 
    If the council authorizes the change of the street name, the street shall continue to be designated by its previous name, as well as by the new name, for a period of 12 months from the date of the authorization of the change of name, after which time the street shall be designated only by its new name. 
(Code 1978, § 17-15) 
Sec. 70-41. - City-initiated street name change. 
    If the city wishes to initiate the change of a street name, the city must comply with the notice required in this article. However, the city shall not be required to comply with the section regarding the deposit to cover the estimated cost of changing the name of the street. 
(Code 1978, § 17-16) 
Secs. 70-42-70-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION IN AND USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 70-61. - Findings and purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Assist in the management of facilities placed in, on or over the public rights-of-way in order to minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact and other adverse effects, and the costs to the citizens resulting from the placement of facilities within the public rights-of-way; 
(2)  Govern the use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way; 
(3)  Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
(4)  Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held in public trust by the city; 
(5)  To preserve the physical integrity of the streets and highways; 
(6)  To control the orderly flow of vehicles and pedestrians; 
(7)  Keep track of the different entities using the rights-of-way to prevent interference between them; 
(8)  Assist on scheduling common trenching and street cuts; and 
(9)  Protect the safety, security, appearance, and condition of the public rights-of-way. 
    This article may be referred to as the "Construction in the Public Rights-of-Way Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1999-13, § 1, 10-25-99) 
Sec. 70-62. - Authority; scope. 
    This article applies to all persons that place facilities in, on or over public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1999-13, § 2, 10-25-99) 
Sec. 70-63. - Definitions. 
    In this article: 
    Affiliate means a person who controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with a provider. 
    Certificated telecommunications provider means the same as in Local Government Code Section 283.002(2) (any entity that has been granted a certificate from the Texas Public Utility Commission under Chapter 54 of Tex. Utility Code authorizing that entity to provide local exchange telephone service). 
    City means The City of Wharton, Texas. As used throughout, the term city also includes the designated agent of the city. 
    City manager means the city manager of the city or the city manager's designee. 
    Direction of the city means all ordinances, laws, rules, resolutions, and regulations of the city that are not inconsistent with this article and that are now in force or may hereafter be passed and adopted. 
    Facilities means any and all of the wires, cables, fibers, duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, underground and overhead passageways and other equipment, structures, plant and appurtenances and all associated physical equipment placed in, on or under the public rights-of-way. 
    Person means a natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company or association, and other such entity. 
    Public rights-of-way means the same as in the Texas Local Government Code, 283.002(6), (the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the municipality has an interest. The term does not include the airwaves above a public rights-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications). 
(Ord. No. 1999-13, § 3, 10-25-99) 
Sec. 70-64. - Municipal authorization required. 
(a)  Any person seeking to place facilities on, in or over the public rights-of-way, shall first file an application for a building permit with the city and shall abide by the terms and provisions of this article pertaining to use of the public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Any person, except a certificated telecommunications provider, prior to placing, reconstructing, or altering facilities in, on or over the public rights-of-way, must obtain separate municipal authorization from the city. 
(c)  Any person with a current, unexpired consent, franchise, agreement or other authorization from the city (grant) to use the public rights-of-way that is in effect at the time this article takes effect shall continue to operate under and comply with that grant until the grant expires or until it is terminated by mutual agreement of the city and the person, or terminated as otherwise provided for in law. 
(Ord. No. 1999-13, § 4, 10-25-99) 
Sec. 70-65. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The city manager shall administer and enforce compliance with this article. 
(b)  A person shall report information related to the use of the public rights-of-way that the city manager requires in the form and manner reasonably prescribed by the city manager. 
(c)  The city manager shall report to the city council upon the determination that a person has failed to comply with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1999-13, § 5, 10-25-99) 
Sec. 70-66. - Construction obligations. 
    A person is subject to reasonable police power regulation of the city to manage its public rights-of-way in connection with the construction, expansion, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of facilities in the public rights-of-way, pursuant to the city' s rights as a custodian of public property, based upon the city's historic rights under state and federal laws. Such regulations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  At the city's request, a person shall furnish the city accurate and complete information relating to the construction, reconstruction, removal, maintenance, operation and repair of facilities performed by the person in the public rights-of-way. 
(2)  A person may be required to place certain facilities within the public rights-of-way underground according to applicable city requirements absent a compelling demonstration by the person that, in any specific instance, this requirement is not reasonable or feasible nor is it equally applicable to other similar users of the public rights-of-way. 
(3)  A person shall perform operations, excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way in accordance with all applicable city requirements, including the obligation to use trenchless technology whenever commercially economical and practical and consistent with obligations on other similar users of the public rights-of-way. The city shall waive the requirement of trenchless technology if it determines that the field conditions warrant the waiver, based upon information provided to the city by the person. All excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way shall be conducted so as to minimize interference with the use of public and private property. A person shall follow all reasonable construction directions given by the city in order to minimize any such interference. 
(4)  A person must obtain a permit, as reasonably required by applicable city codes, prior to any excavation, construction, installation, expansion, repair, removal, relocation or maintenance of the persons facilities. Once a permit is issued, person shall give to the city a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours notice (which could be at the time of the issuance of the permit) prior to undertaking any of the above listed activities on its network in, on or under the public rights-of-way. The failure of the person to request and obtain a permit from the city prior to performing any of the above listed activities in, on or over any public rights-of-way, except in an emergency as provided for in subsection (11) below, will subject the person to a stop-work order from the city and enforcement action pursuant to the city's code of ordinances. If the person fails to act upon any permit within 90 calendar days of issuance, the permit shall become invalid, and the person will be required to obtain another permit. 
(5)  When a person completes construction, expansion, reconstruction, removal, excavation or other work, the person shall promptly restore the rights-of-way in accordance with applicable city requirements. A person shall replace and properly relay and repair the surface, base, irrigation system and landscape treatment of any public rights-of-way that may be excavated or damaged by reason of the erection, construction, maintenance, or repair of the persons facilities within thirty (30) calendar days after completion of the work in accordance with existing standards of the city in effect at the time of the work. 
(6)  Upon failure of a person to perform any such repair or replacement work, and five (5) days after written notice has been given by the city to the person, the city may repair such portion of the public rights-of-way as may have been disturbed by the person, its contractors or agents. Upon receipt of an invoice from the city, the person will reimburse the city for the costs so incurred within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the city invoice. 
(7)  Should the city reasonably determine, within two (2) years from the date of the completion of the repair work, that the surface, base, irrigation system or landscape treatment requires additional restoration work to meet existing standards of the city, a person shall perform such additional restoration work to the satisfaction of the city, subject to all city remedies as provided herein. 
(8)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the city determines that the failure of a person to properly repair or restore the public rights-of-way constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the city may undertake emergency repairs and restoration efforts. A person shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred by the city within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the city invoice. 
(9)  A person shall furnish the city with construction plans and maps showing the location and proposed routing of new construction or reconstruction at least fifteen (15) days before beginning construction or reconstruction that involves an alteration to the surface or subsurface of the public rights-of-way. A person may not begin construction until the location of new facilities and proposed routing of the new construction or reconstruction and all required plans and drawings have been approved in writing by the city, which approval will not be unreasonably withheld, taking due consideration of the surrounding area and alternative locations for the facilities and routing. 
(10)  If the city manager declares an emergency with regard to the health and safety of the citizens and requests by written notice the removal or abatement of facilities, a person shall remove or abate the person's facilities by the deadline provided in the city manager's request. The person and the city shall cooperate to the extent possible to assure continuity of service. If the person, after notice, fails or refuses to act, the city may remove or abate the facility, at the sole cost and expense of the person, without paying compensation to the person and without the city incurring liability for damages. 
(11)  Except in the case of customer service interruptions and imminent harm to property or person (emergency conditions), a person may not excavate the pavement of a street or public rights-of-way without first complying with city requirements. The city manager or designee shall be notified immediately regarding work performed under such emergency conditions, and the person shall comply with the requirements of city standards for the restoration of the public rights-of-way. 
(12)  Within sixty (60) days of completion of each new permitted section of a person's facilities, the person shall supply the city with a complete set of "as built" drawings for the segment in a format used in the ordinary course of the persons business and as reasonably prescribed by the city, and as allowed by law. 
(13)  The city may require reasonable bonding requirements of a person, as are required of other entities that place facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1999-13, § 6, 10-25-99) 
Sec. 70-77. - Conditions of public rights-of-way occupancy. 
(a)  In the exercise of governmental functions, the city has first priority over all other uses of the public rights-of-way. The city reserves the right to lay sewer, gas, water, and other pipe lines or cables and conduits, and to do underground and overhead work, and attachments, restructuring or changes in aerial facilities in, across, along, over or under a public street, alley or public rights-of-way occupied by a person, and to change the curb, sidewalks or the grade of streets. 
(b)  The city shall assign the location in or over the public rights-of-way among competing users of the public rights-of-way with due consideration to the public health and safety considerations of each user type, and to the extent the city can demonstrate that there is limited space available for additional users, may limit new users, as allowed under state or federal law. 
(c)  If the city authorizes abutting landowners to occupy space under the surface of any public street, alley, or public rights-of-way, the grant to an abutting landowner shall be subject to the rights of the previously authorized user of the public rights-of-way. If the city closes or abandons a public rights-of-way that contains a portion of a person's facilities, the city shall close or abandon such public rights-of-way subject to the rights of the person. 
(d)  If the city gives written notice, a person shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of person's facilities that are in the public rights-of-way within 120 days, except in circumstances that require additional time as reasonably determined by the city based upon information provided by the person. For projects expected to take longer than 120 days to remove, change or relocate, the city will confer with person before determining the alterations to be required and the timing thereof. The city shall give notice whenever the city has determined that removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction, operation, repair, maintenance or installation of a city or other governmental public improvement in the public rights-of-way. This section shall not be construed to prevent a person's recovery of the cost of relocation or removal from private third parties who initiate the request for relocation or removal, nor shall it be required if improvements are solely for beautification purposes without prior joint deliberation and agreement with person. 
If the person fails to relocate facilities in the time allowed by the city in this section, the person may be subject to liability to the city for such delay and as set forth in the city codes or ordinance, now or hereafter enacted. 
Notwithstanding anything in this subsection (d), the city manager and a person may agree in writing to different time frames than those provided above if circumstances reasonably warrant such a change. 
(e)  During the term of its municipal consent, a person may trim trees in or over the rights-of-way for the safe and reliable operation, use and maintenance of its facilities. All tree trimming shall be performed in accordance with standards promulgated by the city. Should the person, its contractor or agent, fail to remove such trimmings within 24 hours, the city may remove the trimmings or have them removed, and upon receipt of a bill from the city, the person shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred within 30 working days. 
(f)  Persons shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial facilities to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures, if the city gives written notice of no less than 48 hours. The expense of these temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting and benefiting from the temporary rearrangements. Person may require prepayment or prior posting of a bond from the party requesting temporary move. 
(Ord. No. 1999-13, § 7, 10-25-99) 
Sec. 70-68. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  A person shall obtain and maintain insurance in the amounts reasonably prescribed by the city with an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas acceptable to the city throughout the term of a municipal consent conveyed under this chapter. A person shall furnish the city with proof of insurance at the time of the request for building permits. The city reserves the right to review the insurance requirements and to reasonably adjust insurance coverage and limits when the city manager determines that changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims history of the industry or the person require adjustment of the coverage. For purposes of this section, the city will accept certificates of self-insurance issued by the State of Texas or letters written by the person in those instances where the state does not issue such letters, which provide the same coverage as required herein. However, for the city to accept such letters the person must demonstrate by written information that it has adequate financial resources to be a self-insured entity as reasonably determined by the city, based on financial information requested by and furnished to the city. The city's current insurance requirements are described in Exhibit A attached hereto. 
(b)  Person shall furnish, at no cost to the city, copies of certificates of insurance evidencing the coverage required by this section to the city. The city may request the deletion, revision or modification of particular policy terms, conditions, limitations or exclusions, unless the policy provisions are established by a law or regulation binding the city, the person, or the underwriter. If the city requests a deletion, revision or modification, a person shall exercise reasonable efforts to pay for and to accomplish the change. 
(c)  An insurance certificate shall contain the following required provisions: 
(1)  Name the city of and its officers, employees, board members and elected representatives as additional insureds for all applicable coverage; 
(2)  Provide for 30 days notice to the city for cancellation, non-renewal, or material change; and 
(3)  Provide that notice of claims shall be provided to the city manager by certified mail. 
(d)  Person shall file and maintain proof of insurance with the city manager. An insurance certificate obtained in compliance with this section is subject to city approval. The city may require the certificate to be changed to reflect changing liability limits. A person shall immediately advise the city attorney of actual or potential litigation that may develop may affect an existing carrier's obligation to defend and indemnify. 
(e)  An insurer has no right of recovery against the city. The required insurance policies shall protect the person and the city. The insurance shall be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies. 
(f)  The policy clause "other insurance" shall not apply to the city if the city is an insured under the policy. 
(g)  The person shall pay premiums and assessments. A company, which issues an insurance policy, has no recourse against the city for payment of a premium or assessment. Insurance policies obtained by a person must provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the city in connection with damage covered by the policy. 
(Ord. No. 1999-13, § 8, 10-25-99) 
Sec. 70-69. - Indemnity. 
(a)  Except as to certificated telecommunications utilities, each person placing facilities in the public rights-of-way shall agree to promptly defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from and against all damages, costs, losses or expenses (i) for the repair, replacement, or restoration of city's property, equipment, materials, structures and facilities which are damaged, destroyed or found to be defective as a result of the person's acts or omissions, (ii) from and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action, and judgments for (a) damage to or loss of the property of any person (including, but not limited to the person, its agents, officers, employees and subcontractors, city's agents, officers and employees, and third parties); and/or (b) death, bodily injury, illness, disease, loss of services, or loss of income or wages to any person (including, but not limited to the agents, officers and employees of the person, person's subcontractors and city, and third parties), arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting from the negligent or willful act or omissions of the person, its agents, employees, and/or subcontractors, in the performance of activities pursuant to this article. 
(b)  This indemnity provision shall not apply to any liability resulting from the negligence of the city, its officers, employees, agents, contractors, or subcontractors. 
(c)  The provisions of this indemnity is solely for the benefit of the city and is not intended to create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity. 
(Ord. No. 1999-13, § 9, 10-25-99) 
Chapter 74 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Tax department created, § 22; tax administration, § 83 et seq. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Sales tax levied for the funding of municipal improvements. 
(a)  The city council hereby adopts an additional one-half of one percent sales and use tax to be used for any purpose authorized by Section 413, Article 5190.6, V.T.C.S., as amended (The Development Corporation Act of 1979), including but not limited to projects for the promotion and development of new or expanded business enterprises, including a project to provide public safety facilities, streets and roads, drainage and related improvements, demolition of existing structures, general municipality owned improvements, as well as any improvements or facilities that are related to any of those projects and any other project that promotes or develops new or expanded business enterprises, as well as projects required or suitable for use for professional and amateur (including children's sports, athletic, entertainment, tourist, convention, and public park purposes and events, including stadiums, ball parks, auditoriums, amphitheaters, concert halls, learning centers, parks and park facilities, open space improvements, municipal buildings, museums, exhibition facilities, and related store, restaurant, concession, and automobile parking facilities, related area transportation facilities, and related roads, streets, and water and sewer facilities and other related items that enhance any of those items, including the maintenance and operating costs of any such projects mentioned above, and accordingly, there is hereby levied and there shall be collected within the city (i) a tax on receipts from the sale at retail of taxable items within the city at a rate equal to one-half of one percent, and (ii) an excise tax on the use, storage, or other consumption within the city of tangible personal property purchased, leased or rented from a retailer during the period that the tax is effective within the city, such excise tax to be at the same rate of the sales tax described in clause (i) above, and to be applied to the sale price of the tangible personal property, the imposition, computation, administration, collection, and remittance of the tax to be governed by Chapter 321, V.C.T.A., Tax Code, except as inconsistent with Section 4A of the Act. 
(b)  The city council hereby declares and orders that the effective date for the commencement of collection of the tax adopted and levied by Ord. No. 1998-02 and imposed by Section 413 of the Act is October 1, 1998, said date being the first day of the first calendar quarter after the expiration of the first complete calendar quarter occurring after the date upon which the Comptroller of Public Accounts shall have received a certified copy hereof. 
(c)  The city council hereby abolishes the additional one-half of one percent sales and use tax within the city to be used to reduce the property tax rate. 
(Ord. No. 1998-02, §§ 2, 3, 2-9-98) 
Sec. 74-2. - [Tangible personal property in trasit; tax.] 
    The goods-in-transit, as defined by the V.T.C.A. Tax Code, § 11.253(a)(2), as amended by House Bill 621, enacted by the 80th Texas legislature in regular session, shall remain subject to taxation by the City of Wharton, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2007-27, § I, 10-22-07) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2007-27, § I, adopted October 22, 2007, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 74-2 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 74-3-74-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAXES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-51. - Methods of appraisal. 
    The appraisal methods and procedures as set forth in V.T.C.A., Tax Code chapter 23 are hereby adopted. 
(Code 1978, § 17.5-21) 
Sec. 74-52. - Property taxed. 
    All of that property described in the state constitution, article VIII, section 1-j, shall be fully taxable in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1989-32, § 1, 12-11-89; Ord. No. 1990-05, § 1, 3-27-90) 
Sec. 74-53. - Additional penalty for collection costs on delinquent taxes. 
(a)  The city council hereby adopts the provisions of V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 33.07 so that an additional penalty for collection costs of 15 percent of the amount of taxes, penalty and interest due at the time the taxes, penalty and interest are paid shall be charged. 
(b)  This additional penalty will be added to only those taxes that remain delinquent on July 1 of the year in which they become delinquent. 
(Code 1978, § 17.5-22) 
Secs. 74-54-74-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENCE HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION 

Sec. 74-76. - Granted; amount. 
    Upon compliance with this article and all other applicable laws and ordinances, $10,000.00 of the assessed value of residence homesteads of persons 60 years of age or older shall be exempt from ad valorem taxes levied by the city based on 100 percent of assessed value. 
(Code 1978, § 17.5-31) 
Sec. 74-77. - Eligibility date. 
    Eligibility for the exemption provided for in section 74-76 shall be determined each year as of January 1 of such year. 
(Code 1978, § 17.5-32) 
Sec. 74-78. - Application. 
    The exemption provided for in section 74-76 shall not be allowed unless the person claiming such exemption shall file with the city tax assessor-collector, between January 1 and April 1 of the year for which such exemption is claimed, documentary proof of age satisfactory to the tax assessor-collector and a sworn claim for such exemption, describing the property for which exemption is sought, on forms prescribed by the tax assessor-collector, giving complete information as provided for by such forms. Late applications may not be accepted except by specific authority of the city council, but no later, in any event, than ten days prior to time for submission of assessment rolls to the board of equalization. After the filing of such proof of age and claim for exemption, the tax assessor-collector may, if he deems it necessary, request further information in order to determine eligibility for such exemption, which information shall be provided by the applicant as a prerequisite to obtaining such exemption. Such application for exemption shall be made annually for each year that such exemption is sought. 
(Code 1978, § 17.5-33) 
Sec. 74-79. - Determination of tax assessor-collector. 
    After the application as provided in section 74-78, all necessary proof and any other necessary information has been filed, the tax assessor-collector shall determine eligibility for such exemption. The determination of the tax assessor-collector shall be final and the property in question shall be placed on the tax rolls of the city in accordance with such determination. However, if the tax assessor-collector shall deny such application for exemption, notice shall be given to the applicant within ten days of such determination and in any event no later than the submission of all assessment lists to the board of equalization. However, there shall be no appeal of the tax assessor-collector's determination. 
(Code 1978, § 17.5-34) 
Sec. 74-80. - Limitations. 
    The exemptions authorized in this division shall extend only to a residential homestead as such may be defined by the laws of the state. Such exemptions shall be allowed only if the property in question is in fact the residential homestead of the applicant and such person has attained the age of 60 years on January 1 of the taxable year in question. The exemption shall be granted if one spouse had attained the age of 60 years on such applicable date even though the other has not attained such age. 
(Code 1978, § 17.5-35) 
Sec. 74-81. - Determinative date for exemption. 
    January 1 of each tax year shall be the determinative date for eligibility for the exemption authorized in this division, and qualification therefor shall be determined each year as of that date. Determination of eligibility for such exemption shall be for only the year in question, with application and determination of eligibility as provided in this division required for each subsequent year. There shall be no proration of the exemption provided for in this division for any taxable year either for qualification or disqualification of either any applicable person or property for such exemption after January 1 of the applicable year. 
(Code 1978, § 17.5-36) 
Sec. 74-82. - Residence homestead tax freeze for elderly or disabled individuals. 
(a)  Effective with tax year 2004, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on the residence homestead of a person who is disabled or is 65 years of age or older shall not be increased while it remains the residence homestead of that person or that person's spouse who is disabled or 65 years of age or older. 
(b)  If the person who is disabled or is 65 years of age or older dies in a year in which the person received a residence homestead exemption, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on the residence homestead shall not be increased while it remains the residence homestead of that person's surviving spouse if the spouse is 55 years of age or older at the time of the person's death. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b), taxes on the residence homestead may be increased to the extent the value of the homestead is increased by improvements other than repairs and other than improvements made to comply with governmental requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2004-09, § 1, 3-8-04) 
Editor's note- The provisions of Ord. No. 2004-09, adopted March 8, 2004, superseded the provisions of uncodified Ord. No. 2004-08, adopted Feb. 23, 2004, which pertained to similar subject matter. 
Sec. 74-83. - Residence homestead tax exemption for disabled individuals. 
    Upon compliance with this article and other applicable laws and ordinances, $10,000.00 of the assessed value of resident homesteads of persons disabled shall be exempt from ad valorem taxes levied by the City of Wharton based on 100 percent of the assessed value. 
(Ord. No. 2004-09, § 2, 3-8-04) 
Note- See editor's note to section 74-82. 
Secs. 74-84-74-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Hotel occupancy tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq. 

Sec. 74-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consideration means the cost of the room, sleeping space, bed or dormitory space or other facilities in a hotel and does not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant not related to cleaning and readying such room or space for occupancy and does not include any tax assessed for occupancy thereof by any other government agency. 
    Hotel means a building in which members of the public obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term includes a hotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodginghouse, inn or roominghouse, but does not include a hospital, sanitarium or nursing home. 
    Institution of higher education means any public technical institute, public junior college, public senior college or university, medical or dental unit or other agency of higher education as defined in V.T.C.A., Education Code § 61.003. 
    Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to use or possession of any room, space or sleeping facility in a hotel for any purpose. 
    Occupant means anyone who for a consideration uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room or sleeping space or facility in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement. 
    Permanent resident means any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or sleeping space or facility in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year. 
    Person means any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel in the city. 
    Quarterly period means the regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March; the second quarter being the months of April, May and June; the third quarter being the months of July, August and September; and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. 
(Code 1978, § 17.5-41) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-102. - Levy of tax; rate; exceptions. 
(a)  There is hereby levied a tax upon the occupant of any room, ordinarily used for sleeping, furnished by any hotel in the city where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room, space or facility to such hotel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by any other governmental agency. 
(b)  No tax shall be imposed under this article upon a permanent resident. 
(c)  This article does not impose a tax on the United States, this state or an agency, institution, board or commission of this state, other than an institution of higher education. 
(d)  This article does not impose a tax on an officer or employee of a governmental entity described by subsection (d) of this section when traveling on or otherwise engaged in the course of official duties for the governmental entity. 
(e)  All revenue derived from the occupancy tax imposed in subsection (a) of this section shall be placed in a special revenue fund of the city and shall be used for the purposes authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.101 et seq., as the city council may from time to time direct or provide. 
(Code 1978, § 17.5-42;Ord. No. 2005-9, 9-12-05) 
Sec. 74-103. - Collection. 
    Every person owning, operating, managing, or controlling any hotel in the city shall collect the tax imposed in section 74-102 for the city. 
(Code 1978, § 17.5-43) 
Sec. 74-104. - Reports. 
    On or before the last day of the month immediately following each quarterly period, every person required by section 74-103 to collect the tax imposed in this article shall file a report with the director of finance showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies and any other information as the director of finance may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the amount of tax collected from occupants during the period of the report at the time of filing the report. 
(Code 1978, § 17.5-44) 
Sec. 74-105. - Rules and regulations. 
    The director of finance shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied in this article, and shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under this article. 
(Code 1978, § 17.5-45) 
Sec. 74-106. - Penalties. 
    If any person shall fail to collect the tax imposed in this article or shall fail to file a report as required in this article or shall fail to pay to the director of finance the tax as imposed in this article when such report for payment is due or shall file a false report, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine as set out in section 1-5. In addition, such person who fails to remit the tax imposed by this article within the time required shall forfeit five percent of the amount due as a penalty, and after the first 30 days of delinquency shall forfeit an additional five percent of such tax; provided, however, that the penalty shall never be less than $5.00. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of six percent per annum, beginning 60 days from the date due, on the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1978, § 17.5-46) 
Sec. 74-107. - Extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
    This chapter, herein written in its entirety, shall apply to all territory within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Wharton, as the same may exist from time to time, and the same shall be and is hereby jurisdiction of the City of Wharton. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09, 8-25-08) 
Secs. 74-108-74-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES TAX 

Sec. 74-136. - Authorization of tax; rates. 
(a)  Tax authorized; consummation of services. The city council authorizes a tax on all telecommunication services sold within the city. For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. 
(b)  Repeal of application of exemption. The city repeals the application of the exemption provided for in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210(a), as authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210(b). 
(c)  Rate of tax. The rate of tax imposed by this article shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes, as authorized by the legislature of the state. 
(Code 1978, § 17.5-51) 
Sec. 74-137. - Article cumulative. 
    This article shall be and is declared to be cumulative of all other ordinances of the city, and this article shall not operate to repeal or affect any of such other ordinances. It is the express intent of this article that all such obligations, impositions and agreements of every kind and nature shall remain in full force and effect without reduction or limitation by this article. 
(Code 1978, § 17.5-52) 
Sec. 74-138. - Construction of article. 
    This article shall be liberally construed to achieve its remedial purposes. 
(Code 1978, § 17.5-53) 
Chapter 78 - TAXICABS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-19, adopted July 23, 2013, amended ch. 78 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 78, §§ 78-1-78-87, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1978, §§ 18-1-18-9, §§ 18-20-18-29, and §§ 18-40-18-46. 
Cross reference- Aircraft and airports, ch. 6. 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of vehicles for hire, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.073. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any individual, firm or corporation in the process of attaining either a license to operate or a city taxi driver permit. 
    Driver means an individual who drives or operates a taxicab. 
    Holder means a person who is granted an annual operating permit to operate a taxicab service under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Manifest means a daily record prepared by a taxicab driver of all trips made by the driver, showing time and place of origin, destination, number of passengers and the amount of fare of each trip. 
    Operating permit means the permission granted by the city to operate a taxicab service inside the city for a period of one year, renewable under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Rate card means a card for display in each taxicab which contains the rates of fare in force. 
    Taxicab means any vehicle carrying passengers for hire, except buses operated by bus lines over a designated route in or through the city. Privately owned school buses for transporting school children to and from school are included within this definition. 
    Taxicab business means the use of one or more taxicabs within the city by the owner thereof, for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire, either by driving the taxicab himself or having the taxicab driven by some other person, and does not include limousine services. This definition shall not apply to any licensed chauffeur hired as a driver by any person holding a permit to conduct a taxicab business in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-2. - Vehicle ownership. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person conducting a taxicab business to use or operate or cause to be used or operated, as a taxicab, any vehicle not owned by him. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 78-3. - Designation of taxi. 
(a)  Each taxicab shall have painted in fast colors, contrasting with the color of the vehicle, on both sides the trade name of the organization under whose operating permit such taxicab is being operated, the taxicab unit number and the business telephone number of the holder of the operating permit. 
(1)  Such letters and numbers shall be not less than three inches high with one-half inch stroke, painted on each taxicab so that the same will be readily apparent. 
(b)  No design shall be approved that, in the opinion of the city, conflicts with or imitates that of any vehicle already operating under an operating permit granted under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 78-4. - Vehicle inspection. 
(a)  Before being allowed to operate upon the streets of the city, each taxicab shall be inspected and approved annually by the chief of police or his representative. 
(b)  No taxicab shall be driven or operated upon the streets of the city unless the same is in safe condition and free from mechanical defects, and it must further meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Have a current valid state inspection sticker and be in compliance with the safety requirements of the Texas Motor Vehicle Code as amended; and 
(2)  Have a seat belt for each passenger; and 
(3)  Have an operating heater and air conditioner; and 
(4)  Have a fire extinguisher that is in good operating order; and 
(5)  Have a taxi-top light. 
(c)  The vehicle identification number and license number of each taxicab must match the numbers listed for that taxicab on the permit application. 
(d)  Insignia of taxicab must be the same as that indicated on the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 78-5. - Taximeter required. 
(a)  A person may not drive or allow another person to drive a taxicab unless the taxicab is equipped with an operational taximeter that displays an accuracy seal, certifying its accuracy in accordance with procedures determined by the chief of police. 
(b)  For purposes of determining a fare for taxicab service, a person may not use a device other than a taximeter for measuring distance or time. 
(c)  Except as provided by section 78-6, a person may not drive or allow another person to drive a taxicab unless an accurate taximeter is used to determine the fare to be charged. 
(d)  When using a taximeter to compute a fare, a driver shall place the taximeter in the revenue-earning position when a passenger enters a taxicab, or at the pre-arranged time, if any, after the customer is informed of the taxicab's presence. 
(e)  When using a taximeter to compute a fare, a driver shall call the attention of passengers to the amount registered on the taximeter before resetting the taximeter. The taximeter may not be reset to the "vacant" position until after the fare is paid. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 78-6. - Rates of fare; rate card required. 
(a)  This section establishes maximum fares that the owner or operator of a taxicab can charge. 
(b)  For four or fewer passengers, the owner or operator of a taxicab may charge a pickup fee of not to exceed $5.00. For five or more passengers, the owner or operator of a taxicab may charge $1.00 for each additional passenger. 
(c)  For trips wholly within the City of Wharton, the fare shall be a maximum of $2.00 per mile, regardless of the number of passengers. The taximeter shall be calibrated to charge no more than $0.50 per one-fourth of a mile. 
(d)  For trips that originate in the City of Wharton, but terminating outside the City of Wharton, the fare shall be a maximum of $2.00 per mile, regardless of the number of passengers. The taximeter shall be calibrated to charge no more than $0.50 per quarter mile. 
(e)  A taximeter is not necessary to determine the maximum fare for a trip under a contract with a governmental agency, a nonprofit organization, or as otherwise reasonably necessary to provide a public service. 
(f)  The maximum fare for wait time will be $15.00 for each hour the driver must wait for a passenger. The taximeter shall be calibrated to charge a maximum of $0.25 per minute of wait time. 
(g)  A cab driver may charge a cleaning fee if a passenger soils a taxicab to the extent that the taxicab must be pulled from service for cleaning. The cleaning fee shall not exceed $250.00. 
(h)  Every taxicab operated under this article shall have a rate card setting forth the rates of fare established by this section displayed in a place in view of all passengers. The rate card shall instruct customers to call the Wharton Police Department at (979) 532-3131, or any successor non-emergency telephone number if they have questions or concerns about the rates. 
(i)  In January of each year, the chief of police shall review the rates of fare to determine whether the fares need to be reconsidered. The chief of police shall base such the determination on the Consumer Price Index, the costs of gasoline, and other reasonable costs of operating a taxicab service. The chief of police shall report his findings each year to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 78-7. - Solicitation of business. 
    It shall be unlawful for any driver of any taxicab or for any other person acting for the driver to seek or solicit patrons or passengers for any such taxicab by word or sign while driving any such taxicab over, through, or on any public street or public place of the city. Drivers may solicit business when the taxicab is legally parked. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 78-8. - Parking on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for the holder of any permit to conduct a taxicab business or for the agent, servant or employee of such permittee to park or leave standing any taxicab on the streets of the city, except while loading and unloading passengers into and from such taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 78-9. - Unlawful acts. 
    A driver may not knowingly permit an unlawful act to be conducted in the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Secs. 78-10-78-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 

Sec. 78-41. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a taxicab business in the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 78-42 - Driver's conduct. 
(a)  While on duty, a driver shall: 
(1)  Act in a professional and courteous manner; and 
(2)  Maintain a well-groomed appearance. 
(b)  While on duty, a driver may not: 
(1)  Consume an alcoholic beverage, controlled substance, or other substance that could adversely affect the driver's ability to drive a motor vehicle, and may not drive a vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage, controlled substance, or other substance that could adversely affect the driver's ability to drive a motor vehicle; 
(2)  Sell or otherwise provide an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance to a passenger in a ground transportation service vehicle; 
(3)  Monitor the communication frequency of a ground transportation service other than the driver's own frequency or respond to a service call assigned to another driver; or 
(4)  Possess communication equipment, including scanners, capable of receiving the frequency of a service other than the driver's own. 
(c)  If a person is convicted of an offense prescribed in subsection (b)(2) section, the conviction results in the automatic revocation, without further notice, of all chauffeur's permits held by the person. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 78-43. - Application-Filing; contents; adding vehicles; keeping information current. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit to conduct a taxicab business shall file an application therefore with the city secretary. 
(b)  The application shall state the following: 
(1)  The name and address of such business and of the applicant; 
(2)  Whether the applicant is an individual, firm or corporation and if a firm the name and address of each member thereof and if a corporation the name and address of each officer thereof; and 
(3)  The number of vehicles proposed to be operated under such permit. 
(c)  The names of all drivers employed by the applicant or holder of a permit to conduct a taxicab business shall be filed with the city secretary by the permit holder. 
(d)  Each applicant shall file with the city secretary a written statement, under oath and signed by the applicant, showing the make, model, motor number and state license number of each taxicab to be operated by him. 
(e)  The information required in this section shall be kept current during the life of the permit. 
(f)  If at any time the holder of a permit shall desire to use vehicles under the permit in addition to those listed in the statement required by this section, he may do so only after he has made application to the city council for a permit to operate such additional vehicles and has had his application for such a permit granted. The permit holder shall furnish to the city secretary the same information regarding such additional vehicles as is required in this section regarding those covered by the original permit and shall pay to the city secretary the fee as provided for in section 78-47. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 78-44. - Same-Action by council. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city secretary, when an application for a permit under this article is filed with him, at the next regular meeting of the city council following the filing of such application, to call the attention of the council thereto. 
(b)  Upon consideration of such application, the city council may grant or refuse such permit, as in its discretion may seem to be to the best interest of the citizenship of the city and the public in general. 
(c)  The method of issuing such permits shall be determined by the public convenience and necessity for a taxicab. If the city council finds that the public convenience and necessity require the operation of a greater or lesser number of vehicles than that for which the permit is sought and that the applicant or owner is fit to conduct the business and that the other requirements of this article have been complied with, it shall notify the applicant of its findings. The council shall refuse to issue a permit to the applicant if it finds that the convenience or necessity does not require additional taxicabs or if it finds the applicant unfit to conduct a taxicab business. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 78-45. - Insurance. 
(a)  The holder of a permit to conduct a taxicab business in the city shall at all times during the life of such permit keep each vehicle operated by him under his permit insured in a company authorized to do business in the state, by policies of liability and property damage insurance in the amounts of $100,000.00 for bodily injury to any one person; in the amount of $300,000.00 for injuries to more than one person which are sustained in the same accident; and $100,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident. The policy shall list the City of Wharton as an additional insured. 
(b)  Such policies or certificates of insurance shall be approved by the city attorney and filed and left with the city secretary. The policies of insurance shall not be canceled or surrendered, except upon written notice to the city secretary. Each policy must contain a "cancellation provision or coverage change" endorsement that provides 30 days' notice to the city before the policy is canceled or materially changed to reduce or restrict the coverage. The notice must be mailed to the city secretary. 
(c)  Failure of any permittee to procure and file the policies of insurance as required by this section shall immediately forfeit and make null and void such permit, and all rights thereunder shall at once cease. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 78-46. - Limitation on number issued. 
    The number of permits which will be issued under this article shall be based upon the population of the metropolitan area of the city, being determined on the ratio of one taxicab to each 1,000 inhabitants, based upon the estimate of the last current city directory. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 78-47. - Fees; term. 
    No operating permit required under this section shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder thereof has paid an annual license fee of $200.00 and a $50.00 fee each year for each vehicle operated under an operating permit. The fees shall be paid to the city to compensate the city for is superintendence of the taxicab business operated under this section and for the use of the city streets, alleys and public ways. If such permit is granted for less than a full year, the permittee shall pay to the city an amount prorated according to the number of months for which the permit is issued for a 12-month period ending December 31. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
State Law reference- Gross receipts charge on taxicabs authorized, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6698. 
Sec. 78-48. - Issuance; contents. 
    Every permit to conduct a taxicab business in the city shall be issued and signed by the city secretary and sealed with the seal of his office. Such a permit shall: 
(1)  Be dated on the day of its issuance; 
(2)  Bear a serial number; 
(3)  Show the name and address of the permittee; 
(4)  State that the permittee has been authorized by the city council to conduct a taxicab business in the city until the expiration of December 31 next following the date of issuance; 
(5)  State that the permit is subject to cancellation at any time by the city council; 
(6)  Existing taxicab permits or applications for a taxicab permit at the time of the effective date of this article shall be brought to compliance within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 78-49. - Nonassignability. 
    No permit issued under this article shall be assignable. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 78-50. - Revocation. 
    Any permit issued under this article may be revoked by the city council at any time it appears to the council the permittee has violated this chapter or failed to comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Secs. 78-51-78-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRIVERS' LICENSES 

Sec. 78-81. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab within the city without first procuring a chauffeur's permit from the city council. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person holding a permit to conduct a taxicab business in the city to permit any person who has not first obtained a taxicab chauffeur's permit to drive any taxicab owned by him. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 78-82. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring a taxicab chauffeur's permit shall make application therefore to the city council upon blanks to be furnished by the city secretary, giving the following: 
(1)  Name, age, present address, date of birth; 
(2)  Address and place of employment during the past two years, with the reasons for leaving; 
(3)  Applicant's residence address and telephone number and states of residence during the three years preceding the date of the application; 
(4)  Applicant's Texas driver's license number and expiration date; 
(5)  The applicant must attach to the application a copy of the applicant's complete criminal history and driving record, issued and certified by the Texas Department of Public Safety or other relevant governmental entity as determined by the department. The criminal history and driving record must be issued and certified not earlier than the 30th day before the date the applicant submits an application for a chauffeur's permit; 
(6)  An applicant who has been a resident of Texas for less than three years preceding the date the application is submitted must also submit a criminal history and driving record certified by the appropriate governmental authority in the former state of residence. The criminal history and driving record from the appropriate governmental authority in the former state of residence must be issued and certified not earlier than the 30th day before the date the applicant submits an application for a chauffeur's permit. 
(b)  Such applicant shall likewise attach to his application affidavits from two reputable citizens attesting to the good character of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 78-83. - Fingerprints and photograph. 
    No taxicab chauffeur's permit shall be issued to any applicant until the police department has taken fingerprints and a photograph of such applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 78-84. - Fee. 
    The fee for a permit issued under this article shall be an annual fee of $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 78-85. - Issuance; term; transfer. 
(a)  After the application for a taxicab chauffeur's permit has been approved by the city council, it shall be the duty of the city secretary to issue a taxicab chauffeur's permit to such applicant, which permit shall run for a period of one calendar year. 
(b)  The permit, when issued, shall not be transferable. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of a permit to use the same permit if he changes employment from one operator or owner of taxicabs to another. 
(d)  To renew a chauffeur's permit, a permittee must submit a written application not earlier than the 30th day before the expiration date of the permit and not later than the expiration date of the permit, accompanied by the renewal fee. Renewal application is made on a form prescribed by the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 78-86. - Display. 
    The driver of a taxicab shall have his chauffeur's permit, together with his photograph of a size prescribed by the chief of police, affixed and displayed in the driving compartment of the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 78-87. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Any permit issued under this article may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police upon the violation of this chapter or if the permittee is an habitual traffic violator and receives as many as three traffic violation tickets in a 12-month period. 
(b)  Any person whose permit is so suspended or revoked by the chief of police may appeal to the city council, and the council may either reverse or affirm the action of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, 7-23-13) 
Chapter 82 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-03, adopted April 12, 2010, amended and restated former Ch. 82, Arts., I-V, in its entirety. Former Ch. 82 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table near the end of this volume for a listing of ordinances which have amended former Ch. 82. 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Powers as to streets, alleys, etc., and obstructions thereon, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175(3), (5); powers in Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 12, 26, 27, 31, 43A, 49, 65, 76, 87, 91, 94-96, 165, 169, 170; franchise for railway crossing, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d-6; movement of heavy and oversize equipment, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d-11, § 2(d); movement of oversize or overweight oil well servicing and drilling machinery, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d-16, § 2; removal of unauthorized vehicle from parking facilities or public highways, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701g-2; traffic safety program, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701j-1, § 5(b); regulation of vehicles for hire, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.073; regulation of parking, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 431.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Adoption of Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways. 
    All provisions of the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d), as now in effect in the state, including all amendments to such statute, are hereby adopted as a part of this chapter, and such statute is supplemented by the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-2. - Enforcement-Fines for parking violations. 
    Any person who shall violate any parking provision shall be fined not more than $30.00 for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-3. - Same-Payment of traffic fines at police department. 
(a)  Any person who has received any notice to appear in answer to a traffic charge under this chapter may, within the time specified in the notice, appear at the municipal court and answer the charge set forth in such notice by paying a fine in accord with the schedule of fines prescribed by motion or resolution of the city council, thereby pleading guilty to the charge. 
(b)  A person who has been guilty of three or more traffic violations within the preceding 12 months shall not be permitted to pay a fine at the police department, and he must make a statutory bail for appearance in court. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-4. - Same-Disregarding notice of violation. 
    Any driver of a motor vehicle who unlawfully neglects to answer to the charges set forth in a written notice affixed to such motor vehicle by a police officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge for which such notice was originally given. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-5. - Same-Penalty generally. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court, be fined as provided in section 1-5. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-6. - Same-Impoundment of illegally parked vehicles. 
    Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter at a place where parking is prohibited or parking time is limited may be removed and impounded by the police department and wrecker charges shall be assessed against and collected from the owner or driver of the vehicle before the release of such vehicle. The payment of the wrecker fee shall not excuse such owner or driver of the vehicle from the charge of violating the traffic ordinances prohibiting or limiting such parking. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-7. - Enforcement on school property-Applicability. 
    All traffic laws and ordinances of the city are hereby made and declared to be applied and made applicable to all of the property of the Wharton Independent School District which lies within the corporate limits of the city. All references in this chapter to the property of the Wharton Independent School District shall be construed to mean only that property which lies within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-8. - Same-Right and authority. 
    The right and authority of all police and law enforcement agents and officers of the city to enter into and upon all property owned by the Wharton Independent School District, blanket authority and permission having been had and obtained from the board of trustees of the Wharton Independent School District consenting to this, and all of the parts and provisions of sections 82-5 and 82-7 for the purpose of enforcing any of the ordinances of the city, as well as all of the traffic and parking rules, requirements, regulations and limitations of record in the minutes of the board of trustees of the Wharton Independent School District, so long as such rules, regulations, requirements and limitations are clearly designated by signs and markers, erected or painted by the Wharton Independent School District and at the expense of the Wharton Independent School District, exclusively, is hereby granted, authorized and established. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-9. - Enactments of council. 
    The city council is hereby empowered, by ordinance or resolution, to make and enforce regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this chapter and to make and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergency or special conditions. All such valid and subsisting regulations, not in conflict with this chapter, are hereby continued in full force and effect until amended or repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-10. - Duty of police department to enforce chapter; authority of police officers and firefighters to direct traffic. 
    It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Officers of the police department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic, either in person or by means of visible and/or audible signals in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. If a fire or other emergency occurs or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department or fire department may direct traffic, as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-11. - Accident reports. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or property damage to an apparent extent of $25.00 or more shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, either verbal or written, give notice of such accident to the police department if such accident occurs within this city. 
(b)  The police department may require any driver of a vehicle involved in an accident on which a report must be made as provided in this section to make a supplemental oral or written report, whenever the original report is found to be insufficient or inadequate, and may require witnesses of accidents to render reports to the department. 
(c)  Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making a required accident report and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making the report, such occupant shall make or cause to be made such report. 
(d)  Every law enforcement officer, other than members of the city police department and state department of public safety, who, in the regular course of duty, investigates a motor vehicle accident of which a report must be made as required in this section, either at the time of and at the scene of the accident or thereafter, by interviewing participants or witnesses, shall, within 24 hours after completing such investigation, forward a report of such accident to the police department. Every such accident report shall be made on the appropriate form provided by the police department (standard accident form used by the state) and shall contain all of the information required therein unless not available. Such reports shall be without prejudice to the officer so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-12. - Removal of vehicle from scene of accident. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the driver or any other person to remove any vehicle involved in an accident, for which a report is required, from the scene of the accident until authorized to do so by a police officer. This section shall not apply if there exists or arises a duty on the part of such driver or other person in control of such vehicle to use the vehicle in carrying any person injured in the accident to a physician or surgeon for medical or surgical treatment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the driver or any person in charge of any vehicle equipped with a crane, hoist, winch or towing device who has answered a call to or is attending the scene of any collision or accident of one or more vehicles on any street in this city to remove or attempt to remove any vehicle involved in such collision or accident or in any way interfere with or change the position of any vehicle, except upon authority or direction and in the presence of a police officer, unless such change is made or attempted for the purpose of releasing a person imprisoned within or under such vehicle involved in such collision or an accident. It shall likewise be unlawful for the driver or person in charge of any such vehicle equipped with a crane, winch, hoist or towing device to remove any vehicle from the scene of an accident or collision without the consent of the owner of the vehicle so removed, unless directed by a police officer to remove such vehicle as a public safety measure or for the protection of private property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-13. - Garage records of damaged vehicles. 
    The person in charge of any garage or repair shop shall keep a record of all damaged vehicles which show evidence of having been involved in an accident or wreck or struck by bullets. This record shall be available for police inspection and shall show the name of the driver or person in charge of the vehicle, the license number, model and type of the vehicle, description of the damage to the vehicle and the date brought in for repairs. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-14. - Railroads-Duty to keep crossings in repair. 
    Every railroad company operating a railroad in or through any part of the city shall keep that portion of its roadbed and right-of-way over which any street or public road crosses in the city in proper condition for the use of the traveling public. If any company fails to comply with this section for 30 days after written notice to do so is given by the city, such company shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-15. - Same-Obstructing streets. 
    No railroad company shall obstruct any street, alley, crossing or other thoroughfare of the city by leaving thereon any car, engine or rolling stock for a longer period than five minutes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Secs. 82-16-82-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 82-51. - Permit to use vehicles for advertising purposes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon any street within the city for the primary purpose of displaying advertising, either by signs, posters or any type of loudspeaker, without first securing a permit from the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-52. - Use of skates, coasters and toy vehicles in roadway. 
    No person upon roller skates or a skateboard or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk; and when so crossing, such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subjected to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street set aside as a play street as authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-53. - Speed limits-Specific streets and highways. 
    Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation made as authorized by the provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 169, the following prima facie limits indicated for vehicles are hereby determined and declared to be reasonable and safe, and such speed limits are hereby fixed at the rate of speed indicated for vehicles traveling upon the named streets and highways or parts thereof described as follows: 
U.S. 59-Loop 183 (Richmond Road). 
(1)  From a point at the north city limit to a point 2,260 feet south, a distance of approximately 0.428 of a mile, 45 miles per hour. 
(2)  From a point 2,260 feet south of the north city limit to a point 1,874 feet south, a distance of approximately 0.355 of a mile, 40 miles per hour. 
(3)  From a point 4,134 feet south of the north city limit to a point 3,432 feet south, a distance of approximately 0.650 of a mile, 35 miles per hour. 
(4)  From a point at the south city limit to a point 127 feet north, a distance of approximately 0.024 of a mile, 40 miles per hour. 
(5)  From a point 127 feet north of the south city limit to a point 4,182 feet north, a distance of approximately 0.792 of a mile, 30 miles per hour. 
State Highway 60 (Milam Street). 
(1)  From a point at the east city limit to a point 1,605 feet west, a distance of approximately 0.304 mile, 45 miles per hour. 
(2)  From a point 1,605 feet west of the east city limit to a point 5,121 feet west, a distance of approximately 0.970 mile, 30 miles per hour. 
FM 102 (Ogden Street). 
(1)  From a point at the intersection of U.S. 59 Business, Richmond Road, to a point 1,299 feet East, a distance of approximately .246 of a mile, to be 30 miles per hour; 
(2)  From a point 1,299 feet east of the intersection of U.S. 59 Business, Richmond Road, to a point 3,696 feet east, a distance of approximately .700 of a mile, to be 40 miles per hour; 
(3)  From a point 4,995 feet east of the intersection of U.S. 59 Business, Richmond Road, to a point 2,304 feet east, a distance of approximately .438 of a mile, to be 50 miles per hour; 
(4)  From a point 7,299 feet east of the intersection of U.S. 59 Business, Richmond Road, to a point 2,650 feet east, a distance of approximately .502 of a mile, at the east city limit, to be 55 miles per hour; 
FM 1299 (Alabama Road). 
(1)  From a point at its intersection with State Highway 60 (Milam Street) to a point 2,540 feet south, a distance of approximately 0.481 mile, 40 miles per hour. 
(2)  From a point at the south city limit to a point 174 feet north, a distance of approximately 0.033 mile, 50 miles per hour. 
FM 1301. 
(1)  From a point at the intersection of U.S. 59 Business, Richmond Road, to a point 1,299 feet east, a distance of approximately .246 of a mile, to be 30 miles per hour; 
(2)  From a point 1,299 feet east of the intersection of U.S. 59 Business, Richmond Road, to a point 3,696 feet east, a distance of approximately .700 of a mile, to be 40 miles per hour; 
(3)  From a point 4,995 feet east of the intersection of U.S. 59 Business, Richmond Road, to a point 2,304 feet east, a distance of approximately .438 of a mile, to be 50 miles per hour; 
(4)  From a point 7,299 feet east of the intersection of U.S. 59 Business, Richmond Road, to a point 2,650 feet east, a distance of approximately .502 of a mile, at the east city limit, to be 55 miles per hour; 
Old Caney Road. From a point at its intersection with Old Lane City Road, in a northeasterly direction, to the city limits, 35 miles per hour. 
Old Lane City Road. From a point at its intersection with State Highway 60, in an easterly direction to the city limits, 35 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-54. - Same-School zones. 
    No person shall operate a vehicle at a speed greater than 20 miles per hour when passing through any properly marked school zone in the city. The school zone speed limit shall be operative between the hours of 7:15 a.m. and 8:15 a.m. and between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. during school days. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-55. - School crossings. 
(a)  Designation. The following areas are designated as school crossings, and crosswalks shall be delineated in these areas: 
Abell Street, 46 feet north of Avenue C. 
Alabama Road, at its intersection at Sunny Lane. 
Alabama Road, at the juncture of the 1700 and 1800 blocks. 
Alabama Street, at its intersection with Abell Street. 
Martin Luther King Boulevard, immediately west of its intersection with Allen Street. 
Martin Luther King Boulevard, approximately 35 feet east of Sanders Street. 
Mattie Street, at its intersection with Hendon Street. 
Milam Street, for 50 feet on either side of its intersection with East Avenue. 
North Abel, between Wharton High School parking lot and the field house beginning at a distance of more or less 240 feet from the intersection of Ahldag Street and North Abell. 
North Fulton, at its south side intersection of Kelly Street. 
North Rusk, at its south side intersection of Kelly Street. 
Tiger Avenue, at its 100 block adjacent to Wharton County Junior College. 
(b)  Boundaries of crosswalks. The city shall use white markings on pavements to designate the boundaries of the crosswalks. These markings may be in lieu of or in addition to other traffic signs and signals. 
(c)  Right-of-way. Pedestrians may proceed across the roadways described in subsection (a) of this section within the boundaries of the crosswalks, and drivers of all vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrians crossing in any such areas. 
(d)  Penalty. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person found guilty of intentionally, knowingly or recklessly violating any provision of this article and upon conviction thereof in the municipal court shall be fined in accordance with the terms of section 1-5 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Wharton, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10; Ord. No. 2010-19, 12-13-10) 
Sec. 82-56. - School zones. 
(a)  Designated. The following areas are designated as school zones: 
Abell Street, from its intersection with Alabama Street to its intersection with Center Street. 
Abell Street, from its intersection with Belle Avenue to its intersection with Tiger Avenue. 
Alabama Road, from its intersection with FM 1301 (Old Boling Road) to its intersection with Barfield Road. 
Alabama Road, from its intersection with FM 1301 (Old Boling Road) to its intersection with Sunny Lane. 
Alabama Street, from its intersection with East Avenue to its intersection with Speed Street. 
Belle Avenue, from its intersection with Abell Street to its intersection with Junior College Boulevard. 
Center Street, from its intersection with Abell Street to its intersection with Speed Street. 
Lynn Street, from its intersection with Fulton Street to its intersection with Houston Street. 
Mockingbird Lane, from its intersection with Rusk Street to its intersection with Sunny Lane. 
Old Boling Road, from its intersection with Alabama Road to its intersection with John Knox Street. 
Oriole Lane, from its intersection with Sunny Lane to its intersection with Meadow Lane. 
Pecan Street, from its intersection with Third Street to its intersection with Mockingbird Lane. 
Rusk Street, from its intersection with Mockingbird Lane to its intersection with Santé Fe Street. 
Santa Fe Street, from its intersection with Fulton Street to its intersection with Walnut Street. 
Speed Street, from its intersection with Alabama Street to its intersection with Center Street. 
Sunny Lane, from its intersection with Alabama Road to its intersection with Park Lane. 
Third Street, from its intersection with Rusk Street to its intersection with Pecan Street. 
Tiger Avenue, from its intersection with Alabama Road to its intersection with the 600 Block of Ahldag Street. 
(b)  FM 1301: For a distance of .345 miles beginning 4,158 feet from its intersection with Alabama Road and continuing for a distance of 1,820 feet in an easterly direction. 
(c)  Speed limit. 
(1)  The speed limit in the school zones described in subsection (a) of this section shall be 20 miles per hour from 7:15 a.m. until 8:15 a.m. and from 3:00 p.m. until 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
(2)  The speed limit in the school zones described in subsection (b) of this section shall be 35 miles an hour during times in which the school zone signs are flashing. 
(d)  Signs. 
(1)  The chief of police is authorized to cause signs to be erected designating the areas described in subsection (a) of this section as school zones and designating the speed limit to be followed in these school zones. 
(2)  The Texas Department of Transportation shall cause signs to be erected designating the areas described in subsection (b) of this section as school zones and designating the speed limit to be followed in these school zones. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-57. - No u-turn intersections. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized to cause any street intersection to be designated as an intersection at which no U-turn shall be made, as may be authorized by the city council from time to time. The chief of police is further authorized to cause appropriate signs and markings to be painted on the surface of the street or to cause clearly visible and uniform signs to be erected at such intersection indicating that it has been designated as an intersection at which no U-turn shall be made. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-58. - Truck routes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate any truck rated larger than one-ton load capacity on any street in the city, other than as listed in subsection (b) of this section, except for the purpose of making a pickup or a delivery within the city or for the purpose of going to and from the operator's place of residence in the city or for the purpose of having the truck repaired or serviced within the city. However, any truck rendered for taxation within the city may be operated upon such other streets in the city as are necessary to use for the purpose of direct ingress and egress to and from the truck route streets authorized in subsection (b) of this section in order to gain ingress and egress to and from the place within the city where the truck is usually kept when not in actual operation. 
(b)  The following streets are hereby designated as truck route streets within the city, and it shall not be unlawful to operate a truck rated larger than the one-ton load capacity upon such streets: 
U.S. Highway 59. 
State Highway 60. 
FM 1301. 
FM 102. 
South East Avenue. 
Burleson Street from Richmond Road to Resident Street. 
Resident Street from Burleson Street to Milam Street. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-59. - Improper acceleration. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle upon any public street, roadway or alley or upon any private driveway or parking lot in the city to start such vehicle from a stopped position in such a manner as to cause one or more of its tires to slip, skid or squeal in a loud manner calculated to disturb the persons present at or near such place or in such a manner calculated to cause or causing rocks, pebbles or other debris to be thrown or thrust out from under such wheels or tires in a manner calculated to cause or causing injury to persons present at or near such place or private or public property at or near such place. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-60. - Improper slowing or stopping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle upon any public street or roadway in the city to apply the brakes of such vehicle or to stop, turn or slow such vehicle in such a manner as to cause one or more of its wheels or tires to skip, skid or squeal in a loud manner calculated to disturb the persons present at or near such place, except to avoid an accident or collision. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-61. - Negligent collision. 
    Every person who drives or operates any motor vehicle, animal, railroad engine, railroad car, wagon, cart, dray or any other vehicle who shall, by negligence, cause or suffer or permit the vehicle to come in collision with any other vehicle of any nature whatever or with any animal, person, street sign, street post, water plug, mailbox or any other obstacle or object whatever, in or upon any public street or public alley, highway or any public place in the city shall be guilty of negligent collision and of violating this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-61.1. - Three-way stop intersections designated. 
    Briar Lane, at its intersection with Glenn Haven Street. 
    Crestmont Street, at its intersection with Hodges Lane and Willowbend Street. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-62. - Four-way stop intersections designated. 
    The following intersections are hereby designated as four-way stop intersections at which all vehicles shall stop before entering such intersections from any direction. The chief of police shall cause stop signs to be erected at each corner of such intersections, along with stripes for added precautions at the Mockingbird Lane/North Rusk intersection, indicating that vehicles shall stop before entering the intersection in accordance with state law: 
Alabama Street, east, at its intersection with Resident Street, north. 
Avenue A at its intersection with Olive Street. 
Belle Avenue, east at its intersection with Walnut Street, north. 
Caney Street, west at its intersection with Houston Street, north. 
Emily Street, east at its intersection with Speed Street, north. 
Fulton Street, north at its intersection with Armstrong Street and Kelly Street. 
Fulton, north at its intersection with Ahldag Street. 
Fulton, north at its intersection with Alabama Street. 
Fulton, north at its intersection with Caney Street, east. 
North Texas Avenue at its intersection with East Wayside. 
Outlar Street, north at its intersection with Bailey Street. 
Pecan Street at its intersection with Mockingbird Lane. 
Resident Street, north at its intersection with Caney Street, east. 
Rusk Street at its intersection with Mockingbird Lane 
Texas Street at its intersection with Center Street. 
University Street and Carter Street intersection. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10; Ord. No. 2013-18, 7-22-13; Ord. No. 2015-09, 8-10-15) 
Sec. 82-63. - Stop intersections designated. 
    The following intersections are designated as stop intersections and stop signs shall be erected as follows: 
Abell Street at its intersection with Alabama Street east. 
Abell Street at its intersection with Center Street. 
Abell Street at its intersection with Columbus Street. 
Abell Street at its intersection with Santa Fe Street. 
Abell Street north at its intersection with Ahldag Street. 
Abell Street north at its intersection with Emily. 
Abell Street north at its intersection with Mulberry Street east. 
Ahldag Street west at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
Alabama Street east at its intersection with Alabama Road north. 
Alabama Street west at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
Alcalde Way at its intersection with Park Lane. 
Alcalde Way at its intersection with Sunny Lane. 
Allen Street at its intersection with Goode Street. 
Allen Street at its intersection with Martin Luther King Boulevard. 
Armstrong at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
Avenue A at its intersection with Abell Street. 
Avenue A at its intersection with Alabama Road north. 
Avenue A at its intersection with Resident Street. 
Avenue B at its intersection with Pecan Street north. 
Avenue B at its intersection with Walnut Street. 
Avenue C at its intersection with Abell Street. 
Avenue C at its intersection with Alabama Road north. 
Avenue C at its intersection with Koehl Street. 
Avenue C at its intersection with Resident Street. 
Avenue C at its intersection with Speed Street. 
Avenue C at its intersection with Texas Street. 
Azalea Drive at its intersection with Camellia Avenue. 
Azalea Street at its intersection with Outlar Street south. 
Bailey Street at its intersection with Spanish Camp Road north. 
Barclay Avenue at its intersection with Ahldag Street west. 
Barclay Avenue at its intersection with Fulton Street north. 
Barfield Lane at its intersection with Alabama Road north. 
Bell Street at its intersection with Sunset Street south. 
Belle Avenue at its intersection with Fulton north. 
Belle Avenue east at its intersection with Abell Street north. 
Belle Avenue east at its intersection with Junior College Boulevard. 
Belle Avenue west at its intersection with Richmond north. 
Black Street at its intersection with Elm Street. 
Boatwright Lane at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
Bob-O-Link Lane at its intersection with Lazy Lane. 
Bob-O-Link Lane at its intersection with Rusk Street north. 
Bob-O-Link Lane at its intersection with Sunny Lane. 
Boling Green Drive at its intersection with Greenbriar Drive. 
Bolton Street at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
Bolton Street at its intersection with Sunset Street north. 
Branch Street at its intersection with FM 102 (Ogden Street). 
Branch Street at its intersection with Hendon Street. 
Branch Street at its intersection with Martin Luther King Boulevard. 
Breezy Lane at its intersection with Alabama Road. 
Breezy Lane at its intersection with Park Lane. 
Breezy Lane at its intersection with Pecan Street. 
Breitling Lane at its intersection with Elm Street. 
Brenek Lane at its intersection with Nelson Lane. 
Brenek Lane at its intersection with Rugely Lane. 
Briar Lane at its intersection with Alabama Road. 
Burleson Street west at its intersection with Ford Street north. 
Burleson Street west at its intersection with Sheppard Street north. 
Burleson Street west at its intersection with Sunset Street south 
Camellia at its intersection with Martin Luther King Boulevard. 
Caney Drive south at its intersection with Sunset Street north. 
Caney Street east at its intersection with East Avenue north. 
Caney Street east at its intersection with Alabama Road north. 
Caney Street west at its intersection with Ford north. 
Caney Street west at its intersection with Outlar north. 
Caney Street west at its intersection with Sunset Street north. 
Cargill Street at its intersection with Abell Street. 
Cargill Street at its intersection with Alabama Road north. 
Cargill Street at its intersection with Koehl. 
Cargill Street at its intersection with Speed Street. 
Cargill Street at its intersection with Texas Street. 
Carolyn Street at its intersection with Alabama Road south. 
Carolyn Street at its intersection with East Avenue south. 
Carter at its intersection with Boling Highway. 
Carter Street at its intersection with Frankie. 
Center Street at its intersection with Alabama Road north. 
Center Street at its intersection with Koehl. 
Center Street at its intersection with Walnut Street. 
Centennial at its intersection with Fulton. 
Centennial at its intersection with Rusk Street. 
Chapel Heights Drive at its intersection with Cottonwood Drive. 
Chapel Courts at its intersection with Sycamore Street. 
Circle Drive at its intersection with Circle Drive. 
Circle Drive at its intersection with Old Lane City Road. 
Circle Drive at its intersection with Park Drive. 
Cline Drive at its intersection with Old Caney Road. 
Cloud Street at its intersection with Bell Street. 
Cloud Street at its intersection with Burleson west. 
Cloud Street at its intersection with Colorado Street. 
Cloud Street at its intersection with Milam Street west. 
Cloud Street north at its intersection with Caney west. 
College Street at its intersection with Ogden Street. 
Colorado Street at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
Colorado Street at its intersection with Sunset Street south. 
Columbine Street at its intersection with Azalea. 
Columbine Street at its intersection with Outlar south. 
Columbus Drive at its intersection with Fulton north. 
Columbus Drive at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
Connie Street at its intersection with Outlar Street north. 
Correll at its intersection with Carolyn Street. 
Correll at its intersection with Elm east. 
Correll at its intersection with Maple Street. 
Correll at its intersection with Milam Street east. 
Cottonwood Drive at its intersection with Price Drive. 
Country Club Drive at its intersection with Old Lane City Road. 
Crestmont at its intersection with Alabama Road. 
Crestmont at its intersection with Glen Haven. 
Croom Drive at its intersection with Old Lane City Road. 
Croom Drive at its intersection with Sycamore Street. 
Cutbirth at its intersection with Old Lane City Road. 
Dahlgren at its intersection with Fulton north. 
Dalgreen east at its intersection with Walnut north. 
Dahlgren west at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
Damon Street at its intersection with Sheppard Street south. 
David Street at its intersection with East Avenue south. 
David Street at its intersection with Moutray Street. 
Davis Street at its intersection with East Avenue north. 
Davis Street at its intersection with Resident Street north. 
Davis Street at its intersection with Walnut Street. 
Debbie Street at its intersection with Alabama Street east. 
Debbie Street at its intersection with Davis Street. 
Delmas Drive at its intersection with Kincaid Street. 
Delmas Drive at its intersection with Milam Street east. 
Dennis Street at its intersection with Caney east. 
Dennis Street at its intersection with Davis Street. 
Dennis Street at its intersection with Milam Street east. 
Dunraven Street at its intersection with Kingston Drive. 
Dunraven Street at its intersection with Westgate Drive. 
Dunraven Street at its intersection with Wisteria way. 
East Avenue at its intersection with Alabama Street east. 
East Avenue at its intersection with Milam Street east. 
Edwards Street at its intersection with Sheppard Street. 
Elm east at its intersection with Alabama Road. 
Elm Street east at its intersection with East Avenue south. 
Emily at its intersection with Fulton north. 
Emily at its intersection with Richmond north. 
Evans at its intersection with Fulton north. 
Evans at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
Fairway Drive at its intersection with Old Caney Road. 
First Street at its intersection with Fulton Street north. 
First Street at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
First Street at its intersection with Rusk north. 
Foote Street at its intersection with Evans Street. 
Foote Street at its intersection with Harmanson Street. 
Foote Street at its intersection with Mayes Street. 
Ford Street at its intersection with Milam Street west. 
Frankie at its intersection with Pioneer. 
Franklin at its intersection with Crestmont. 
Franklin Drive at its intersection with Kelving Way. 
Franklin Road at its intersection with Nelga Road. 
Fulton Street south at its intersection with Elm Street east. 
Fulton south at its intersection with Burleson Street east. 
Gail at its intersection with Fulton Street north. 
Gail at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
Gallaher at its intersection with Burleson west. 
Gallaher Street at its intersection with Colorado Street. 
Golfcrest Drive at its intersection with Country Club Drive. 
Goode Street at its intersection with Outlar Street north. 
Glen Haven at Kelving Way. 
Grayson Street north at its intersection with Ahldag Street east. 
Greenbriar at its intersection with Boling Highway. 
Greenbriar at its intersection with Boling Green (Lake Net 2nd). 
Grove Street at its intersection with Alabama Street east. 
Grove Street at its intersection with Caney east. 
Groves Street at its intersection with Milam Street east. 
Hamilton at its intersection with Bolton Street. 
Hamilton at its intersection with Caney west. 
Harmanson at its intersection with Fulton north. 
Harmanson Street at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
Harris Street at its intersection with Hughes Street. 
Harris Street at its intersection with Outlar north. 
Harrison Lane at its intersection with Ogden Street (FM 102). 
Harrison Lane at its intersection with Spanish Camp Road. Hawes Stree;hg1;t at its intersection with Fulton north. 
Hawes Street at its intersection with Houston Street. 
Hawes Street at its intersection with Polk Street. 
Helms Street at its intersection with Carter Street. 
Helms Street at its intersection with Pioneer Avenue. 
Hendon Street at its intersection with Mattie Street. 
Hendon Street at its intersection with Spanish Camp Road north. 
Hodges Lane at its intersection with Alabama Road. 
Hodges Lane at its intersection with Briar Lane. 
Hollis Avenue at its intersection with Delmas Drive. 
Hollis Avenue at its intersection with Oliver Street. 
Horton Foote at its intersection with Alabama north. 
Horton Foote at its intersection with Pioneer. 
Houston Street at its intersection with Elm. 
Houston Street at its intersection with Alabama Street west. 
Houston Street at its intersection with Linn Street. 
Hughes Street at its intersection with Caney west. 
Hughes Street at its intersection with Milam Street west. 
Hughes Street at its intersection Spanish Camp Road. 
Jefferson Street at its intersection with East Avenue south. 
Jefferson Street at its intersection with Milam Street east. 
Joan Street at its intersection with Fulton north. 
Joan Street at its intersection with Richmond north. 
John Knox at its intersection with Lazy Lane. 
John Knox Street at its intersection with Boling Highway. 
John Knox Street at its intersection with Old Boling Highway. 
Jr. College Boulevard at its intersection with Tiger Avenue. 
Kaiser Lane at its intersection with Spanish Camp Road. 
Kearney Street at its intersection with Sheppard Street south. 
Kelly Street at its intersection with Rusk Street. 
Kelving Way at its intersection with Alabama Road. 
Kelving Way at its intersection with Hodges. 
Kelving Way Courts at its intersection with Hodges Lane. 
Kincaid Street at its intersection with Hodges Lane. 
Kincaid Street at its intersection with Milam Street east. 
Kingston Drive at its intersection with Alabama Road. 
Koehl Street at its intersection with Alabama Street east. 
Koehl Street at its intersection with Avenue A. 
Koehl Street at its intersection with Santa Fe Street. 
La Delle Street at its intersection with Alabama Road. 
Lakeshore Drive at its intersection with Boling Highway. 
Lazy Lane at its intersection with Fulton. 
Lazy Lane at its intersection with Rusk Street. 
Lazy Lane at its intersection with Sunny Lane. 
Lewis Street at its intersection with Hendon Street. 
Lewis Street at its intersection with Wilson Street. 
Liberty Road at its intersection with Alabama Road. 
Lily Lane at its intersection with Park Drive. 
Lincoln Street at its intersection with Carolyn Street. 
Lincoln Street at its intersection with David Street. 
Lincoln Street at its intersection with Elm east. 
Lincoln Street at its intersection with Jefferson Street. 
Lincoln Street at its intersection with Maple Street. 
Linda Croom park at its intersection with Alabama Road. 
Linn Street at its intersection with Fulton north. 
Linn Street at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
Linwood Street at its intersection with Briar Lane. 
Linwood Street at its intersection with Hodges. 
Lucky Lane at its intersection with Bolton Street. 
Lucky Lane at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
Mahan Street at its intersection with Hodges Lane. 
Mahan Street at its intersection with Milam Street east. 
Maple Street at its intersection with Alabama Road. 
Maple Street at its intersection with East Avenue south. 
Martin Luther King Boulevard at its intersection with Spanish Camp north. 
Mattie Street at its intersection with Martin Luther King Boulevard. 
Mattie Street at its intersection with Ogden (FM 102). 
Mayfair circle at its intersection with Bob-O-Link Lane. 
Mays Street at its intersection with Fulton north. 
Mays Street at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
McElroy Street at its intersection with Fulton north. 
McElroy Street at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
Meadow Lane at its intersection with Alabama Road. 
Meadow Lane at its intersection with Park Lane. 
Meadow Lane at its intersection with Sunny Lane. 
Merry Lane at its intersection with Breezy Lane. 
Merry Lane at its intersection with Park Lane. 
Milam Street west at its intersection with Outlar Street south. 
Milam Street west at its intersection with Outlar Street north. 
Milburn Street at its intersection with Rusk Street north. 
Mockingbird Lane at its intersection with Fulton Street north. 
Moore Street at its intersection with Milburn Street. 
Moore Street at its intersection with Old Boling Highway east. 
Moutray Street at its intersection with Carolyn Street. 
Moutray Street at its intersection with Elm east. 
Moutray Street at its intersection with Jefferson Street. 
Moutray Street at its intersection with Maple Street. 
Mulberry Avenue east at its intersection with Texas north. 
Mulberry west at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
Mulbery Street west at its intersection with Fulton Street north. 
Murphy Avenue at its intersection with Collins Street. 
Nelga Road at its intersection with Stavena Road. 
Nelson Lane at its intersection with Ogden Street. 
Nelson Lane at its intersection with Spanish Camp Road. 
Newton at its intersection with Ahldag Street east. 
Oak Street at its intersection with Bailey Street. 
Oak Street at its intersection with Caney west. 
Oak Street at its intersection with Harris. 
Oak Street at its intersection with Milam Street west. 
Oak Street at its intersection with Spanish Camp north. 
Oakcrest Street at its intersection with Crestmont Street. 
Old Boling Highway at its intersection with Alabama Road north. 
Old Boling Road at its intersection with Rusk Street. 
Old Caney Road at its intersection with Old Lane City Road. 
Old Lane City Road at its intersection with Milam Street east. 
Olive Street at its intersection with Alabama Street east. 
Olive Street at its intersection with Avenue C. 
Olive Street at its intersection with Breezy Lane. 
Olive Street at its intersection with Center Street. 
Olive Street at its intersection with Santa Fe Street. 
Oliver Street at its intersection with Delmas Drive. 
Oliver Street at its intersection with Kincaid Avenue. 
Oriole Lane at its intersection with Breezy Lane. 
Oriole Lane at its intersection with Meadow Lane. 
Oriole Lane at its intersection with Sunny Lane. 
Outlar north at its intersection with Martin Luther King Boulevard. 
Park Drive at its intersection with Croom Drive. 
Park Lane at its intersection with Breezy Lane. 
Park Lane at its intersection with Meadow Lane. 
Park Lane at its intersection with Oriole Lane. 
Pecan Street at its intersection with Alabama Street. 
Pecan Street at its intersection with Avenue A. 
Pecan Street at its intersection with Avenue C. 
Pecan Street at its intersection with Bob-O-Link Lane. 
Pecan Street at its intersection with Lazy Lane. 
Pecan Street at its intersection with Santa Fe Street. 
Pecan Street west at its intersection with Bailey Street. 
Pecan Street west at its intersection with Caney Street west. 
Pecan Street west at its intersection with Harris Street. 
Pecan Street west at its intersection with Martin Luther King Boulevard. 
Pecan Street west at its intersection with Milam Street west. 
Pioneer Avenue at its intersection with Ahldag Street east. 
Pioneer Avenue at its intersection with Boling Highway east. 
Polk Street at its intersection with Milam Street west. 
Polk Street north at its intersection with Alabama Street west. 
Polk Street north at its intersection with Caney Street, west. 
Polk Street south at its intersection with Burleson west. 
Polk Street south at its intersection with Elm Street west. 
Price Drive at its intersection with Briar Lane. 
Price Drive at its intersection with Lily Lane. 
Price Drive at its intersection with Sycamore Drive. 
Quail hollow at its intersection with Crestmont Drive. 
Quail hollow at its intersection with Oakcrest. 
Red River Drive at its intersection with Barfield Lane. 
Reed at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
Regional Medical Drive at its intersection with Highway 59 North Feeder Road. 
Regional Medical Drive at its intersection with Ogden (FM 102). 
Resident Street at its intersection with Milam Street east. 
Resident Street at its intersection with Santa Fe Street. 
Resident Street at its intersection with Third Street. 
Resident Street south at its intersection with Burleson east. 
Resident Street south at its intersection with Elm Street east. 
Rugeley Lane at its intersection with Stafford Lane. 
Rusk north at its intersection with Emily east. 
Rusk north at its intersection with Wayside Street. 
Rusk Street at its intersection with Alabama Street. 
Rusk Street at its intersection with Boling Highway. 
Rusk Street north at its intersection with Alabama Street east. 
Rusk Street north at its intersection with Belle Avenue. 
Rusk Street north at its intersection with Caney east. 
Rusk Street south at its intersection with Burleson east. 
Rusk Street south at its intersection with Elm Street east. 
Salisbury at its intersection with Westgate Drive. 
Salisbury Street at its intersection with Kingston Street. 
Sanders Street at its intersection with Martin Luther King Boulevard. 
Santa Fe Street at its intersection with Alabama Road north. 
Santa Fe Street at its intersection with Fulton north. 
Santa Fe Street at its intersection with Rusk Street. 
Sara Ann at its intersection with Kingston Drive. 
Sara Ann at its intersection with Westgate Drive. 
Sara Ann at its intersection with Wisteria Way. 
Schley Drive at its intersection with Delmas Drive. 
Schley Drive at its intersection with Kincaid Avenue. 
Schley Drive at its intersection with Mahan Avenue. 
Second Street at its intersection with Fulton Street. 
Second Street at its intersection with Resident Street. 
Second Street at its intersection with Rusk Street north. 
Sheppard Street north at its intersection with Caney west. 
Sheppard Street north at its intersection with Milam Street west. 
Sheppard Street north at its intersection with Spanish Camp Road west. 
Shirley Avenue at its intersection with Alabama Road north. 
Sorrell Street at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
Sorrell Street at its intersection with Sunset Street north. 
Spanish Camp Road at its intersection with Sunset Street south. 
Spanish Camp Road north at its intersection with Ogden Street (FM 102). 
Speed Street at its intersection with Alabama Street east. 
Speed Street at its intersection with Avenue A. 
Speed Street at its intersection with Center Street. 
Speed Street at its intersection with Columbus Street. 
Speed Street at its intersection with Santa Fe Street. 
Speed Street at its intersection with Wayside Street. 
Speed Street north at its intersection with Mulberry Avenue east. 
Stadium Street at its intersection with Boling Highway. 
Stafford Lane at its intersection with Nelson Lane. 
Stavena Road at its intersection with Old Lane City Road. 
Sunny Lane at its intersection with Alabama Road north. 
Sunny Lane at its intersection with Mockingbird Lane. 
Sunny Lane at its intersection with Pecan Street. 
Sunset Drive north at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
Sunset Street north at its intersection with Milam Street west. 
Sunset Street north at its intersection with Ogden Street (FM 102). 
Sycamore Drive at its intersection with Lily Lane. 
Sycamore Drive at its intersection with Price Drive. 
Sycamore Street at its intersection with Croom Drive. 
Tennie Street at its intersection with Carter Street. 
Tennie Street at its intersection with Pioneer Avenue. 
Texas Street at its intersection with Alabama Street east. 
Texas Street at its intersection with Avenue A. 
Texas Street at its intersection with Santa Fe Street. 
Texas Street north at its intersection with Belle east. 
Third Street at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
Third Street at its intersection with Fulton north. 
Third Street at its intersection with Pecan Street. 
Third Street at its intersection with Rusk Street north. 
Tiger Avenue at its intersection with Junior College Boulevard. 
University Street at its intersection with Fulton north. 
University Street at its intersection with Pioneer Avenue. 
Valhalla Drive at its intersection with Regional Medical Drive. 
Walnut North Street at its intersection with Emily Street east. 
Walnut Street at its intersection with Alabama Street east. 
Walnut Street at its intersection with Avenue A. 
Walnut Street at its intersection with Avenue C. 
Walnut Street at its intersection with Caney Street east. 
Walnut Street at its intersection with Milam Street east. 
Walnut Street at its intersection with Santa Fe Street. 
Walnut Street at its intersection with Wayside Street. 
Walnut Street north at its intersection with Ahldag Avenue east. 
Washington Street at its intersection with Carolyn Street. 
Washington Street at its intersection with David Street. 
Washington Street at its intersection with Elm Street east. 
Washington Street at its intersection with Maple Street. 
Wayside Avenue at its intersection with Abell Street north. 
Wayside Avenue at its intersection with Fulton north. 
Wayside Avenue at its intersection with Junior College Boulevard. 
Wayside Avenue at its intersection with Richmond north. 
Wayside Avenue at its intersection with Texas Street north. 
Wells Street at its intersection with Caney Drive north. 
Wells Street at its intersection with Ogden Street (FM 102). 
West Street at its intersection with Circle Drive. 
Westgate at its intersection with Alabama Road south. 
Weston Avenue at its intersection with Hodges Lane. 
Wilkes Street at its intersection with Martin Luther King Boulevard. 
Willow Lane west at its intersection with Richmond Road north. 
Wilson Street at its intersection with Branch Street. 
Wilson Street at its intersection with Spanish Camp Road. 
Wisteria Way at its intersection with Alabama Road south. 
Woodvine Street at its intersection with Briar Lane. 
Woodvine Street at its intersection with Linwood Drive. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-64. - Yield right-of-way intersections. 
    The following intersections have been designated as yield right-of-way intersections and yield signs shall be erected as follows: 
(a)  Burleson Street east at Milam Street east. 
(b)  Jr. College Boulevard at its intersection with Tiger Avenue. 
(c)  Jr. College Boulevard at its intersection with County Road 166. 
(d)  Regional Medical Drive at Regional Medical Drive. 
(e)  Tiger Avenue at Junior College Boulevard. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-65. - One-way only streets. 
(a)  Burleson Street from its intersection at Richmond Road to Resident Street. 
(b)  Resident Street from its intersection at Burleson Street to Milam Street. 
(c)  Milam Street from its intersection at Resident Street to Richmond Road. 
(d)  Fulton Street from its intersection at Milam Street to Burleson Street. 
(e)  Houston Street from its intersection at Milam Street to Burleson Street. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Secs. 82-67-82-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROCESSIONS AND PARADES 

Sec. 82-91. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any number of persons or a delegation or association of persons or for any company, circus or group, excepting the military forces of the United States or of this state and the forces of the police and fire departments of this city to parade, march or proceed along any street within the city without having first obtained a written permit from the chief of police, during certain hours as may be designated by the chief of police. Whenever such permit is granted by the city, acting by and through its chief of police, it shall designate the streets, avenues, alleys and thoroughfares over which the parade or group is privileged to travel and the time that the parade or procession shall be held and completed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-92. - Identification of funeral processions. 
    A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified by such methods as may be determined and designated by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-93. - Driving in procession. 
    Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-94. - Driving through processions. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously identified as required. This section shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Secs. 82-95-82-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of stopping, standing and parking of vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 27(a)(1), 96(c); removal of illegally stopped vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 94. 

Sec. 82-126. - Parking of unlicensed or uninspected vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park or to allow, suffer or permit to be parked, upon any street within the city, any motor vehicle not displaying front and rear license tags for the current year or any motor vehicle not displaying the current safety inspection sticker. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-127. - Parking in alley. 
    Except in compliance with law, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in an alley or in such a manner as to block or impede vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-128. - Emerging from parked vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to step from a parked vehicle into the roadway or sidewalk in such a manner as to interfere with or impede the progress of any vehicle or pedestrian. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-129. - Moving vehicle from angle parking space. 
    In leaving an angle parking space, a vehicle shall not be backed into the traffic lane any further than necessary to get straightened out and faced in the proper direction for traffic between such space and the center of the street. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-130. - Time limit for parking certain vehicles: 
(a)  Six wheeled vehicles (trucks and trailers): It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle or truck having more than six wheels or any combination of motor vehicle, truck and trailer with more than six wheels or any trailer detached from any truck that has more than six wheels upon any street within the city for a longer period of time than 30 minutes. 
(b)  Two and four wheeled vehicles (utility trailers, boats, travel trailers, etc.): It shall be unlawful for any person to park any two or four wheeled vehicle (including but not limited to utility trailers, boats, travel trailers, etc.) that is detached from any truck or other vehicle upon any street within the city for a longer period of time than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-131. - Trucks and trailers parked in city-owned lots or on city-owned property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle or truck having more than six wheels or any combination of motor vehicle, truck and trailer with more than six wheels or any trailer detached from any truck that has more than six wheels upon any city parking lot, city park or other real property owned by the city. This section shall not apply to city-owned vehicles, trucks or trailers parking on city-owned property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-132. - No parking zones-All times. 
    The following no parking zones, in addition to those established by authority of the council and not in conflict with this section, are established in the city: 
North Abell Street, both sides, from its intersection with Ahldag Avenue to its intersection with East Belle Avenue. 
West Alabama Street, from a point of its intersection with North Polk Street, in a westerly direction to North Richmond Road. 
Bailey Street, north side, from a point 216 feet west of its intersection with Outlar Street for a distance of 449 feet in a westerly direction; such no parking zone extending from a point 30 feet east of the bus entrance to a point 30 feet west of the bus exit. 
East Belle Avenue south side, from its intersection with North Abell Street to its intersection with Alabama Road. 
East Belle Avenue, south side of 100 block east, beginning at a point 140 feet from its intersection with North Fulton Street and continuing in an easterly direction for 56 feet. 
East Boling Highway, FM 1301, both sides, in the 900 block from Pioneer Avenue and extending east to Alabama Road. 
West Boling Road, FM Road 1301, north side, at a point beginning 142.75 feet west of its intersection with North Fulton Street in a westerly direction a distance of 78 feet. 
Briar Lane, beginning at its intersection with Price Drive and continuing in a westerly direction 20 feet on the side of the street across from the Holy Family Catholic Church. 
Briar Lane, northeast side, at its intersection with Hodges Lane to include the width of Hodges Lane at such intersection plus a distance of 20 feet on each side of the intersection. 
Burleson Street, north side, from its intersection with North Richmond Road to its intersection with Resident Street (except the block on Burleson Street between Houston Street and Fulton Street where parking on both sides shall be permitted). 
FM 102, north side, for a distance of 120 feet on both the east and west sides of its intersection with Regional Medical Drive. 
FM 102, south side, for a distance of 120 feet on both the east and west sides of its intersection with Mattie Street. 
Fulton Street, on the west side beginning at its intersection with Milam Street for a distance of 78 feet north. 
Fulton Street, on the east side of the 200 block of Fulton Street from a point beginning at the intersection of Alabama Street and extending a distance of 148 feet south. This area shall be designated as a no parking area seven days a week and 24 hours per day, except for duly authorized personnel of the city fire department and city ambulance service as they may be permitted under the rules and regulations of these particular departments. 
Mattie Street, with Hendon Street. 
West Milam Street, north side, from the 900 block to the 1100 block. 
West Milam Street, both sides beginning at the intersection of Outlar Street and continuing to the cul-de-sac or pedestrian entrance of Harris Park. 
Mockingbird Street, both sides, from its intersection with Pecan Street to its intersection with Rusk Street. 
Nelson Lane, the west side of Nelson Lane beginning at the intersection of FM 102 and extending a distance of 265 feet south. 
Price Drive, beginning at its intersection with Briar Lane and continuing in a northerly direction 20 feet on the side of the street across from the Holy Family Catholic Church. 
Regional Medical Drive, from its intersection at FM 102 to its intersection with the east frontage road of U.S. Highway 59. 
Resident Street, west side, from its intersection with Burleson Street to its intersection with Milam Street. 
Richmond Road, both sides, from the south city limits at its intersection with the Colorado River and continuing in a northerly direction to the intersection of North Richmond Road with FM 1301. 
North Richmond Road, within 36 feet of either side of the centerline of the street beginning at a point 400 feet north of its intersection with FM 1301 and continuing in a northerly direction to the city limit line. 
Rusk Street, east side, from a point of its intersection with Mockingbird Lane in a southerly direction to a point perpendicular from the intersection of Kelly Street. 
North Rusk Street, in the 100 block, from East Milam Street and extending north to East Caney Street. 
North Sheppard Street, east side, to its intersection at West Caney Street. 
South Sheppard Street west side, to its intersection at Burleson Street. 
Speed Street, west side, from a point at its intersection with Center Street in a southerly direction to its intersection with Alabama Street. 
West Stadium Road, from its intersection with FM 1301 to its intersection with Barfield Road. 
State Highway 1301 both sides, from its intersection with Pioneer Street to its intersection with Alabama Road. 
Sunny Lane, north side, from its intersection with Alabama Road in a southerly direction a distance of 130 feet. 
Sunny Lane, both sides, from its intersection with Alabama Road to its intersection with Oriole Lane. 
US 59 East Frontage Road near FM 102, from FM 102 to 500 feet north, east side. 
US 59 East Frontage Road near FM 102, from FM 102 to 500 feet south, west side. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-133. - Same-Designated hours. 
    The following no parking zones are established in the city during the designated times: 
(1)  From 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.: 
Alabama Road, both sides from FM 1301 to Stadium Street and along the west side of Alabama Road from Stadium Street to Ahldag Avenue. 
Lazy Lane, both sides, from a distance of 325 feet in an easterly direction of its intersection with North Rusk Street. 
Pioneer Avenue, both sides, from its intersection with FM 1301 to Ahldag Avenue. 
(2)  From 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.: 
Abell Street, beginning on the east side of Abell Street 270 feet from its intersection with Alabama Street and continuing 134 feet north. 
Martin Luther King Boulevard, north side. 
(3)  From 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.: 
Frankie Avenue, one block off Pioneer Avenue. 
Helms Street, one block off Pioneer Avenue. 
Tennie Avenue, one block off Pioneer Avenue. 
University Avenue, one block off Pioneer. 
(4)  From 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.: 
Fulton Street, in the 200 block between the south boundary line and the north boundary line of the New Hope Baptist Church property, Monday through Friday, inclusive, of each week, except vehicles of the city fire department and city ambulance service. 
(5)  From 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.: 
South Wilkes Street, west side. 
(6)  From 6:00 a.m. to 3:00 a.m.: 
Branch Street, west side, from its intersection with Hendon Street to the south a distance of 300 feet. 
Branch Street, east side, from its intersection with Canton Street to its intersection with Wilson Street. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-134. - No standing/no stopping zones. 
(a)  Designated. The following areas are designated as no standing/no stopping zones: 
Mockingbird Lane, from its intersection with Pecan Street to its intersection with Rusk Street. 
Sunny Lane, from its intersection with Alabama Road to its intersection with Oriole Lane. 
US 59 East Frontage Road near FM 102, from FM 102 to 500 feet south, west side. 
(b)  Partially, totally blocking traffic prohibited. No person shall stand or cause a vehicle to stop in any of the areas described in subsection (a) of this section in such a manner as to partially or totally block any vehicular traffic. 
(c)  Signs. The city council authorizes the chief of police to cause signs to be erected designating the areas described in subsection (a) of this section as no standing/no stopping zones. 
(d)  Penalty. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person found guilty of intentionally, knowingly or recklessly violating any provision of this article and upon conviction thereof in the municipal court shall be fined in accordance with the terms of section 1-5 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Wharton, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10; Ord. No. 2010-19, 12-13-10) 
Sec. 82-135. - Three-hour parking zones. 
(a)  Designated. Except on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on the following designated streets and areas between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. for a period of time longer than three consecutive hours in one specific parking space: 
The north and south side of the 100 block of West Burleson. 
The south side of the 200 block of West Burleson. 
The south side of the 100 block of East Burleson. 
The east and west side of the 100 block of South Fulton. 
The west side of the 100 block of North Fulton. 
The east side of the 200 block of South Fulton beginning at a point 30 feet south of the intersection of East Burleson and South Fulton and running along the east side of Fulton in a southernly direction for a distance of 60 feet. 
The east and west side of the 100 block of South Houston. 
The east and west side of the 200 block of South Houston. 
The west side of the 100 block of North Houston beginning at a point 30 feet north of the intersection of West Milam and North Houston and running along the west side of Houston Street in a northernly direction for a distance of 45 feet. 
The east side of the 100 block of North Houston beginning at a point of 30 feet north of the intersection of West Milam and North Houston and running along the east side of Houston street in a northernly direction for a distance of 125 feet. 
The north and south side of the 100 block of West Milam. 
The north and south sides of the 200 and 300 blocks of West Milam. 
The south side of the 100 block of East Milam beginning at a point of 75 feet from the intersection of South Rusk and East Milam in front of the United States Post Office. 
(b)  Exception. The three-hour parking restriction shall not apply during city-wide events or festivals held in the downtown area. These events would include but is not limited to the Wharton County Freedom Festival, Hispano Americana Festival, Shanghai Days Cowboy Gathering, and the Wharton Chamber of Commerce Holiday Parade. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-136. - One-hour parking zones. 
    Designated. Except on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on the following designated streets and areas between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. for a period of time longer than one hour in one specific parking space: 
The north side of the 100 block of East Milam Street from its intersection with North Fulton Street and extending 75 feet in an easterly direction. 
The east side of the 100 block of North Fulton Street. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-137. - Ten-minute parking zones. 
    Except on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on the following designated streets and areas between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. for a period of time longer than ten consecutive minutes: 
The north side of the 100 block of East Milam Street from a distance of 30 feet from the intersection of South Rusk and East Milam Streets and extending 45 feet in a westward direction. 
The south side of the 100 block of East Milam Street from a distance of 30 feet from the intersection of South Rusk and East Milam Streets and extending 74 feet in a westward direction. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-138. - Reserved. 
Sec. 82-139. - Parking spaces for disabled persons. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Disabled person means any person who: 
(1)  Is so severely handicapped that he is unable to move from place to place without the aid of a mechanical device, wheelchair, walker, cane, crutches, artificial limb or any similar device. 
(2)  Has mobility problems that substantially impair the person's ability to walk. 
(3)  Is legally blind. 
    Legally blind means having not more than 20/200 of visual acuity in the better eye with correcting lenses or visual acuity greater than 20/200 but with a limitation in the field of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a disabled person to park or leave standing a motor vehicle in any space designated for the use of such disabled persons; provided, however, that a driver of a vehicle used in transporting such disabled persons may park in such spaces. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for a person to park a vehicle so that the vehicle blocks an access or curb ramp or any other architectural improvement designed to aid disabled persons. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for a person to park a vehicle neither displaying special license plates nor displaying a removable windshield identification card in a parking space or parking area designated specifically for the disabled by the city or by a person who owns or controls private property used for parking for which the city has provided for the application of this section under Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6675-5e.1, § 6A(c). 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for a person to lend an identification card issued to him under Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6675a-5e.1 to a person who uses the identification card in violation of this section. 
(c)  Designation of parking spaces for disabled persons. 
(1)  The city shall have the authority to designate parking spaces or parking areas for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting temporarily or permanently disabled persons. 
(2)  The city's designation of any such parking spaces or parking areas shall conform to the rules promulgated by the state commissioner of licensing and regulation under Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 9102, relating to the identification and dimensions of parking spaces for the disabled. 
(3)  A person who owns or controls private property used for parking may voluntarily designate one or more parking spaces or parking areas specifically for the disabled. All such parking spaces or parking areas shall conform to the identification and dimension requirements referred to in subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(4)  The city may require any private property owner or any person who controls property used for parking to designate one or more parking spaces or parking areas for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting temporarily or permanently disabled persons. All such parking spaces and parking areas shall conform to the identification and dimension requirements referred to in subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(5)  All parking spaces or parking areas located on private property and specifically designated as parking spaces or parking areas for the disabled shall conform to the identification and dimension requirements referred to in subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(6)  Subsection (b) of this section shall apply to any parking space or area for the disabled on private property designated in compliance with the identification requirements described in subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(d)  Signs. The chief of police or any other person whom the city council authorizes shall cause signs to be posted in all areas where parking is limited to disabled persons. These signs shall contain the international wheelchair symbol, consisting of a profile view of a stylized wheelchair with an occupant in white on a blue background, which will identify the parking space as one for disabled persons only. 
(e)  Presumption. In a prosecution of an offense under this section, it shall be presumed that the registered owner of the motor vehicle that is the subject of the prosecution is the person who parked the vehicle at the time and place that the offense occurred. 
(f)  In the prosecution of an offense under section 82-135, it shall be presumed that the registered owner of a motor vehicle that displays a valid disabled persons license plate or has attached to said vehicle a permit issued by the State of Texas and is the subject of prosecution under this section shall be allowed a defense to prosecution of such section if found to be in possession of such valid license plate or permit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-140. - Defense to prosecution. 
    Any person whose primary residence is located in the buildings whose addresses are listed on the streets mentioned in section 82-135 shall file an application with the chief of police and provide verifiable proof of residency. Once the application is approved, the resident shall be issued a permit to be placed in a visible location in their vehicle and shall be exempt from the parking restriction. Permits will be issued on a yearly basis 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Secs. 82-141-82-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BICYCLES 

Sec. 82-161. - Parent's guardian's responsibility. 
    It shall be unlawful for the parent of any child or the guardian of any ward to authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-162. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle propelled wholly or in part by muscular power upon any of the streets of the city without first obtaining from the police department a license therefore as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-163. - Application form. 
(a)  Form. Application for a bicycle license and license plate shall be made upon a form provided by the city and shall be made to the police department of the city. 
(b)  Fee. No fee shall be required for any license to be issued. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-164. - Issuance of license. 
    The city reserves the right to issue licenses or to contract with agencies for license issuing. The city or the contractor, upon receiving proper application therefore, is authorized and directed to issue a bicycle license. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-165. - License prohibited under suspicious circumstances. 
    The police department shall not issue a license for any bicycle when it is known or there are reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant is not the owner of or entitled to the possession of such bicycle. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-166. - Inspection; refusal of license if unsafe. 
    The chief of police or an officer assigned such responsibility shall, if it be deemed necessary, inspect each bicycle before licensing the same, and if it be found that such bicycle is in unsafe mechanical condition, such license shall be refused. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-167. - Metal tags; registration card; records. 
    This license shall be issued one time only for a one-time fee for the duration of the life to the bicycle, and subject to the terms and conditions hereinafter set out. 
(1)  Metal tags. The city shall provide metallic tags and seals having the registration number. 
(2)  Attachment to bicycle. The owner of the bicycle shall keep the metal tag attached to the rear of each bicycle so that the tag is clearly visible at all times. 
(3)  Registration card. At the time of the issuance of the license, the police department shall also issue to the person obtaining the license a registration card, which card shall bear the license and registration number of the bicycle. 
(4)  Records. The city shall keep a record of the date of the issuance of each license, the name of the person to whom issued the number thereof and a description of the bicycle. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-168. - Lost registration card and license plate. 
    Any licensee who has lost his registration card or license plate shall pay a fee of $1.00 for a reissuance thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-169. - Transfer of ownership; seller's report; purchaser's registration. 
(a)  Seller's report. It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycle to report such sale or transfer by returning to the police department the registration card issued to such person as licensee thereof, together with the name and address of the person to whom the bicycle was sold or transferred. Such report shall be made within five days of the date of the sale or transfer. 
(b)  Purchaser's registration. It shall be the duty of the purchaser or transferee of such bicycle to apply for a transfer of registration therefore within five days of the sale or transfer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-170. - Mutilation of identifying numbers; provision for supply numbers. 
(a)  Frame or factory numbers. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to this section. 
(b)  License plate, seal or registration card. It shall also be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to this section. 
(c)  Provision for supplying number. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the police department from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no serial number can be found or on which such number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-171. - Bicycle dealers. 
(a)  Secondhand buyers. All persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles are required to make a daily report to the police department, giving the name and address of the person from whom each bicycle is purchased, the description of each bicycle purchased, the frame number thereof, and the number of the metallic license plate found thereon, if any. 
(b)  Repair of unlicensed bicycles. It shall be unlawful for any person to do any repair work on any bicycle to be licensed hereunder which is not properly licensed and registered as required by this section. It shall be the duty of any such person to see that any such bicycle has the city license tag thereon before doing any repair work on the same. 
(c)  Dismantling or taking out of operation. Within ten days after any bicycle registered and licensed hereunder shall have been dismantled and taken out of operation, such information shall be reported to the police department by the person in whose name the bicycle has been licensed and registered. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-172. - Required equipment; electric headlamps; tail lamps and rear reflectors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle during the period between one-half hour after sundown to one-half hour before sunrise, or at any time where there is not sufficient natural light to render persons and vehicles clearly discernible on the streets at a distance of 500 feet, unless such bicycle is equipped with a lighted electric headlamp and a lighted electric tail lamp or a rear reflector meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  Headlamps. Headlamps shall be firmly attached to the frame of the bicycle and shall cast a white light to the front clearly visible from a distance of 500 feet under normal atmospheric conditions. 
(2)  Tail lamps and rear reflectors. Tail lamps and rear reflectors shall be firmly attached to the rear of the bicycle. Tail lamps shall emit a red light to the rear clearly visible from a distance of 500 feet under normal atmospheric conditions. 
(3)  Rear reflectors. Rear reflectors shall be red in color, not less than one and one-half inch in diameter, shall contain one lens or a group of smaller lenses, and shall be visible at a distance of 300 feet when illuminated by vehicular head lamps complying with the city's regulations. 
(4)  Brakes. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-173. - Traffic laws apply. 
    Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state except as to special regulations in this section and except as to those provisions of laws and regulations which by their nature have no application. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Sec. 82-174. - Fine and penalty for violation. 
    Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalty, not to exceed $50.00 fine, removal and detention of the license plate from such person's bicycle for a period not to exceed 90 days, to impounding of such person's bicycle for a period not to exceed 30 days, or by any combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 4-12-10) 
Chapter 86 - UTILITIES AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to provide water, sewer and other services, § 11; utilities department created, § 22. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and construction, ch. 18; subdivisions, app. A. 
State Law reference- Public Utility Regulatory Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1446c. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, adopted Aug. 27, 2012, amended art. I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. I, §§ 86-1-86-22, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. No. 2008-10, § I, adopted Aug. 25, 2008; Ord. No. 2009-11, § I, adopted Nov. 9, 2009; and Ord. No. 2010-09, § I, adopted Aug. 23, 2010. 

Sec. 86-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this and subsequent articles shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Analytical laboratory (or laboratory ) means the independent EPA-approved laboratory specifically contracted by the city to perform required analysis of wastewater discharges subject to the requirements of the ordinance codified herein. Only the laboratory specifically contracted by the city shall be recognized for the analysis of compliance point samples. 
    Approving authority means the Public Works Director of the City of Wharton or his/her duly authorized representative. 
    Authorized representative of the user means: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of the principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively; 
(3)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) and (2), above may designate another authorized representative if this authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates, or specifies the individual having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and this written authorization is submitted to the city. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (milligrams oxygen utilized per liter of wastewater (mg/1)). 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (also called line lateral and line connection). 
    Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act, which applies to an industrial user. 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means the measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
    City means the City of Wharton, Texas, or the City Council of Wharton, Texas, and those persons authorized by the city council to represent the city. 
    Commercial grease generator means every food preparation and food services establishment including, but not limited to, bakeries, bars, butcher shops, cafes, clubhouses, delicatessens, ice cream parlors, hospitals, hotels, restaurants, schools, commercial day care centers, or similar places where meat, poultry, seafood, dairy products, or fried foods are prepared or served, but shall not apply to any residence not used for the commercial preparation or sale of food items. 
    Compliance point means a point of access to a course of discharge from an industrial user at which samples are collected and analyzed for flow and quality. These samples must be representative of the total discharge to the public sewer and must be collected prior to co-mingling with any other noncontrolled flows. Samples are taken at the compliance point of an industrial user for the purposes of determining the user's compliance with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. Samples collected at locations other than at the compliance point are considered for water quality information and background purposes only. 
    Composite sample means the sample resulting from the combination of individual discrete wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time. 
    Contact cooling water means water used for cooling which may come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product either by deliberate design or by accidental occurrence. 
    Control authority means a city representative, including but not limited to, code enforcement building official, public works director or third party contractor. 
    Control manhole means a manhole giving access to building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges into the public sewer. 
    Control point means a point of access to course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. For industrial discharges, the control point is also considered the compliance point. 
    Director means the Public Works Director of the City of Wharton, or his/her duly authorized representative. 
    Domestic wastewater means waterborne waste normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, residences, hotels, apartments, office buildings and factories, free from stormwater, groundwater, surface water and industrial waste. Normal domestic wastewater shall mean domestic wastewater that is "normal" sewage for the city. 
    Emulsifiers, surfactants or lubricants means those chemical compounds, either naturally-occurring or synthetically-derived, which are added to, or incorporated into, an aqueous stream to chemically alter the properties of that strewn to improve solubility, viscosity, lubricity or heat transfer characteristics. 
    Excessive strength wastewater means any industrial wastewater in which any of the following concentrations are exceeded: 
BOD = 150 milligrams per liter of wastewater; 
TSS = 200 milligrams per liter of wastewater; 
Total oil and grease = 15 milligrams per liter of wastewater. 
    Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the effective date of this pretreatment ordinance and prior to the publication date of any EPA proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which would be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Clean Water Act. 
    Fat, oil and grease (FOG) means a semi-solid viscous liquid organic polar compound derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease" or "greases." 
    Food-based oils and greases means the liquid, semi-solid or solid substances originating from animal or vegetable sources which are encountered in sewer discharges from food processing activities. These substances are discernible from other types of oils and greases, which are not generated from typical food processing activities. 
    Food processing activities means those activities specifically involved in the preparation of food items for human consumption. These activities may be conducted at residential, retail, commercial or institutional type facilities. 
    Garbage means animal and vegetable wastes and residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
    Generator means a person/business who owns or operates causes, creates, generates, stores or otherwise produces liquid waste or a person who owns property upon which liquid waste is caused, created, generated, stored or produced including, but not limited to, grease trap waste as a by-product of a domestic or nondomestic activity other than a residence or nonbusiness location. Grab sample means a sample, which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
    Grease or grit trap means a device utilized by commercial or industrial generators of liquid waste to intercept, collect and restrict the passage of petroleum-based oil and grease waste and inorganic or other solids in the sanitary sewer collection system. 
    Grease interceptor means a receptacle utilized by commercial or industrial generators of liquid waste to intercept, collect and restrict the passage of organic, inorganic, greasy or fatty liquid, semi-liquid and/or solid wastes into both public and private sanitary sewers to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected. An interceptor is located outside of a building and the tank capacity is more than 500 gallons. 
    Grease trap means a receptacle utilized by commercial or industrial generators of liquid waste to intercept, collect and restrict the passage of organic, inorganic, greasy or fatty liquid, semi-liquid and/or solid wastes into both public and private sanitary sewers to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected. Typically located inside a building with a capacity of less than 500 gallons. 
    Grease trap/interceptor waste means any organic, inorganic, greasy or fatty liquid, semi-liquid and/or solid waste collected by and ultimately removed from a grease trap for proper disposal. 
    Grit trap waste means oil and grease wastes and/or inorganic solids generated by commercial, industrial, automotive or heavy machinery repair and/or washing facilities. 
    Indirect discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the public sewer from any nondomestic or industrial source regulated under Sections 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Clean Water Act. 
    Industrial oils and greases means those oils and greases present in wastes discharged from industrial facilities as a result of industrial activities conducted at those facilities. Industrial oils and greases may be food-based, petroleum-based, synthetic or natural products that are employed in industrial operations or which are an integral part of those operations. 
    Industrial user means any person that discharges industrial wastes to the public sewer system and any other source of "indirect discharge" as defined above. An industrial facility is one that engages in manufacturing, production or processing operations and which has been identified as such by the Standard Industrial Classification Code applicable to that facility. 
    Industrial waste means waterborne solids, liquids or gaseous wastes resulting from a discharged, permitted to flow, or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, or processing operation, or any mixture of these wastes with water or domestic wastewater. This definition does not apply to food preparation or other institutional wastes, which are considered "nondomestic" wastes. 
    Industrial waste charge means the charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the public sewer system. 
    Industrial waste permit means the authorization, by way of issuance of a permit, by the director to an industrial facility to discharge particular waste streams to the pubic sewer system. The permit describes the wastes and concentrations, which may be discharged by a facility and describes the conditions under which those wastes may be discharged. 
    Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    Interference means a discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulation contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Liquid waste means waterborne solids and liquids containing dissolved or suspended waste material including, but not limited to, septic waste and wastes from grease traps and grit traps. 
    Liquid waste manifest means the written, multi-part documentation required to be in the possession of the transporter enabling disposal of hauled grease trap waste, grit trap waste, or septic waste at a permitted or registered disposal site. 
    Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means the same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
    Minor industrial user means any nonsignificant industrial user which may discharge "excessive strength wastewater" (as the term is herein defined) to the public sewer system, but that is not a significant industrial user. 
    National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) means the federal wastewater and stormwater permitting program authorizing discharges to waters of the U.S. This permitting program sets out requirements for industrial discharges in addition to state and local permit programs. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the effective date of this pretreatment ordinance or after the publication date of any EPA proposed pretreatment standards under Section 3070 of the Clean Water Act, which would be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no existing source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generated or processed at the building, structure, facility, or installation is substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, will be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (1)b. or c. above, but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation or removal of existing building structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment, which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
    Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product. 
    Nondomestic user means any person that discharges nondomestic wastes to the public sewer system that is not considered an industrial waste. Nondomestic sources include those wastes from food preparation and processing, commercial and retail facilities and institutional wastes from hotels, hospitals, schools, criminal justice facilities, nursing homes and other miscellaneous nonindustrial activities. 
    Oil and water separator or separator means a receptacle utilized by commercial or industrial generators (namely car washes and mechanic shops) of liquid waste to intercept, collect and restrict the passage of oils, grease, semi-liquid and/or solid wastes into both public and private sanitary sewers to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected. A separator is located outside of a building and the tank capacity is more than 500 gallons. 
    Overload means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
    Pass through means a discharge which exits the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) into water of the U.S. in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
    Person means any individual, group of individuals, authorized corporate representatives or corporation which is directly involved in and responsible for the discharge of any wastes to the public sewer system. 
    Petroleum-based oil and grease means those liquid semi-solid or solid wastes originating from petroleum products, including crude and refined oils, distillates, degreasing solvents, lubricating oils and cooling or thermal oils. 
    pH means the measure of the relative acidity or alkalinity of water. 
    Plumbing changes means the installation, replacement or removal of drainage pipe or water supply pipe. 
    Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural, food-based, synthetic, and petroleum oil or petroleum oil-containing wastes and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor). 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to (or in lieu of) introducing such pollutant into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means. Dilution of an industrial waste stream with other nonpolluted waters or domestic wastes is, not permitted as a form of pretreatment. 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment standards (or standards) shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and other federal, state or local limits set out in this pretreatment ordinance. 
    Prohibited discharge standards (or prohibited discharges ) means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a "treatment works", or combination of all wastewater collection and treatment facilities owned and operated by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to treatment plant. This definition, however, does not include pipes, sewers, other conveyances, or sampling points located exclusively on private property, and that are physically located anterior to the indirect discharge point. 
    Receiving facility means a facility having written authorization by permit or registration issued by TCEQ to receive wastes as defined in 30 TAC 312.143. 
    Sanitary sewer means a public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both and into which stormwater, surface water, groundwater and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
    Septic tank wastes means those liquid and solid wastes collected from underground septic systems. Septic systems are those which use biological processes to treat domestic sewage and do not include industrial waste systems. 
    Septic waste means liquid wastes and sludge containing sufficient liquid content, normally more than 85 percent, to permit flow by gravity or minimal pumping, which is removed from a portable toilet, chemical toilet, septic tank or cesspool. Septic waste does not include nondomestic wastes from commercial or industrial establishments. 
    Serve means: (1) to personally serve upon the generator or his agent; (2) to send by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the generator or his agent, allowing at least five days for said mail to be retrieved by the recipient, at the address at which the generator receives his utility bill for the location of the alleged discharge; or (3) to place a written notice upon an entrance to the location where the alleged discharge is occurring or has occurred. 
    Sewage means the normal mixture of human wastes generated by domestic, residential, institutional, commercial and restaurant facilities. Sewage may include some cleaning compounds such as soaps, detergents or other cleaning products. 
    Significant industrial user means: 
(1)  A user subject to any categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day (gpd) or more of nondomestic wastewater to the POTW; or 
b.  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in paragraph (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation, or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may, at any time, on its own initiative, or in response to a petition received from a user, determine that such use should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
    Slug load (or slug ) means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards of the ordinance codified herein. 
    Standard methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation (WEF). 
    Storm sewer means a public sewer, which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
    Stormwater means rainfall or any other forms of precipitation and the natural over land drainage of precipitation. 
    Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) means the state agency of that title, and its predecessor and successor agencies or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation from the director or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    To discharge means to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep or otherwise release or dispose of or to allow, permit or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
    Total suspended solids (TSS) means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquid and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Transporter means a person who is registered with and authorized by the TCEQ to transport sewage sludge, water treatment sludge, domestic sewage, chemical toilet waste, grit trap waste, or grease trap waste in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code 312.142. 
    Unpolluted wastewater means water, which does not contain any: 
(1)  Free or emulsified grease or oil; 
(2)  Acids or alkalis; 
(3)  Phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in the receiving water; 
(4)  Toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; 
(5)  Noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases; 
(6)  More than ten mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD; and 
(7)  Color exceeding 50 units as measured by the platinum-cobalt method of determination as specified in standard methods. 
    User (industrial user or nondomestic user ) means any person who discharges industrial or nondomestic wastewater to the wastewater system, and any other source of indirect discharge as defined herein. 
    Waste means rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural or industrial activities. 
    Wastewater means liquids and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are discharged into the POTW. 
    Wastewater facilities includes all facilities for the collection, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
    Wastewater service charge means the charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater. 
    Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant means that portion of the POTW, which is designed to provide treatment of sanitary wastewater and industrial waste. 
    Watercourse means a natural or manmade channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12; Ord. No. 2015-04, § I, 1-26-15; Ord. No. 2015-05, § I, 2-23-15; Ord. No. 2019-02, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 86-2. - Purpose and policy. 
    This article sets forth uniform requirements to be met by all industrial and nondomestic users utilizing the wastewater collection, transportation and treatment system for the City of Wharton, Texas. The ordinance is written to enable the City of Wharton Wastewater Treatment System to comply with and enforce all applicable state and federal laws pertaining to industrial wastewater quality control. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12) 
Sec. 86-3. - General requirements for all users. 
(a)  General prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into a public sanitary sewer or any other component of the POTW any pollutant or wastewater, which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all industrial and nondomestic users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  No industrial or nondomestic user may discharge to public sewers any waste, which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may: 
(1)  Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities; 
(2)  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or 
(3)  Create a hazard in receiving waters or the wastewater treatment plant effluent. 
(c)  All discharges shall conform to this article. 
(d)  No industrial or nondomestic discharge to public sewers may contain the following: 
(1)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases; 
(2)  Strong acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not; 
(3)  Substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (zero and 65 degrees Celsius); 
(4)  Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving authority for such materials; 
(5)  Obnoxious, toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in quantities sufficient to violate this section; or 
(6)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plants effluent to fail a toxicity test. 
(e)  No waste, wastewater or other substances may be discharged into public sewers which have a pH lower than six or higher than nine or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel at the wastewater facilities. 
(f)  All waste, wastewater or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide or other taste- and odor-producing substances shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by state, federal or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters. 
(g)  Any wastewater of such character or quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such material at the wastewater treatment plant or in the collection system. 
(h)  No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment, to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12) 
Sec. 86-4. - Heavy metals and toxic material limits. 
(a)  No discharges to the public sewers may contain concentrations of heavy metals greater than the amounts specified in subsection (b) below. 
(b)  Maximum allowable concentrations of discharges shall be as follows: 
(1)  Quality levels of inland waters. The allowable concentrations of each of the hazardous metals, stated in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), for discharge to inland waters are as follows: 
Not to Exceed Metal Average Daily 
Composite Grab 
Sample Arsenic 0.1 0.2 0.3 Barium 1.0 2.0 4.0 Cadmium 0.05 0.1 0.2 Chromium 0.5 1.0 5.0 Copper 0.5 1.0 2.0 Lead 0.5 1.0 1.5 Manganese 1.0 2.0 3.0 Mercury 0.005 0.005 0.01 Nickel 1.0 2.0 3.0 Selenium 0.05 0.1 0.2 Silver 0.05 0.1 0.2 Zinc 1.0 2.0 6.0  
(c)  No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the approving authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes and other applicable provisions. 
(d)  Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include, but are not limited to the following: 
    (1) Antimony; 
    (2) Beryllium; 
    (3) Bismuth; 
    (4) Cobalt; 
    (5) Molybdenum; 
    (6) Tin; 
    (7) Uranylion; 
    (8) Rhenium; 
    (9) Strontium; 
    (10) Tellurium; 
    (11) Herbicides; 
    (12) Fungicides; and 
    (13) Pesticides. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12) 
Sec. 86-5. - Garbage. 
(a)  No person may discharge garbage into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half inch in any dimensions are prohibited. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12) 
Sec. 86-6. - Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage. 
(a)  No person may discharge the following to public sanitary sewers: 
(1)  Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage; 
(2)  Unpolluted cooling water; 
(3)  Unpolluted industrial process waters; or 
(4)  Other unpolluted drainage. 
(b)  In compliance with the Texas Water Quality Act (V.T.C.A., Water Code § 26.001 et seq.) and other statutes, the approving authority may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) of this section may be discharged. 
(c)  Polluted stormwaters and cooling waters may be discharged to the public sewer provided that authorization has been granted by the city for such discharges under the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12) 
Sec. 86-7. - Temperature. 
    No person may discharge to the public sewers any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius) or any substance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour or a combined total increase of plant influent temperature to 110 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12) 
Sec. 86-8. - Radioactive wastes. 
(a)  No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the approving authority. 
(b)  The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12) 
Sec. 86-9. - Impairment of facilities. 
(a)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing: 
(1)  Obstruction to the flow in sewers; 
(2)  Interference with the operation of treatment processes of facilities; 
(3)  Excessive loading of treatment facilities; 
(4)  Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) of this section include but are not limited to materials which exert or cause concentrations of: 
a.  Inert suspended solids greater than 200 mg/l, including but not limited to: 
1.  Fuller's earth; 
2.  Lime slurries; and 
3.  Lime residues; 
b.  Dissolved solids greater than 145 mg/l, including but not limited to: 
1.  Sodium chloride; and 
2.  Sodium sulfate. 
c.  Excessive discoloration, including but not limited to: 
1.  Dye wastes; and 
2.  Vegetable tanning solutions; or 
d.  BOD, COD or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity. 
(b)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substances that may: 
(1)  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers; 
(2)  Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes due to the nonamenability of the substance to bacterial action; or wastewater treatment processes due to the nonamenability of the substance to bacterial action; or 
(3)  Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities. 
(c)  No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which: 
(1)  Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed; or 
(2)  Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(d)  The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may: 
(1)  Impair the treatment process; 
(2)  Cause damage to collection facilities; 
(3)  Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or 
(4)  Render the waste unfit for stream disposal. 
(e)  No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a) of this section if present in sufficient quantity or size, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Ashes; 
(2)  Cinders; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Mud; 
(5)  Straw; 
(6)  Shavings; 
(7)  Metal; 
(8)  Glass; 
(9)  Rags; 
(10)  Feathers; 
(11)  Tar; 
(12)  Plastics; 
(13)  Wood; 
(14)  Unground garbage; 
(15)  Whole blood; 
(16)  Paunch manure; 
(17)  Hair and fleshings; 
(18)  Entrails; 
(19)  Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders; 
(20)  Slop; 
(21)  Chemical residues; 
(22)  Paint residues; or 
(23)  Bulk solids. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12) 
Sec. 86-10. - Local limits for nondomestic users. 
(a)  Maximum allowable concentrations of discharges for all nondomestic users shall be as follows: 
PARAMETER CONCENTRATION NOT TO EXCEED AT ANY ITME - mg/l BOD 150 COD 250 TSS 200 Food-Based Oils or Grease 100 Cyanide 1 Chlorides 250 Fluorides None other than present in the public water supply  
(b)  Other specific requirements for nondomestic users shall be as follows: 
(1)  Nondomestic users shall provide pretreatment for fats, oils and greases by the use of grease traps. Nondomestic users will be required to maintain these traps in proper working order to maximize oil and grease removal. All traps shall be of adequate capacity, shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature, and shall so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by users at their expense. These traps will be inspected on a semi-annual basis at the discretion of the city. 
(2)  Nondomestic user's wastewater will be sampled on a periodic basis at the director's discretion. The frequency of sampling and type of testing to be conducted will be based on a particular facility's potential to exceed certain discharge standard or requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12) 
Sec. 86-11. - Local limits for industrial users. 
    Certain local limits apply to industrial users, as specified in article II Industrial Waste Disposal and Pretreatment, section 86-44. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12) 
Sec. 86-12. - Hauled or trucked in wastewater. 
(a)  Trucked in wastes to any city treatment facilities are subject to the same pretreatment standards and requirements of this article. Prior approval must be obtained from the city before any trucked in wastes can be accepted for treatment at any treatment facilities. Industrial users transporting wastes over land for disposal at a POTW must obtain a waste haulers permit from the state regulatory authorities. The city may request information considering the nature of trucked in wastes. This information may include, but is not limited to, material safety data sheets (MSDS), process information, quantity to be treated and sample results. 
(b)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the director, and at such times as are established by the director. Such waste shall not violate any standard or requirement of this article. Wastewater discharge permits for individual vehicle to discharge septic waste may be issued by the director. 
(c)  The director shall issue wastewater discharge permits to any haulers of industrial waste who discharge any industrial waste or wastewater into a public sewer or any other component of the POTW. The director may issue wastewater discharge permits to any generators of hauled industrial waste so discharged. The director may also prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other standards and requirements of this article unless otherwise authorized by the director. 
(d)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the director. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the director. The director may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The director may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(e)  Industrial waste haulers who discharge any waste or wastewater into a public sewer or any other component of the POTW must provide a waste tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are Resources Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) hazardous wastes. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12) 
Sec. 86-13. - Required and approved discharges. 
(a)  Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging: 
(1)  Wastewater; 
(2)  Industrial waste; 
(3)  Polluted liquids; or 
(4)  Certain unpolluted waters or liquids. 
(b)  Unless authorized by the state water development board, no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection (a) of this section on public or private property in or adjacent to any: 
(1)  Natural outlet; 
(2)  Watercourse; 
(3)  Storm sewer; or 
(4)  Other area within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(c)  The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state and local governments. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12) 
Sec. 86-14. - Connections made by city; service applications. 
(a)  All connections or taps to the city's water and sewer systems shall be made by employees of the city under the direction and supervision of the water superintendent. A work order shall be prepared and completed for all connections and taps to the city systems. Customer must pay the tap charges prior to installation of the taps as noted in subsections 86-15(1) and (2). 
(b)  Each house or premises must have a separate meter and connection. 
(c)  New customers are required to present a United States photo identification card and complete an application for utility services including a confidentiality notice at the time that the service is requested. If the owner is the applicant, proof of ownership is required. If the renter is the applicant, a lease agreement or owner authorization is required. Customers are also required to pay a deposit as noted in subsection 86-15(3). 
(d)  All utility service customers are required to certify that any city ordinances regarding utility services will be complied with as amended from time to time by the city council. This certification is included in the service application referred to in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12) 
Sec. 86-15. - Water and sewer tap charges, deposits, administrative penalties and other charges. 
    Water and sewer tap charges, deposits, administrative penalties and other charges shall be as follows: 
(1)  Water. Standard water tap fees for customers inside the city limits and outside the city limits are as follows: 
Size of Tap Cost of Service a. 3/4-inch T-off $235.77 b. 3/4-inch $471.52 c. 1-inch $619.72 + cost of meter d. 11/2-inch $929.58 + cost of meter e. 2-inch $1,239.42 + cost of meter  
Customers must pay for the cost of the meter for taps one inch and larger. Tap fees for taps larger than two inches shall be determined and based on the cost to install plus cost of water meter. 
In addition to the standard water tap fee, customers must also pay the city for any and all additional costs associated with installing a water tap: 
1.  Customers are responsible for the actual cost for main line extensions, boring under a street or pre-existing utility line, or any other additional costs necessary to install a water tap. All main line extensions will require the extension to be extended the width of the property to the next adjacent property line unless a variance is issued. All main line extensions will require a written agreement between the city and the customer. 
2.  Residential customers inside the city limits that qualify for a homestead exemption prior to applying for a building permit will receive up to 200 feet of line extension at no charge for the cost of materials and installation. Residential homestead customers in the city limits will be charged for any borings associated with the installation of the first 200 feet of line extension and will be charged for any main line extensions in excess of 200 feet. Residential customers outside the city limits will be charged for the first 200 feet as well as for any boring associated with the first 200 feet and for any main line extensions in excess of 200 feet. 
3.  Customers will be required to pay the city in advance for any additional costs associated with connecting to the city's main line based on the city's engineer's estimate for projected engineer and construction costs. Once the project is complete, the customer will either be billed or refunded the difference between the estimate and the actual cost. 
(2)  Sewer. Standard sewer tap fees for customers inside the city limits and outside the city limits are as follows: 
Size of Tap Cost of Service a. 4-inch $471.52 b. 6-inch $774.64  
In addition to the standard sewer tap fee, customers must also pay the city for any and all additional costs associated with installing a sewer tap: 
1.  Customers are responsible for the actual cost for main line extensions, boring under a street or pre-existing utility line, or any other additional costs necessary to install a sewer tap. All main line extensions will require the extension to be extended to the width of the property to the next adjacent property line unless a variance is issued. All main line extensions will require a written agreement between the city and the customer. 
2.  Residential customers inside the city limits that qualify for a homestead exemption prior to applying for a building permit will receive up to 200 feet of line extension at no charge for the cost of materials and installation. Residential homestead customers in the city limits will be charged for any borings associated with the installation of the first 200 feet of line extension and will be charged for any main line extensions in excess of 200 feet. Residential customers outside the city limits will be charged for the first 200 feet as well as for any boring associated with the first 200 feet and for any main line extensions in excess of 200 feet. 
3.  Customers will be required to pay the city in advance for any additional cost associated with connecting to the city's main line based on the city's engineer's estimate for projected engineer and construction costs. Once the project is complete, the customer will either be billed or refunded the difference between the estimate and the actual cost. 
Residential and commercial customers are required to put a sewer clean out at the property line where the city's line ties into the customer's line. 
(3)  Deposits. As a condition of receiving water, sewer and garbage service, the following deposits shall be charged: 
a.  Deposit amount: 
Residential customer ..... $100.00 
Residential-Senior citizens ..... $50.00 
(60 years or over) 
Commercial customer's ..... Based on estimated bill 
$100.00 minimum 
The deposit for all commercial customers including businesses, industrial users, multi-residential units and all others will be based on the estimated water, sewer and garbage charges for one month. If the customer has consumption history, the estimate will be based on a 12-month average. If the customer is a new customer with no consumption history, the estimate will be based on usage of a similar customer and consider the type of garbage service requested. Current deposit amounts will remain for commercial customers until there is a change in ownership or account status. 
b.  Deposits will not be required for public schools, counties, and other governmental entities. 
c.  Customers may transfer their deposits from one account to another account if they move from one address to another. The account must have a zero balance or the current balance will be transferred with the deposit and the new service enacted. 
d.  Customers transferring from one address to another must have paid the maximum deposit or must pay the difference between the deposit paid and the maximum deposit before the deposit can be transferred and the new service enacted. 
e.  Residential customers' deposits will be refunded by crediting the deposit amount to the customer's account after the customer has completed 24 months with no delinquent payments or no dishonored payments. If the customer has additional active accounts without deposits that have delinquent payments, the deposit will be transferred to one of the other accounts. A new deposit will be required if a customer appears on the cut-off list after the original deposit has been returned. 
f.  Customers must terminate utility services by providing written authorization signed or emailed by the customer whose name is on the account. In the event that the account is established under more than one name, any one person may authorize the disconnection of service. 
g.  Customers' deposits will be refunded by crediting the deposit amount to the customer's account when the account is finaled. Any remaining deposit will be mailed to the forwarding address provided by the customer. If the customer has additional active accounts without deposits, the deposit will be transferred to one of the other accounts. 
h.  Letters of credit are not acceptable in lieu of cash for payment of deposits as required in this section. 
i.  In the event a current utility service customer requests service at an additional address, the deposit may be waived if the customer has had no more than two delinquent payments on the existing account for the previous 12 months prior to the date of the request. In the event that either the initial account or any additional accounts appear on the cut-off list, an additional deposit will be required for each account. 
(4)  Administrative penalty. If payment is not received on a delinquent account and is placed on the cut-off list and water is due to be or is disconnected, an administrative penalty will be assessed as follows: 
Administrative penalty ..... $25.00 
(5)  Other charges include the following: 
a.  Late charges. If payment is not received by the 15th of each month, a penalty will be assessed on the 16th of each month at the rate noted below: 
Late charges ..... 5% of 
balance due 
b.  After hours charge. An after hours charge will be assessed for a reconnection due to nonpayment requested by the customer that is not between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday. Services requested on holidays will also be charged an after hour charge. 
After hours charge ..... $30.00 
c.  Charges of damages. Charges shall also be made for damages to equipment, such as meters, cutoff valves and locks. These charges shall be based on the actual cost of replacement, including labor, where applicable. 
d.  Industrial users. Industrial users may be subject to additional charges and fees, relating to permitting and noncompliance issues, as outlined in article II, Industrial Waste Disposal and Pretreatment, sections 86-41 through 86-78. 
e.  Restaurants, food preparation facilities and other commercial users. Restaurants, food preparation facilities, institutional facilities and other commercial type facilities utilizing grease traps will be subject to a $100.00 fee for each exceedance of the local oil and grease limit of 100 mg/l. This fee is not a surcharge. The payment of this fee does not authorize the discharge of wastes containing oil and grease in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l. This limit applies only to food grade oils of animal or vegetable origin. The concentration of petroleum-based oil and grease is limited to 15mg/l. The oil and grease exceedance fee will be assessed for each sample result, which indicates an excess oil and grease concentration in sewer discharges from the facility. The city will be responsible for collecting and analyzing all oil and grease samples from grease traps. Oil and grease trap sampling will be conducted on a periodic basis at the city's discretion. 
f.  Septic tank waste hauled or trucked into wastewater treatment plant as outlined in article II, section 86-54 will be billed at the following rate: 
Fees for hauling waste, per 1,000 gallons ..... $52.50 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12; Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 8-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-10, 8-24-15; Ord. No. 2016-06, § I, 8-22-16; Ord. No. 2017-09, § I, 8-28-17; Ord. No. 2018-06, § I, 8-27-18) 
Sec. 86-16. - Water service charges. 
(a)  The monthly charges for water service rendered by the city shall be as follows: 
Volume      Charges 
First 2,000 gallons (minimum) ..... $21.41 
Next 2,000 gallons, per 1,000 ..... $4.06 
Next 3,000 gallons, per 1,000 ..... $4.21 
Next 4,000 gallons, per 1,000 ..... $4.37 
Next 4,000 gallons, per 1,000 ..... $4.65 
Next 35,000 gallons, per 1,000 ..... $4.93 
Next 50,000 gallons, per 1,000 ..... $5.11 
Next 50,000 gallons, per 1,000 ..... $5.49 
Next 50,000 gallons, per 1,000 ..... $5.83 
(b)  Customers requesting temporary water services (seven-day increments) can apply for a temporary water rate based on the following: 
Volume      Charges 
First 8,000 gallons for seven days ..... $49.48 
Over 8,000 gallons, per 1,000 ..... $4.52 
The temporary water rate is intended as a temporary service for water only and will not be extended for more than 14 consecutive days without a deposit or connection fee being made in accordance with section 86-2, subsections (4) and (5). The base rate must be paid at the time the service is requested. Additional gallons will be billed after the temporary service is disconnected. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12; Ord. No. 2013-20, § I, 8-26-13; Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 8-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-10, 8-24-15; Ord. No. 2016-06, § I, 8-22-16; Ord. No. 2017-09, § I, 8-28-17; Ord. No. 2018-06, § I, 8-27-18) 
Sec. 86-17. - Sewer service charges. 
(a)  The monthly charges for sanitary sewer services rendered by the city shall be as follows: 
Volume      Charges 
First 2,000 gallons (minimum) ..... $23.00 
Next 2,000 gallons, per 1,000 ..... $3.58 
Next 3,000 gallons, per 1,000 ..... $4.37 
Next 4,000 gallons, per 1,000 ..... $4.85 
Next 4,000 gallons, per 1,000 ..... $5.21 
Next 35,000 gallons, per 1,000 ..... $5.64 
Next 50,000 gallons, per 1,000 ..... $6.13 
Next 50,000 gallons, per 1,000 ..... $6.49 
Next 50,000 gallons, per 1,000 ..... $6.95 
(b)  Residential customers. Monthly service charges for sewer service are based on the average water consumption for three winter months (December, January and February). The winter averaging is calculated in March and is reflected in the April 1st bill. New residential customers with no historical usage shall be billed for sewer usage based on the average residential customers' usage based on the most current winter averaging. 
(c)  Regular commercial customers. Monthly service charge for sewer service shall be based on the monthly-metered water usage at the rates set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12; Ord. No. 2013-20, § I, 8-26-13; Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 8-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-10, 8-24-15; Ord. No. 2016-06, § I, 8-22-16; Ord. No. 2017-09, § I, 8-28-17; Ord. No. 2018-06, § I, 8-27-18) 
Sec. 86-18. - Billing, collection, etc. 
(a)  Meters shall be read approximately every 30 days. Utility bills will be processed and mailed by the 1st day of each month. 
(b)  All monthly bills for services rendered by the water and sewer systems are due upon issuance by the City of Wharton and are payable by the due date noted on the bill. 
(c)  A delinquent charge (penalty) will be assessed to each account if not paid by the due date. Delinquent notices will be mailed on the next working day of the month following the due date as stated on the bill. In addition to delinquent notices, the city may use other forms of notification on delinquent accounts. 
(d)  The city may discontinue service if payment is not received in full by 5:00 p.m. on the 5th business day after the issuance of delinquent notices. The city is not responsible for delays in the mail. 
(e)  In the event of discontinuation of service, all amounts due the city including any penalties and charges are required to be paid in full before reconnection to the system. If the account is not paid in full by the tenth of the following month the account will be finalized and the deposit will be applied to the balance. 
(f)  Customers may appeal incorrect or improper billings with the supervisor of the utility administration department within 15 days of issuance of the monthly bills. The customer service division shall investigate the validity of customer complaints and provide a report on their findings within three days of such filing. No late charges shall be applied to any account with an appeal pending. The failure of any customer to receive a bill or the subsequent reminder notice shall not be grounds for appeal. If, in the sole opinion of the supervisor of the department, the investigation supports the appeal, the account may be adjusted, as appropriate. 
(g)  All checks issued for payment of water and/or sewer service returned unpaid shall incur a processing fee equal to the maximum amount allowed by law. 
(h)  Deposits. If any person attempts to pay a required deposit by check or similar instrument and such instrument is dishonored, the service for which such deposit was made shall be subject to disconnection without notice. A processing fee as prescribed in subsection 86-5(g) and an administrative penalty in accordance with the schedule set out in subsection 86-15(4) will be charged. 
(i)  Account payment. If any person attempts to pay an account bill by check or similar instrument and such instrument is dishonored, then the person obligated on the corresponding account shall be notified by letter sent by the United States first class mail that if he does not pay the bill, plus a processing fee as prescribed in subsection 86-5(g), in full, by cash or money order, within five business days, the service for which such bill was prepared shall be discontinued and corresponding account will be charged an administrative penalty in accordance with the schedule set out in subsection 86-15(4). A certificate of mailing by the United States Postal Service shall be prima facie evidence of delivery of such notice. The payment on account by dishonored check or similar instrument shall constitute nonpayment and shall be subject to penalties therefor. 
(j)  Payment by cash, cashier's check or money order. The city may refuse to accept payment by check or similar instrument from any person who has had three or more payments to the city made by check or similar instrument dishonored. The city shall notify the person in writing that only cash, cashier's check, or money order will be accepted from that person for one year. After one year, the customer may pay by check or similar instrument. 
(k)  A customer who deems his account to have had an extraordinary increase in consumption may appeal to the utility billing department for a credit adjustment. Consideration may be given for unavoidable leaks and unexplainable consumption which amounts to 125 percent or more of the normal consumption for that account with normal consumption defined as the consumption of the same account for the same month in the prior year or the average consumption for the account for the past 12 months, whichever is greater. The credit adjustment will be limited to two months and limited to one-half of the amount determined to be over the normal consumption. 
(l)  Utility customers may have their service temporarily disconnected for a period of not less than 30 days' by notification to the utility department. The account is said to be on-hold which means the service is disconnected by city employees and no charges are billed to the customer during that time. The city retains the deposit in order for the account to remain on-hold status. The account may remain "on-hold" status for a period not to exceed six months from the date the "on-hold" status began. Once the six-month period has lapsed, the account will become active. The account must have an active status for at least six months before the account may be put back "on-hold" status. However, all meters are checked on a monthly basis. Therefore, if there is any usage on the meter during the time the account is on vacation, the account will become active and all charges for water, sewer and garbage shall be billed to the customer. 
(m)  Final bill. Upon termination of utility services, a final bill will be calculated based on the customer's usage. The billed amount will also be prorated based on the date of the request to terminate services. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12) 
Sec. 86-19. - Water and sewer service for outside city limits. 
(a)  The city council may approve water and sewer service for customers outside the city limits. 
(b)  Charges for water and/or sewer service usage for customers outside the city limits shall be in accordance with sections 86-16 and 86-17. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12) 
Sec. 86-20. - Cleaning compounds. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cleaning compound means a cleaning compound in liquid, bar, spray, tablet, flake, powder or other form used for cleaning purposes. The term "cleaning compound" shall not mean: 
(1)  A metal cleaner, degreasing compound, commercial cleaner, industrial cleaner, or other substance that is intended to be used for industrial cleaning purposes. 
(2)  A phosphorus acid product, including a sanitizer, brightener, acid cleaner or metal conditioner. 
(3)  A detergent manufactured, stored or distributed for use or sale outside the city limits. 
    Phosphorus means elemental phosphorus. 
(b)  Restrictions. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer or expose for sale, give or furnish any cleaning compound containing more than 0.5 percent phosphorus by weight except that dish washing formulations may contain up to 8.70 percent phosphorus by weight within the city from and after October 1, 1992. 
(2)  The concentration of phosphorus by weight, expressed, as elemental phosphorus in any synthetic detergent or detergent shall be determined by the current applicable method prescribed by the American Society for Testing and Materials (A.S.T.M.). 
(c)  Voluntary limits. The city will try to operate its wastewater treatment system so that the amount of phosphorus discharged from the system is less than 2.5 milligrams per liter (2.5 mg/l) on a daily average. Samples will be taken and tested at the same time other samples are taken for regulatory purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12) 
Sec. 86-21. - Bulk water rates. 
(a)  Bulk sales through fire hydrant water meters temporarily installed at locations remote from the Wharton Volunteer Fire Department on Fulton Street will require the following: 
(1)  Advance, nonrefundable payment of $50.00 to the City of Wharton at City Hall for setting the meter connection at the fire hydrant or other appropriate locations as the city may determine; and 
(2)  Payment of bulk sales rate of $82.46 per month for the first 1,000 gallons of water dispensed, or any fraction thereof; $32.99 per month per 1,000 gallons dispensed, or any fraction thereof, beyond the initial 1,000 gallons dispensed; and 
(3)  Advance, refundable fire hydrant meter deposit payment of $200.00 to the City of Wharton at City Hall. 
(b)  Bulk sales through permanently installed water meter dispensation point at the Wharton Volunteer Fire Department on Fulton Street will require the following: 
(1)  No requirement for payment of meter setting fee; and 
(2)  Payment of bulk sales rate of $82.46 for the first 1,000 gallons of water dispensed, or any fraction thereof; $32.99 per 1,000 gallons dispensed, or any fraction thereof, beyond the initial 1,000 gallons dispensed; and 
(3)  No requirement for payment of the $200.00 fire hydrant meter deposit, however each water dispensation transaction authorized under this section must be prepaid to the City of Wharton at City Hall where a one-day dispensation voucher will be issued for presentation to the water plant operator to authorize a one-day dispensation of a not to exceed amount of water in gallons. The one-day dispensation voucher identifying the cumulative number of gallons purchased will allow for scheduled multiple withdrawals of water, but only during the same City of Wharton working day upon which initial dispensation commences. 
Bulk sales water service customers must provide a suitable mobile water containment vessel of sound quality for receiving and hauling water for use or consumption at any location within the Wharton water system. 
Public or private volunteer fire fighting organizations that procure water only for fire prevention and control purposes and do not resell such water for other purposes, are exempt from this classification, rates and fees schedule. Contractors constructing City of Wharton Public Works projects requiring potable water for dust control and construction operations shall also be exempt from this classification, rates and fees schedule. 
Any $200.00 refundable fire hydrant meter deposit paid to the City of Wharton may be applied by the City of Wharton to the payment of any bulk sales customer unpaid bills, and when so partially consumed through past-due account application, shall be restored by the bulk sales customer to the original $200.00 amount. 
Bulk sales water service dispensation to consumers having only an occasional need for such water service are encouraged to utilize the permanently installed water meter dispensation point at the Wharton Volunteer Fire Department located on Fulton Street. 
Use of the Fulton Street permanently installed water meter dispensation point requires advanced payment by check or cash to the City of Wharton at City Hall and at least four hours advanced scheduling of prospective water withdrawals which shall also only occur during the following city working hours Monday-Friday 9:00 a.m.-12:00 p.m. and 1:00 p.m.-4:00 p.m. (Saturday, Sunday and city holidays excluded). 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12; Ord. No. 2013-20, § I, 8-26-13; Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 8-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-10, 8-24-15; Ord. No. 2016-06, § I, 8-22-16; Ord. No. 2017-09, § I, 8-28-17; Ord. No. 2018-06, § I, 8-27-18) 
Sec. 86-22. - Bypass. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(2)  Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  A user may allow a bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements only if it is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  (1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass it shall submit it prior notice to the control authority, at least ten working days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the control authority of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five working days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The control authority may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(d)  (1)  Bypass is prohibited, and the control authority may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass unless: 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, pump and truck, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed during normal periods of equipment downtime or as preventive maintenance in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment or prevent a bypass; 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  The control authority may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the control authority determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (d)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § I, 8-27-12) 
Sec. 86-23. - Grease ordinance; fats, oils, grease, and grit program. 
(a)  Applicability and purpose. 
(1)  The purpose of the ordinance codified herein is to aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages, obstructions and sanitary sewer overflows caused by the accumulation of fats, oils, grease, grit, and lint discharged into the sanitary sewer system. 
(2)  This section shall apply to all nondomestic users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW), as defined in the general provisions of this chapter, whose waste discharge contains or may contain grease, oil, sand or other harmful pollutants originating from processes including, but not limited to, food preparation and serving, vehicle and equipment washing, machine shops and garages, carpet cleaning and water extraction, steam cleaning and chemical cleaning facilities or any facility with a liquid waste holding tank. 
(3)  Grease traps or grease interceptors shall not be required for residential users. 
(4)  Facilities generating fats, oils or greases as a result of food manufacturing, processing, preparation, or food service shall install, use and maintain appropriate grease traps or interceptors as required for compliance with this section. These facilities, include but are not limited to, restaurants, food manufacturers, food processors, hospitals, hotels and motels, prisons, nursing homes, and any other facility preparing, serving, or otherwise making any foodstuff available for consumption. 
(5)  No generator may intentionally or unintentionally allow the direct or indirect discharge of any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or any fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin into the POTW system in such amounts as to cause interference with the collection and treatment system, or as to cause pollutants to pass through the treatment works into the environment. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  This section shall apply to all nondomestic users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW), as defined in the general provisions section of this section. 
(c)  Grease traps, interceptors, separators and holding tanks. 
(1)  Users required to maintain pretreatment devices. 
a.  Grease traps, interceptors, separators or holding tanks shall be provided for the proper handling of wastes containing grease, oil, sand and/or other harmful pollutants which may interfere with the operation and maintenance of the POTW and shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
b.  All restaurants, institutions, cafeterias, or other establishments preparing or serving food shall be required to install and maintain a grease trap for the efficient removal of oil and grease from the waste stream. The design and installation of such devices shall be subject to review and approval by the control authority. 
1.  Designs shall include sample ports. The control authority may require any nondomestic user to install a suitable sampling port in the private sewer to facilitate observation sampling and measurement of the wastes and flows. Sampling ports shall be readily accessible to the control authority at all times. 
c.  All existing vehicle and equipment wash areas shall be equipped with interceptors for the removal of sand and other solids. Where an existing vehicle and equipment wash area is shown to discharge excessive oil and grease, the control authority may require installation of a separator. New vehicle and equipment wash facilities or any existing facility which has closed and proposes to reopen shall be required to provide interceptors and separators for the removal of oils, grease, sand and/or other pollutants before discharging to the sewerage system. The design and installation of such devices shall be subject to review and approval by the control authority. 
d.  It shall be the responsibility of the user/generator to furnish, operate and maintain such pretreatment devices as necessary to produce an effluent in compliance with this or other applicable ordinances. 
e.  Holding tanks shall be provided by the user/generator for automotive or other such waste oils and other waste which is prohibited from being discharged into the sanitary sewer. Such holding tanks shall be constructed to prevent leakage and splashing during operation and cleaning. Such tanks shall be maintained to preclude odor and other nuisances and shall not be connected to the sanitary sewer or in any other way be allowed to be discharged to the sanitary sewer. 
(2)  Existing facilities. 
a.  Existing facilities required by this or other applicable ordinances to maintain a grease trap, interceptor or separator not equipped with an adequately sized treatment unit shall within 18 months of the effective date of ordinance codified in this section, install an adequately sized grease trap, interceptor or separator in accordance with the specifications of this section. 
b.  Existing facilities required by this or other applicable ordinances to maintain a grease trap, interceptor or separator not equipped with a sample port shall within 18 months of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, install a sample port in accordance with the specifications of this section. 
c.  Existing facilities required by this or other applicable ordinances to maintain a grease trap, interceptor or separator not equipped with required pretreatment device for the type of business shall within 12 months of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, install an adequately sized grease trap, interceptor or separator in accordance with the specifications of this section. 
d.  In any circumstance where, in the opinion of the control authority the existing grease trap, separator or interceptor or the absence of a grease trap, separator or interceptor poses a serious threat or an on-going problem to the sanitary sewer, is a public nuisance, or poses a threat to public health or to the environment, the control authority may require the grease trap, interceptor or separator be installed or replaced under a more stringent specification. 
e.  If a food establishment or any other facility requiring a grease trap, interceptor or separator shall cease operation and shall be required to come into compliance, then such establishment or facility shall be required to comply with this section before reopening. If a commercial establishment that is occupied by multiple suites and/or a tenant has closed for operations, it is the property owner's responsibility to maintain the cleaning ordinance for the grease trap, separator, or interceptor until to the suite is occupied. 
(3)  General specifications. 
a.  Specifications outlined in this section shall be considered minimum only. It shall be the responsibility of each user to have a grease trap, interceptor or separator designed and installed and maintained that will produce an effluent in compliance with the requirements of this or other applicable ordinances. 
1.  Grease traps, interceptors and separators shall meet or exceed the more stringent of specifications and requirements set forth in this division and other applicable local, state or federal requirements. 
b.  Grease traps, interceptors and separators shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature and capable of withstanding the traffic load where installed. 
1.  Manhole rings and covers, shall not be less than 24 inches in diameter, shall be installed in the lid of each compartment to facilitate easy access for cleaning and inspection. The manholes shall be placed so that all internal piping is accessible for maintenance and inspection. The cover shall be at or near, but not below the finished grade. 
c.  Plans for new grease traps, interceptors and separators or modifications to existing grease traps, interceptors and separators shall be submitted to the control authority. 
1.  A description of plumbing fixtures draining to the trap, the number of fixture units and calculations used to determine the proposed capacity shall be included in the submittal. 
2.  The control authority shall verify that all requirements have been met on the final plans prior to issuance of any required plumbing or construction permits and subsequent construction. 
d.  All new installations of grease traps, interceptors and separators shall be equipped with an approved sampling port immediately downstream of the treatment facility. 
1.  Sampling ports/sample well shall be easily accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the control authority. Sampling ports shall be inspected by the control authority prior to use. 
2.  Sampling ports/sample well shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
3.  Sampling ports/sample well shall be installed in the building sewer immediately downstream of the grease trap, interceptor or separator. 
4.  The sampling port/sample well shall be a minimum of 12 inches in diameter, equipped with an access cover, with a flow channel not less than four inches in width and 12 inches in length. 
5.  Sampling ports/sample well shall be constructed to exclude the entry of stormwater and groundwater and exit of wastewater (prevention of infiltration, exfiltration). 
e.  Grease trap, interceptors, separators and sampling ports/sample well shall be installed by a licensed plumber. Completed grease traps, interceptors, separators and sampling ports/sample well shall be subjected to inspection by the control authority prior to connection to the sanitary sewer. 
f.  The control authority may at his sole discretion allow existing users with existing under-sized grease traps, interceptors or separators a trial period specified by the control authority in which to demonstrate that the use of best management practices, housekeeping procedures and increased maintenance of the grease trap, interceptor or separator to consistently produce an effluent in compliance with established limitations. 
1.  The user shall maintain records of procedures, training, and extra maintenance necessary to demonstrate the conditions of the trial period are being met. 
2.  The user shall have an appropriate sample port before any trial may begin. 
3.  At least six analyses shall be required within the trial period to demonstrate consistent compliance. Samples shall be collected at random times by an approved testing lab or by the control authority. All costs for sampling and analyses shall be borne by the user. 
i.  A user who has demonstrated consistent compliance during the trial period may be allowed to continue to operate with the existing treatment device. The user may be subject to periodic monitoring to demonstrate continued compliance. 
ii.  A user who has not been able to demonstrate consistent compliance shall be required to install a properly sized treatment device. 
(4)  Grease interceptor specifications. 
a.  The minimum size of grease traps shall be determined according to the number of fixture units draining through the trap, but shall in no case, have a total liquid capacity of less than 750 gallons. 
1.  The total number of fixture units multiplied by 150 gallons shall determine the minimum total liquid capacity of the interceptor. Fixture units shall be defined in accordance with the applicable plumbing code. 
2.  The primary chamber shall occupy three-fourths of the total liquid capacity of the interceptor. 
3.  The dividing wall between each chamber shall completely divide the chambers (shall extend top to bottom) except where the specific design of the interceptor provides for underflow, in which case the wall shall not be greater than 12 inches from the bottom, between the chambers rather than flow traveling through a pipe. 
b.  Grease interceptors shall be equipped with double cleanouts on the outside of the trap in both the influent and effluent pipes. 
c.  The influent shall enter the first chamber of the grease interceptor below the static level in accordance with the specifications outlined in this section. The effluent shall discharge from below the static water level of the second chamber in accordance with the specifications outlined in this section. 
1.  The influent line into the first chamber shall terminate no greater than 18 inches from the bottom of the first chamber. 
2.  The effluent line into the second chamber shall discharge from the lower 12 inches of the second chamber. 
3.  There shall be no openings in any influent or effluent pipe that will allow liquid to enter or exit the chamber at any point other than the intake or discharge point of the pipe. 
4.  The static water level shall be maintained throughout the entire interceptor. 
(5)  Grease trap specifications. 
a.  All grease traps shall meet the manufacturers' specifications. The grease traps shall be operated and maintained in accordance with manufacturers' operating procedures. 
(6)  Oil and water separator specifications. 
a.  Separators shall have a minimum detention time of not less than five minutes. The minimum size shall be in accordance with the specifications in this section. 
1.  Separators may be located inside the wash bay and may be equipped with a grated cover, provided the openings in the cover are not greater than one-half inch. When located inside the wash bay, the control authority may require a larger capacity separator be installed to facilitate efficient sand and grit removal. Covers shall be easily removable for cleaning and inspection. 
2.  Where located outside the wash bay, the separator shall be equipped with solid, watertight covers on each chamber and shall be preceded by a catch basin, located inside the bay, equipped with a grated cover with openings not greater than one-half inch. Covers shall be easily removable for cleaning and inspection. 
3.  The inlet and outlet lines shall be designed and installed to provide uniform flow and stilling in the separator and to prevent sand from passing through the separator. 
4.  The influent line into the first chamber shall terminate no greater than 18 inches from the bottom of the first chamber. 
5.  The effluent line into the second chamber shall discharge from the lower 12 inches of the second chamber. 
6.  There shall be no openings in any influent or effluent pipe that will allow liquid to enter or exit the chamber at any point other than the intake or discharge point of the pipe. 
7.  The static water level shall be maintained throughout the entire separator. 
b.  Minimum sizing for separators, where required, shall be 150 gallons per fixture unit draining into the separator, but not less than the minimum sizes outlined below: 
Separator Minimum Size Portable washer Greater of 500 gal. or 150 gal./fixture unit Single coin-operated wash bay Greater of 500 gal. or 150 gal./fixture unit Manual hand wash, single bay only Greater of 500 gal. or 150 gal./fixture unit 2-4 coin-operated or manual hand wash bays Greater of 1,000 gal. or 150 gal./fixture unit >4 coin-operated or manual hand wash bays Greater of 1,000 gal.+200 gal./bay >4 or 150 gal./fixture unit Drive-through wash bay Greater of 500 gal./bay or 150 gal./fixture unit  
1.  The primary chamber shall occupy three-fourths of the total liquid capacity of the trap/interceptor. 
2.  The dividing wall between each chamber shall completely divide the chambers (shall extend top to bottom) except where the specific design of the interceptor provides for underflow, in which case the wall shall not be greater than 12 inches from the bottom, between the chambers rather than flow traveling through a pipe. 
(d)  Installation and maintenance requirements. 
(1)  Installations. 
a.  New facilities. Food processing or food service facilities which are newly proposed or constructed, or existing facilities which will be expanded or renovated to include a food service facility, where such facility did not previously exist, shall be required to design, install, operate and maintain a grease trap/interceptor in accordance with this section, locally adopted plumbing codes or other applicable ordinances. Grease traps, interceptors or separators shall be installed and inspected prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
b.  Existing facilities. Existing grease traps, interceptors or separators must be operated and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and in accordance with this section, unless specified in writing and approved by the control authority. 
c.  All grease traps, interceptors or separators waste shall be properly disposed of at an appropriate facility in accordance with federal, state or local regulations. 
(2)  Cleaning and maintenance. 
a.  Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be maintained in an efficient operating condition at all times. 
b.  Each grease trap pumped shall be fully evacuated unless the trap volume is greater than the tank capacity on the vacuum truck in which case the transporter shall arrange for additional transportation capacity so that the trap is fully evacuated within a 24-hour period, in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code 312.143. 
(3)  Cleaning schedules. 
a.  Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be cleaned as often as necessary to ensure that sediment and floating materials do not accumulate to impair the efficiency of the grease traps, interceptors or separators; to ensure the discharge is in compliance with local discharge limits; and to ensure no visible grease is observed in the discharge. 
b.  Grease traps and grease interceptors subject to these standards shall be completely evacuated a maximum of every 90 days, or more frequently when: 
1.  Twenty-five percent or more of the wetted height of the grease trap or grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe contains floating materials, sediments, oils or greases; 
2.  The discharge exceeds BOD, COD, TSS, FOG, pH, or other pollutant levels established by the POTW; or 
3.  If there is a history of noncompliance. 
c.  Any person or business who owns or operates a grease trap, interceptor or separator may submit to the POTW a request in writing for an exception to the 90-day pumping frequency on a case-by-case basis when: 
1.  The grease trap, interceptor or separator owner/operator has demonstrated the specific trap, interceptor or separator will produce an effluent, based on defensible analytical results, in consistent compliance with established local discharge limits such as BOD, COD, TSS, FOG, or other parameters as determined by the POTW; or 
2.  Twenty-five percent of the wetted height of the grease trap, interceptor or separator, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or grease. 
d.  In any event, a grease trap, interceptor or separator shall be fully evacuated, cleaned and inspected at least every 180 days or an extended period of time for cleaning/inspection may be granted by the control authority for facilities that operate less than 365 days per year. 
(4)  Manifest requirements. 
a.  Each pump-out of a grease trap, interceptor or separator must be accompanied by a manifest to be used for record keeping purposes. 
b.  Businesses or persons who generate, collect and/or transport grease waste shall maintain a record of each individual collection and deposit. Such records shall be in the form of a manifest. The manifest shall include: 
1.  Name of business, address, generator representative name and signature, date and time waste was collected, business identification number, type of waste removed from premises, and tank capacity. 
2.  Name of transporter company, address, TCEQ registration number, name of transporter representative and signature, date the waste was removed, vehicle permit number, and gallons of waste removed. 
3.  Name of disposal site, address, TCEQ registration number, name of disposal site representative and signature, date and time the waste was deposited at the disposal site. 
c.  Manifests can be obtained at Wharton City Hall and will consist of five parts and records shall be maintained as follows: 
1.  One part of the manifest shall have the generator and transporter information completed and shall be given to the generator at the time of waste pickup. 
2.  The remaining four parts of the manifest shall have all required information completely filled out and signed by the appropriate party before distribution of the manifest. 
3.  One part of the manifest shall go to the receiving facility. 
4.  One part shall go to the transporter company, who shall retain a copy of all manifests showing the collection and disposition of waste. 
5.  One copy of the manifest shall be returned by the transporter to the business who generated the wastes within 15 calendar days after the waste is received at the disposal site or processing facility. 
6.  One part of the manifest shall go to Wharton City Code Enforcement. 
d.  Copies of manifests returned to the waste generator shall be retained for three years and be readily available for review by the control authority. 
e.  Manifests shall be completed and returned to the city every 90 days or in accordance with the routine cleaning schedule. A manifest from each generator will be submitted to the city in the months assigned from the results of the initial survey conducted by the control authority. The generator will be subject to enforcement action including fines, penalties for late submittal of the manifest. 
(5)  Alternative treatment. 
a.  A business/person commits an offense if the person introduces or causes, permits, or suffers the introduction of any surfactant, solvent or emulsifier into a grease trap. Surfactants, solvents and emulsifiers are materials which allow the grease to pass from the trap into the collection system and include, but are not limited to, enzymes, soap, diesel, kerosene, terpene, and other solvents. 
b.  It is an affirmative defense to an enforcement of alternative treatment subsection (d)(5) a. above, that the use of surfactants or soaps is incidental to normal kitchen hygiene operations. 
c.  Bio-remediation media may be used with the POTW's approval if the person requesting use of bio-remediation media has proved to the satisfaction of the POTW that laboratory testing, which is appropriate for the type of grease trap to be used, has verified that: 
1.  The media is a pure live bacterial product which is not inactivated by the use of domestic or commercial disinfectants and detergents, strong alkalis, acids, and/or water temperature of 140 degrees F (60 degrees C). 
2.  The use of the media does not reduce the buoyancy of the grease layer in the grease trap and does not increase the potential for oil and grease to be discharged to the sanitary sewer. 
3.  The use of the bio-remediation media does not cause foaming in the sanitary sewer. 
4.  The BOD, COD and TSS discharged to the sanitary sewer after use of the media does not exceed the BOD, COD and TSS which would be discharged if the product were not being used and the grease trap was being properly maintained. pH levels must be between five and 11. 
d.  All testing designed to satisfy the criteria set forth in subsection (d)(5)c. shall be scientifically sound and statistically valid in the opinion of the POTW. All tests to determine oil and grease, TSS, BOD, COD, pH, and other pollutant levels shall use appropriate tests which have been approved by the Environmental Protection Agency and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality and which are defined in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 136 or Title 30, Texas Administrative Code 319.11. Testing shall be open to inspection by the POTW, and shall meet the POTW's approval. 
(e)  Inspections. 
(1)  The control authority will conduct a survey for each new and existing facility with grease traps, interceptors, or separators. After a full quarter of inspections (three months), a review will take place to determine which customers should be placed on scheduled inspection, i.e.: monthly, quarterly, bi-annually or annually based on the consumption of grease, oil, lint, and/or sand traps. 
(2)  Inspection will be completed one time on the date placed on scheduled inspection, unless re-inspection is required. 
(f)  Re-inspections. 
(1)  If the grease traps, interceptors, or separators are not in compliance, the trap or manifest will require a re-inspection within a timely manner determined by the control authority. The generator will be given sufficient time to rectify the issue. 
(2)  Re-inspection will result in a $50.00 fee for each required re-inspection. Charges for re-inspections will be automatically assessed to customer's utility account when a re-inspection is performed. 
(g)  Violations, fees, fines and penalties. 
(1)  Manifest submittals. 
a.  Each generator is responsible for submitting a manifest to the city in the months assigned from the results of the initial survey conducted by the control authority. 
b.  Late submittal of a manifest will result in a $100.00 late fee, plus $5.00 per day that the manifest is late. 
(2)  Violations and enforcement. 
a.  Any business or generator who does not adhere to the cleaning and maintenance schedule set forth in this section and who discharges any contaminant into the city sewer will incur the following fines and penalties: 
1.  Two thousand dollars per violation per day that the business or generator remains in violation. 
2.  The business or generator will be immediately shut down until the violation has been rectified. 
3.  The business or generator will be responsible for all cleanup, and costs to remediate any damage caused by the violation. 
4.  All costs incurred by the city to clean out the FOG, and TSS in the city sewer lines will be billed to the violating business. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § II, 1-26-15; Ord. No. 2019-02, 1-14-19) 
Secs. 86-24-86-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISPOSAL AND PRETREATMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, adopted Aug. 26, 2002, amended art. II, §§ 86-41-86-78, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1998-06, § I, adopted March 23, 1998. 

Sec. 86-41. - Definitions. 
    The words, terms and phrases, defined in article I, general requirements, when used in this article, shall have the same meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-42. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This industrial waste pretreatment ordinance [this article] sets forth uniform requirements to be met by all industrial and nondomestic users utilizing the wastewater collection, transportation and treatment system for the city. This article is written to enable the city wastewater treatment system to comply with and enforce all applicable state and federal laws pertaining to industrial wastewater quality control. 
(b)  The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system that will interfere with its operation or pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the wastewater system; 
(2)  Enable the city to comply with its NPDES permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the wastewater facilities are subject; and 
(3)  Enable the city to preserve and improve the opportunity to reuse or reclaim any treated waste streams. 
(c)  This article shall be given full force and effect inside the corporate limits of Wharton and within those unincorporated areas located outside the corporate limits of Wharton, but with whom the city has contracted sewer services. 
(d)  The article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits, authorizes monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities, establishes administrative review procedures, requires user reporting and provides for penalties for violations of the regulations established herein. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-43. - General requirements. 
    Industrial users are subject to the same general requirements outlined in article I, general requirements, sections 86-1 through 86-20. 
Sec. 86-44. - Local limits. 
(a)  Maximum allowable concentrations of discharges for all industrial users shall be as follows: 
Parameter Concentration Not to Exceed 
at Any Time - mg/l BOD 150 COD 250 TSS 200 Total oils or grease  15 Cyanide   1 Chlorides 250 Fluorides None other than present in the public water supply  
(b)  No discharge to public sewers may contain the following: Surfactants, emulsifiers, lubricating agents, detergents or other materials in concentrations or quantities which would interfere with the normal operation of treatment processes or facilities or which would cause an excessive loading of treatment facilities. 
(c)  Compliance with the local limits shall be determined based on a per sample occurrence daily average for all composite sample parameters and a per sample occurrence daily maximum for all grab sample parameters, as outlined in section 86-53. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-45. - Pretreatment requirements. 
(a)  Pretreatment facilities. 
(1)  Industrial users shall provide wastewater pretreatment as necessary to comply with Articles I and II of this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, federal, state, and local limits, and the prohibitions set out in this article within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state or the director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and their operating procedures shall be submitted to the director for review before such facilities are constructed. The review of plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or their method of operation shall be reported to and be reviewed for approval by the director prior to the user's initiation of the changes. All plans and drawings for installation of treatment facilities shall have been prepared and signed by a registered professional civil or sanitary engineer (PE) in the State of Texas. 
(b)  Pretreatment program requirements. 
(1)  All industrial users found not to be in compliance, as determined solely by the director, shall be required to develop a compliance schedule for the installation of technology required to meet applicable pretreatment standards. This schedule shall be submitted to the director within 30 days of the effective date of this article. 
(c)  Categorical pretreatment standards. Within 60 days after the effective date of an applicable pretreatment standard user must submit a report to the POTW describing the results of the facility's determination of any categorical pretreatment standard applicable to them. The facility must also demonstrate compliance with any applicable standards within 180 days. Any facility currently subject to any categorical pretreatment standards must notify the director in the required permit application. 
(d)  Additional pretreatment measures. 
(1)  Whenever deemed necessary, the director may require industrial users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the industrial user's compliance with the requirements of this article. The director shall provide the user sufficient' notice and explanation for any additional requirements, opportunity to respond to the notice, and opportunity to appeal the final decision. 
(2)  The director may require any industrial user discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. The director shall provide the user sufficient notice and explanation for any additional requirements, opportunity to respond to the notice, and opportunity to appeal the final decision. 
(3)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors for industrial and nondomestic wastes shall be provided for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease, oil, or sand. All interception units shall be of adequate capacity, shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature, and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by users at their expense. The director shall provide the user sufficient notice and explanation for any additional requirements, opportunity to respond to the notice, and opportunity to appeal the final decision. 
(4)  Industrial users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(5)  At no time shall two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-46. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
    At least once every two years, the director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The director may require any industrial user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the director may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by this article; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures shall include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structure or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-47. - Approving authority requirements. 
(a)  If industrial discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters; create a hazard to life or health; or create a public nuisance the director shall require: 
(1)  Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(2)  Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and 
(3)  Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(b)  The director is entitled to determine whether an industrial discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The director shall reject industrial wastes when: 
(1)  It determines that an industrial discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  The industrial discharger does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-48. - Approving authority review and approval. 
(a)  If pretreatment or control of sewage is required, the director shall review and approve design and installation of equipment and processes. 
(b)  The design and installation of all industrial pretreatment equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws. All designs and plans submitted to the director for pretreatment facilities must be prepared by a registered professional civil or sanitary engineer in the State of Texas. 
(c)  Industrial users responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow equalizing or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at their own expense. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-49. - Industrial user wastewater discharge permit application program. 
(a)  Industrial user wastewater surveys. Within 15 days of the effective date of this article, all industrial users identified and notified by the city as such, must submit the results of a wastewater survey conducted at their facility to the director. This survey must include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The name of the owner and operator of the industrial user; 
(2)  The facility name, address and standard industrial classification code; 
(3)  A schematic drawing indicating the location of all discharge points to the public sewer; 
(4)  Information concerning the flow and quality of all discharges to the public sewer, with reference to specific discharge points; 
(5)  Any existing analytical results conducted by the industrial user substantiating statements concerning the quality of specific discharges; and 
(6)  A statement regarding the ability of the industrial user to meet and comply with all pretreatment standards and requirements included in this article. This statement must be signed by an authorized representative of the corporation or company. If an industrial user determines that compliance with any pretreatment standard or requirement contained in this article cannot be achieved by the required effective date, then a compliance plan and schedule must accompany this statement. The compliance plan and schedule must describe in detail how and when compliance will be attained. Failure to implement specific items contained in the compliance plan, or failure to implement items within the time frame of the compliance schedule, shall be deemed violations of this article and shall subject the user to potential civil and criminal penalties. 
(b)  All industrial users meeting the criteria for significant industrial user, unless otherwise authorized by the director, must prepare and submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater by completing a wastewater permit application. This application must be submitted within 30 days of the effective date of this article. Failure to submit required information shall be grounds for terminating service to the user and shall be considered a violation of this article. New industrial users must submit this permit application 30 days prior to commencement of their discharge. 
(c)  Industrial user wastewater discharge permit requirements. 
(1)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining permission by way of a permit from the director. Existing users shall have 30 days from the effective date of this article during which to seek such approval by submitting a permit application to the director. Existing users may continue to discharge during the permit review and issuance period provided that such discharge meets all of the discharge criteria specified in this article. 
Any user determining that such compliance cannot be achieved, or any user who is aware that possible violation of any condition specified in this article regarding wastewater quality, must notify the director of such noncompliance as soon as such knowledge is available. The director may provide special authorization to these users provided a compliance plan and schedule has been submitted and approved by the director. 
(2)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in this article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(d)  Industrial user wastewater discharge permit application contents. All industrial users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The format for submittal of the permit application is left to the discretion of the industrial user; however, the users must submit as part of the application the following information at a minimum: 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the industrial facility, including the name of the operator and owner; 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility; 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production and standard industrial classifications of the operations carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram, which indicates all points of discharge to the POTW; 
(4)  A list of all raw materials and chemicals stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
(5)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location and elevation; 
(6)  Description of the time and duration of discharge; 
(7)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured or calculated average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from all discharge points. For calculated discharge quantities, the basis for all calculations must be documented; 
(8)  Measurement of pollutants. The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration of regulated pollutants from each individual wastewater stream discharged to the POTW. These samples should include parameters known or suspected to be present in wastewaters based on the user's process knowledge or previous sample results. At a minimum, at least results must be submitted for a minimum of one sample from each discharge into the POTW for the following parameters: Ph, oil and grease, biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand and total suspended solids. Other sampling parameters may be requested by the director at a later date, based on information provided in the permit application; 
(9)  Certification. A statement, reviewed and authorized by the industrial user's authorized representative indicating whether the pretreatment standards are being met, and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment, is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(10)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the user must submit a compliance schedule indicating the completion date by which the users shall have provided such additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance. This compliance schedule shall not extend beyond 180 days from the effective date of this article. Any user not meeting the pretreatment standard and requirements of this article after this date shall be required to submit justifiable evidence for non-compliance. This evidence must be submitted before a hearing held by the city council. Any user not meeting the pretreatment standards and requirements of this article 180 days after its effective date may only continue such discharge with special authorization granted by the hearing; 
(11)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the director to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Signature and certification. All permit applications must be signed and certified by an authorized representative of the corporation or company. This statement must indicate whether the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment, is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(e)  Industrial wastewater discharge permit contents. An industrial user wastewater discharge permit issued by the director shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Industrial user wastewater discharge permits will contain the following conditions: 
a.  A statement regarding the industrial wastewater discharge permit duration, such in no event shall exceed five years; 
b.  A statement that the industrial wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with this article, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Facility discharge limits to the POTW based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local laws and pretreatment requirements; and 
e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
f.  A statement that the permit may be revoked if the requirements for self-monitoring, reporting, compliance and any other requirement set forth in the permit or in this article are not being met. 
g.  A statement that the industrial user shall not allow a bypass to occur except as provided in section 86-22. 
h.  Requirements for reporting accidental and/or slug discharges as per the provisions of this policy. 
i.  Requirements for reporting the introduction of any new wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the POTW. 
j.  Requirements for the installation of inspection and sampling facilities, including requirements for director access to such facilities. 
(2)  Industrial user wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(f)  Industrial user wastewater discharge permit appeals. The director shall provide personal notice to the industrial user and published notice to the public of the issuance, modification, or denial of a wastewater discharge permit. Any affected person, including the user, may petition the city manager to reconsider the terms of an issued or modified wastewater discharge permit, or the denial of a permit, within 30 days of notice of its issuance, modification, or denial. 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. Any reasons urged against a permit denial must be fully explained. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit, as issued or modified, shall not be stayed pending the appeal unless the city manager expressly so states. 
(4)  The city manager shall respond in writing to any petition for reconsideration within 60 days. In his response, the city manger shall indicate his decision whether to affirm or modify the terms of any permit issued or modified, or whether upon reconsideration to deny the permit. If the permit was initially denied, the city manager shall indicate his decision whether to affirm the initial denial or to vacate the initial denial and issue the permit upon specified terms. The city manager's action upon any petition for reconsideration shall be considered final for purposes of any judicial review. 
(5)  If the city manager fails to act on any petition for reconsideration within 60 days, the petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Such deemed denial shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of any judicial review. 
(6)  Aggrieved parties seeking any judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint in a court of competent jurisdiction within the appropriate statute of limitations. 
(g)  Industrial user wastewater discharge permit modification. The director may modify the industrial user wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, city personnel, lines, or equipment or to the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(8)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(h)  Industrial user wastewater discharge permit revocation, industrial user wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the director of changed conditions; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying information or reports; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the director timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet facility discharge limits to the POTW; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
An industrial user will be notified of any proposed permit revocation and offered an opportunity to show cause why the proposed revocation should not occur. Industrial user wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(i)  Industrial user wastewater discharge permit reissuance. 
(1)  An industrial user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with subsection (d), a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(2)  An expired permit will continue to be effective and enforceable until the permit is reissued if: 
a.  The industrial user has submitted a complete permit application at least 90 days prior to the expiration date of the user's existing permit; and 
b.  The failure to reissue the permit, prior to expiration of the previous permit, is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the user. 
(j)  Reports of changed conditions. Each industrial user must notify the director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations of system which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least 90 days before the change. 
(1)  The director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of an industrial user wastewater discharge permit application. 
(2)  The director may issue an industrial user wastewater discharge permit or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases to 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-50. - Industrial user record keeping requirements. 
(a)  Any industrial user shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities required. These records must be retained for a minimum of three years. Such records shall be made available for inspection and copying by the POTW or any other duly authorized regulatory official. 
(b)  Such records shall include for all samples: 
(1)  The date, exact place, method and time of sampling and the names of the persons taking the sample; 
(2)  The dates analyses were performed; 
(3)  Who performed the analyses; 
(4)  The analytical techniques and methods used; and 
(5)  The results of such samples. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-51. - Industrial user reports of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the industrial user shall immediately telephone and notify the director of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, (if known) and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five days following such discharge, the industrial user shall, unless waived by the director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. 
(c)  Failure to notify the director of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(d)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (a) above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-52. - Industrial user building sewers. 
(a)  Any person responsible for sewer discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Install an accessible and safely located control manhole; 
(2)  Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the waste; 
(3)  Maintain the equipment and facilities; and 
(4)  Install an accessible and representative compliance sampling point at each point of discharge to the public sewer. 
    The city will consult with users on the selection of appropriate control/compliance points from existing connections and/or manholes, if feasible. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-53. - Industrial users sampling and testing requirements. 
    The following apply only to industrial users: 
(1)  Sampling of industrial wastes discharged to the public sewer shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the POTW and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb and property. 
(2)  Compliance samples shall be collected at a minimum of three times per week for significant industrial users. After six consecutive months of demonstrated compliance, the sampling frequency may be reduced to once per week. After 24 months of consecutive demonstrated compliance, the sampling frequency may be reduced to once per month. However, detection of any noncompliance will cause the sampling frequency to revert to the normal frequency of three times per week. For infrequent discharges (for example, cooling water that occurs annually), the industrial user shall advise the director of the scheduled discharge in order to coordinate sample collection. 
(3)  Compliance samples shall be collected at a minimum of once per month for nonsignificant industrial users. After six consecutive months of demonstrated compliance, the sampling frequency may be reduced to twice per year. However, detection of any noncompliance will cause the sampling frequency to revert to once per month. For infrequent discharges (for example, cooling water that occurs annually), the industrial user shall advise the director of the scheduled discharge in order to coordinate sample collection. 
(4)  Compliance point samples shall be collected by the city and analyzed at the analytical laboratory contracted by the city. Industrial users may collect split or independent samples at the same time that compliance samples are collected for their own informational purposes. However, only those samples collected by the city and analyzed by the contracted analytical laboratory will be recognized for compliance purposes. Should an industrial user feel that justifiable cause exists for contesting compliance point sample method or results, such user can petition the city manager for a hearing. Only the city manager can approve alternate sampling or analytical methods or the use of an alternate analytical laboratory for analysis of compliance samples. 
(5)  The industrial user and the director must agree on the location of all compliance sampling points. These points must be representative of the entire discharge to the POTW through that point. For intermittent discharges, a sampling schedule must be devised that enables the city to collect samples of each different type of discharge through a compliance point. 
Samples of completely segregated sanitary sewer discharges at an industrial facility shall be sampled at a frequency of twice per year to ensure that no industrial wastes are commingled with sanitary wastes. The industrial user must provide certification to the city that a sanitary waste stream does not, or could not accidentally, contain any industrial wastes prior to discharge to the public sewer. Any commingled waste streams shall be sampled at the normal frequency for that industrial user (either three times per week or once per month). 
(6)  The industrial user shall provide suitable access and sampling locations for each discharge to the POTW. The industrial user shall be solely responsible for the installation of sampling ports or sampling devices for each compliance sampling point. 
(7)  At its discretion, the city may augment the sampling frequency; parameters monitored or request modifications to sampling points, and in order to ensure that representative samples are collected of all discharges. 
(8)  The industrial user shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the city for compliance sampling. These costs shall include, but are not limited to, sampling supplies and materials, personnel labor costs, sample shipping and packaging costs to the analytical laboratory and costs for all analyses performed at the laboratory. These costs will be billed to the user on a monthly basis. The director shall provide the user with an invoice itemizing expenses and a copy of the analytical report. 
Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this article shall be: 
a.  Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods; and 
b.  Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority. 
(9)  BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling. 
a.  Total oil and grease shall be determined from grab sampling. 
(10)  The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD and suspended solids. 
(11)  If independent sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the director within ten days after becoming aware of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-54. - Right of entry: Inspection and sampling. 
    The director shall have the right to enter the premises of any industrial or nondomestic user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article, and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the director or his/her duty authorized representative or city employee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. Inspections will be conducted at a minimum twice per year and the frequency will depend on the nature and type of industrial process as is specified in the city's pretreatment program. 
(1)  Where an industrial user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the director will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The director shall have the right to set up on the industrial user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The director may require the industrial user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated biennially to ensure their accuracy. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-55. - Publication of industrial users in significant noncompliance. 
    The director shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the city, a list of the industrial users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollution parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, COD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the director believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, required permit applications and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s), which the director determines, will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-56. - Notification of sample results. 
    Within seven days of receiving the results of all compliance samples, copies of the analytical reports shall be sent to each industrial user. All analyses indicating an excessive concentration, greater than that allowed by either the pretreatment standards and requirements of this article, or permitted by specific permit limits, shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-57. - Enforcement. 
(a)  In accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(5)(ii), the city has adopted an enforcement response plan (ERP), including an enforcement response guide (ERG) which shall be used by the city in initiating and, if necessary, in escalating enforcement responses with regard to any instance of user noncompliance. The ERP is subject to change as required, and it is consistent with approved city procedures and guidelines. 
(b)  Users who violate any term or condition of this article or of their permit shall be subject to enforcement action(s) by the city. Such enforcement action(s) may include legal action or other appropriate enforcement remedies as provided for below. 
(c)  The city may, at any time, seek legal any/or equitable remedies, or prosecute criminal charges against any person, corporation or other entity believed to be in violation of this article; the provisions of an industrial wastewater discharge permit; and/or any federal or state law or regulations governing water quality or industrial wastewater pretreatment over which the city has been given enforcement powers. The city's legal staff is hereby authorized and instructed to commence such actions for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in courts having proper jurisdiction and may seek civil and/or criminal penalties, and any other legal or equitable relief available under common law, chapter 54 of the Texas Local Government Code, or any other applicable local, state, or federal code or statute. 
Sec. 86-58. - Notice of violation (NOV). 
(a)  When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may serve upon that user a written notice of violation within ten days, explaining the violation and requesting a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of further violations. If the user denies that any violation occurred and/or contends that no corrective action is necessary, an explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention shall be submitted to the director within ten days of receipt of the notice. Submission of an explanation and/or plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, prior to issuing a notice of violation. 
(b)  Response by the industrial user to the notice of violation. The industrial user responding to receipt of a notice of violation shall file a written response in the following form: 
(1)  The industrial user shall submit a written report within ten working days to the director. If the violation involves a discharge that is prohibited, or exceeds quantity, quality, or concentration limitations, the report shall contain information regarding the time, date, location, cause, source, quantity, quality and concentration of the discharge and the corrective measures actually taken, or to be taken, by the industrial user to correct and prevent any similar recurring discharges. If the violation is an administrative or procedural violation, the report shall contain information regarding corrective measures and time schedules the industrial user has adopted to assure expeditious compliance. 
(2)  Should the recipient of a notice of violation fail to respond in writing to the director within the initial ten working day response period, the user shall be considered in violation of this section with each day resulting in a separate violation. Such failure to respond. may be cited by the director in any legal proceeding in the appropriate municipal, county, district, or federal court. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-59. - Consent orders. 
    The director may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any industrial or nondomestic user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents may include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to this article and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-60. - Compliance orders. 
    When the director finds that an industrial or nondomestic user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or consent order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified period of time. If the user does not come into compliance within the period of time specified, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a federal pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other enforcement action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-61. - Cease and desist orders. 
    When the director finds that an industrial or nondomestic user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or consent order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
    Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-62. - Emergency suspension of discharge. 
    The director may immediately and unilaterally suspend an industrial or nondomestic user's water and/or wastewater services after written notice to the user that is practical under the circumstances, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present an endangerment to the health, safety, or welfare of persons; threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment; or significantly contributes to violations of the city's TNRCC or NPDES permit conditions at the POTW. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its water or wastewater services shall immediately stop or eliminate its discharge. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the period of endangerment has passed. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement to the director, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. 
(3)  Costs incurred by the city or its agents in detecting, investigating, monitoring, measuring and eliminating the discharge, along with any sewer disconnect fees and administrative penalties shall be reimbursed to the city within 30 days of billing. Any damages to the POTW resulting from the discharge shall also be reimbursed to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-63. - Termination of discharge. 
    In addition to the other provisions in this article, any industrial or nondomestic user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards of this article and any failure to provide, operate and maintain any wastewater pretreatment equipment. Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under this article to the director why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-64. - Injunctive relief. 
    When the director finds that an industrial or nondomestic user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may petition any court of competent jurisdiction through the city's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The director may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-65. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  An industrial user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a civil penalty of not less than $1,000.00 per violation, per day, not to exceed $5,000.00 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(b)  The city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city, as well as civil penalties, in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other enforcement action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-66. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be considered misdemeanors. The city may pursue all criminal remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes and ordinances against a person(s) or corporation who negligently, willfully or maliciously falsifies information regarding discharges, falsifies information included in permit applications or certifications, or causes loss or damage by tampering with or destroying any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the POTW. 
(b)  An industrial, nondomestic or domestic user who has: 
(1)  Willfully or negligently violated any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement; or 
(2)  Willfully or negligently introduced any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage; or 
(3)  Knowingly made any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder; or 
(4)  Falsified, tampered with, or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article; shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and may be subject to a fine or penalty not to exceed $2,000.00 and other judicial sanctions. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-67. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
    The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-68. - Water supply severance. 
    Whenever an industrial or nondomestic user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the industrial user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-69. - Upset. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or careless or improper operation. 
(b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (c), below, are met. 
(c)  An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(d)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(e)  Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination of any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(f)  Industrial users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with the categorical. pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Sec. 86-70. - Fees for reimbursement of costs. 
    The city hereby adopts fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program, which may include: 
(1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications, including the cost of processing such applications $250.00; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collecting and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users $50.00 per sampling event, not including the cost of any laboratory analyses; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; and 
(4)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-16, § I, 8-26-02) 
Secs. 86-71-86-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2008-11, adopted Aug. 25, 2008, repealed former Art. III, §§ 86-91-86-109, and enacted provisions set out herein as new Art. III. Former Art. III peertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2007-22, adopted Sept. 24, 2007. 
Charter reference- Garbage disposal authority, § 10. 
Cross reference- Clean city commission, § 2-121 et seq. 
State Law reference- Garbage, refuse and other waste, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.013; Solid Waste Disposal Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.001 et seq. 

Sec. 86-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bags. Plastic sacks, to be provided by each customer at his/her own private cost, designed to store garbage with sufficient wall mil strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the top. Total weight of a bag and its contents shall not exceed 50 pounds. Only plastic bags shall be utilized by customers for curbside pick-up. No receptacles will be allowed except for mobile bag hanger receptacles. 
    Bin. Metal receptacle (2, 3, 4, 6, 8 cubic yards) designed to be lifted and emptied mechanically for use only at lighter commercial and industrial units. 
    Brush and tree limbs. Brush and tree limbs that are less than four feet in length and are with weights or volumes potentially greater than those allowed for bagged yard waste (50 pounds). 
    Bulky waste. White goods, plumbing fixtures, mattresses, furniture, swing sets, bicycles (without tires) scrap metals, and other waste materials, other than dead animals, with weights or volumes greater than those allowed for bags. 
    City. City of Wharton, Texas. 
    Commercial and industrial unit. All commercial businesses and establishments, including but not limited to stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other non-manufacturing facilities, premises, locations or entities, public or private, within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Construction debris. Waste building materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations including carpet, tile and other floor materials. Construction debris specifically does not include asphalt, dirt, sand, gravel, rock, concrete or similar material addressed in "pay pile" below. 
    Containers. Metal receptacle ("bin") designed to be lifted and emptied mechanically for use only at lighter commercial and industrial units. 
    Contractor. An independent contractor, person, corporation or partnership performing refuse collection and disposal under a solid waste franchise contract with the city. 
    Dead animals. Animals or portions thereof greater than ten pounds in weight that have expired from any cause, except those slaughtered or killed for human use. 
    Disposal site. A refuse depository including but not limited to sanitary landfills, transfer stations, incinerators, and waste processing/separation centers licensed, permitted or approved by all governmental bodies and agencies having jurisdiction and requiring such licenses, permits or approvals to receive for processing or final disposal, solid waste refuse and dead animals. 
    Garbage. Any and all dead animals of less than ten pounds in weight, except those slaughtered for human consumption; every accumulation of waste (animal, vegetable and/or other matter) that results from the preparation, processing, consumption, dealing in, handling, packing, canning, storage, transportation, decay or decomposition of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains or other animal or vegetable matter (including, but not by way of limitation, used tin cans and other food containers; and all putrescible or easily decomposable waste animal or vegetable matter which is likely to attract flies or rodents); except (in all cases) any matter included in the definition of bulky waste, construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste, or stable matter. 
    Gross amount billed. Amount billed for all non-roll-off services (residential, commercial, bagged, in bins and additional services) by the contractor to the city, and the amount billed directly by the contractor to residential, commercial and industrial users for roll-off services. 
    Hazardous waste. Waste, in any amount, which is defined, characterized or designated as hazardous by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or appropriate state agency by or pursuant to federal or state law, or waste, in any amount, which is regulated under federal or state law. For purposes of this local contract and related ordinance, the term hazardous waste shall also include motor oil, used oil filters, gasoline, paint and paint cans. 
    Pay pile. An accumulation of waste at a residential, commercial or industrial location that because of its excessive volume, weight, length or unusual character requires special arrangements, fees, scheduling between customer and contractor for collection and disposal. See: Exhibit A - "Rates for Other Services." Pay piles also include dirt, sand, gravel rock, concrete and similar materials. 
    Producer. An occupant of a commercial, industrial or a residential unit who generates solid waste refuse from his property. 
    Refuse. All garbage and rubbish generated by a producer at a residential or commercial unit. 
    Residential unit. A dwelling within the corporate limits of the city occupied by a person or group of persons comprising not more than four families. A residential unit shall be deemed occupied when either water or domestic light and power services are being supplied thereto. A condominium dwelling, whether of single or multi-level construction, consisting of four or less contiguous or separate single-family dwelling units, shall be treated as a residential unit, except that each single-family dwelling within any such residential unit shall be billed separately as a residential unit. 
    Roll-off. A 20, 30, or 40 cubic yard container for accumulating and hauling large volumes of solid waste from one generating location. 
    Rubbish. All waste wood, wood products, yard waste, wood chips, shavings, sawdust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, used and discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes and boots, combustible waste pulp and other products such as are used for packaging, or wrapping crockery and glass, ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, glass, mineral or metallic substances, and any and all other waste materials except dirt, sand, gravel, rock, concrete and similar materials, not included in the definition of bulky waste, construction debris, dead animals, garbage, hazardous waste or stable matter. 
    Stable matter. All manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or about a stable, or any animal, livestock or poultry enclosure, and resulting from the keeping of animals, poultry or livestock. 
    White goods. Household appliances including refrigerators which have CFCs removed by a certified technician, stoves and ranges, water heaters, freezers, washing machines and dryers, dishwashers and other similar domestic and commercial large appliances. See also "bulk waste". 
    Yard waste. All items from a yard that can be bagged such as bagged brush or tree limbs, bagged grass clippings and bagged plants, weeds, leaves or branches weighing less than 50 pounds. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 1, 8-25-08) 
Sec. 86-92. - Contract for solid waste services. 
    The city has issued a separate contract for collection and disposal of solid waste from residential units, commercial units and industrial units within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 2, 8-25-08) 
Sec. 86-93. - Services provided. 
(a)  Residential service provided. 
(1)  Residential units shall receive curbside collection service for the collection of residential refuse including garbage and rubbish for each residential unit two times per week. All garbage and rubbish must be properly bagged and shall be placed at curbside by 7:00 a.m. on the designated collection day. There shall be a six-bag, not to exceed 50 pounds per bag, limit for each residential unit per collection day. 
(2)  Residential units shall receive curbside bulky waste collection for all residential units, once per week, on one of the same days as regular curbside collection. 
(3)  Residential units shall receive curbside collection service for the collection of residential yard waste at least one time per week. The collection of residential yard waste may occur simultaneously with the collection of residential refuse. 
(4)  Residential units shall receive curbside collection service for the collection of brush and tree limbs at least one time per week. Brush and tree limbs shall be cut by producer or his contractor in four-foot lengths. Commercial tree trimmers will be allowed to deposit all brush or tree limbs at the curb generated from the lot of producer so long as length restriction of four feet is met. 
(b)  Commercial service provided. 
(1)  Commercial units shall receive curbside collection service for the collection of commercial refuse including garbage and rubbish for each commercial unit requesting such service two times per week. All garbage must be properly bagged and shall be placed at curbside by 7:00 a.m. on the designated collection day. There shall be a ten-bag, not to exceed 50 pounds per bag limit for each commercial unit not using bins, per collection day. 
(2)  Commercial and industrial units shall receive bin collection service for the collection of larger quantities of commercial and industrial refuse to commercial and industrial units according to individual agreements between the customers and the city. Bins shall be made available by contractor in two, three, four, six and eight cubic yards and the frequency of pick-up shall be either one, two, three, four or five times per week as determined by the customer's needs. 
(c)  Additional services provided. 
(1)  Residential, commercial and industrial units shall receive special collection services for solid waste not properly bagged, certain construction debris, brush and tree limbs not properly cut and any other items that do not comply with the volume, weight, length, character restrictions discussed above based on the rates for other services. (See Exhibit A). Such pay piles will be picked-up by the contractor on the next scheduled pick-up after the customer is notified by the city that the collection service requested is not covered by the recurring monthly fee. Charges for pay piles will be automatically assessed to customers utility account when special solid waste collection services are performed. 
(2)  Residential, commercial and industrial units may from time to time receive special collection and disposal of hazardous waste at the sole discretion of the contractor upon such terms, conditions and prices as contractor shall then specify. 
(3)  Residential, commercial and industrial users shall receive 20, 30, or 40 roll-off services for the collection of construction and other larger quantities and types of debris to residential, commercial and industrial units according to private individual agreements between the contractor and customer at the prescribed in Exhibit A - "Rates for Roll-Offs". 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 3, 8-25-08) 
Sec. 86-94. - Garbage bags and receptacles. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any premises to place garbage in bags or plastic sacks provided by each customer at his/her own private cost, designed to store garbage with sufficient wall mil strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the top. Total weight of a bag and its contents shall not exceed 50 pounds. 
(b)  Trash, rubbish, leaves and grass clippings shall also be placed in plastic bags. 
(c)  Plastic bags containing trash, garbage and rubbish may be set in a mobile receptacle the day of pick-up. However, the garbage must still be enclosed in a plastic bag sufficient to be lifted by the top. The mobile receptacle shall only be at the curb the day of pick-up and must be removed after the garbage is taken. There shall be no permanent receptacles placed at the curb. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 4, 8-25-08) 
Sec. 86-95. - Placement for collection. 
(a)  Residential and commercial customers shall place bags curbside for collection. Curbside refers to that portion of public right-of-way adjacent to paved or traveled city roadways (including alleys). Bags shall be placed as close to the roadway as practicable without interfering with or endangering the movement of vehicles or pedestrians. When construction work is being performed in the right-of-way, bags shall be placed as close as practicable to an access point for the collection vehicle. The placement of garbage, trash or rubbish, yard debris, and construction debris on city property, or in the city drainage system is prohibited. 
(b)  Bins (two, three, four, six, eight cubic yard containers) shall be provided for commercial and industrial units when requested by customers. Each bin shall be placed in an accessible, outside location on a customer-provided hard surface and adequate strength driveway to sustain the weight of loaded bins and collection trucks, according to individual agreements between the city and commercial customer. 
(c)  All Roll-offs and bins shall be provided by the contractor within 48 hours of written request from the city for bins or from the customer for roll-offs. 
(d)  Garbage, trash, rubbish or yard debris may not be collected where the waste is not prepared for collection and properly placed as designated by the terms of this article. 
(e)  Garbage containment areas are required for all residential developments with four or more units. All garbage containment devices, including but not limited to dumpsters, garbage or trash containers, recycling bins, compactors, oil receptacles, and grease traps, shall be located within such garbage containment area behind the front building line and enclosed. If the typography or other conditions will not allow the containment area to be located behind the front building line, the building official or his designee shall designate the location for the containment area. 
The type of enclosure shall be a wooden fence, concrete masonry units, brick, or other impenetrable material as approved by the building official or his designee, which shall be determined based upon the proposed location of the garbage containment area, existing site conditions, and the type and amount of existing and proposed vegetation on the site. Garbage containment areas shall meet the following applicable standards as a minimum. 
(1)  Garbage containment areas shall be surrounded by an enclosure as set forth above. 
(2)  Such enclosure shall have a minimum height of six feet or equal to the garbage containment device with the highest measurement if taller than six feet, shall be compatible with the design and color of the principle building, and shall be kept free of advertising. 
(3)  All garbage containment devices shall be placed on a concrete pad inside the containment area large enough to provide adequate support and allow for positive drainage. 
(4)  Garbage containment areas shall not be located on any required parking spaces. 
(5)  Garbage containment areas may be located within a rear yard but shall not be located any closer than five feet to a lot line. Said areas shall not be located within a required buffer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 5, 8-25-08) 
Sec. 86-96. - Collection operation. 
(a)  Hours of operation: 
(1)  Collection of residential waste shall begin no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and shall generally not extend beyond 7:00 p.m. No collection shall be made on Sunday. 
(2)  Collection of commercial waste and industrial waste shall begin no earlier than 5:00 a.m. and shall generally not extend beyond 7:00 p.m. 
(b)  Collection routes shall be established by the contractor as reasonably approved by city. Customers shall be notified of changes to routes, if customer's service will be affected. 
(c)  Holidays and special pickups. The following shall be city solid waste collection holidays: 
New Year's Day 
Memorial Day 
Independence Day 
Labor Day 
Thanksgiving Day 
Christmas Day 
Contractor may decide to observe any or all of the above mentioned holidays by suspension of collection service on the holiday. When the normal residential pick-up falls on a recognized holiday, the pick-up for that residential service will be the next regularly scheduled collection day. The contractor may provide one collection per holiday week for residential customers impacted by the holiday. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 6, 8-25-08) 
Sec. 86-97. - Customer complaints. 
    All customer complaints shall be made to the city and shall be given prompt and courteous attention. In the case of alleged missed scheduled collections, the contractor shall investigate and, if such allegations are verified, shall arrange for the collection of the refuse not collected within 24 hours after the complaint is received. 
    Within 24 hours after receipt of notice, either written, by telephone or by radio, the contractor shall take the necessary action to pick up missed collections, clean up strewn or spilled refuse caused by contractor, and remedy all valid complaints. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 7, 8-25-08) 
Sec. 86-98. - Other customer responsibilities. 
(a)  Spillage. The city or the contractor shall not be responsible for scattered refuse unless the same has been caused by contractor, in which case all scattered refuse shall be picked up immediately by contractor. If scattered refuse is not caused by the contractor, the customer or property owner shall be responsible for pick-up. 
(b)  Disposal of heavy dead animals. Heavy dead animals, such as cows, horses and mules, shall be delivered to the designated city disposal area at the expense of the owner or person having the animal in charge in the manner and by the method directed by the designated official of the city. 
(c)  Disposal of manure and waste oils. Manure from cow lots, horse stables, poultry yards, pigeon lofts and other such places and waste oils from garages or filling stations shall be disposed of at the expense of the party responsible for the waste under the direction of the designated official of the city. 
(d)  Vicious animals: Customer shall make certain that waste can be collected without the employees of the contractor exposing themselves to the dangers of vicious animals in order to accomplish refuse collection service. Contractor will notify the city, and the city will notify the customer, in writing, of such condition and the contractor's inability to make collection. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 8, 8-25-08) 
Sec. 86-99. - Billing. 
(a)  The city will bill the customers for collection services for residential units, commercial units and industrial units for all services provided by contractor other than roll-off bin service. The city will bill the customer based on the billing and collection policies as established for other utility services in section 86-18. 
(b)  Contractor will bill the customers for roll-off bin services. Such billing procedures will be based on policies adopted by the contractor. 
(c)  The city shall notify contractor in writing of any customer that has failed to pay the city for waste collection services, and contractor, upon written direction from city, shall cease servicing such delinquent residential unit until notified by the city. Contractor shall have the right to cease roll-off bin services for any residential unit, commercial unit or industrial unit that is delinquent in payment to contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 9.0, 8-25-08) 
Sec. 86-100. - Rates/modifications to rate. 
    City will charge customer the rates set forth on Schedule "A" codified in section 86-104 of this chapter and incorporated herein ("base rates"). The base rates are subject to adjustment and may be adjusted upon approval of the city council. Customer shall receive due notification of changes to rates. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 10, 8-25-08) 
Sec. 86-101. - Point of contact. 
    Customers shall contact the city for all dealings and contacts regarding solid waste collection and disposal. The city will contact the contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 11, 8-25-08) 
Sec. 86-102. - Meddlimg with or pilfering from. 
    The meddling with garbage, trash or rubbish containers or in any way pilfering there from or scattering contents in any alley or street within the city is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 12, 8-25-08) 
Sec. 86-103. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person found guilty of intentionally, knowingly or recklessly violating any provision of this article and upon conviction thereof in the municipal court shall be fined in accordance with the terms of section 1-5 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Wharton, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 13, 8-25-08; Ord. No. 2011-20, 11-14-11) 
Sec. 86-104. - Schedule "A"-Base rates. 
(a)  Monthly residential waste collection: $23.36 per residential unit which includes a $3.00 per month fee. 
(b)  Monthly commercial hand collection: $30.06 per commercial unit which includes a $3.50 per month fee. 
(c)  Container service (per month) includes a $3.50 fee: 
(1)  2 yd: 
Published in the Wharton Journal Spectator Saturday, October 28, 2017 and Saturday, November 4, 2017. 
1 × wk ..... $64.60 
2 × wk ..... 115.93 
3 × wk ..... 149.16 
4 × wk ..... 205.88 
5 × wk ..... 256.47 
Additional pick-up ..... 70.51 
(2)  3 yd: 
1 × wk ..... 95.15 
2 × wk ..... 170.93 
3 × wk ..... 228.54 
4 × wk ..... 307.07 
5 × wk ..... 382.96 
Additional pick-up ..... 102.09 
(3)  4 yd: 
1 × wk ..... 119.01 
2 × wk ..... 207.93 
3 × wk ..... 294.80 
4 × wk ..... 408.26 
5 × wk ..... 509.44 
Additional pick-up ..... 128.29 
(4)  6 yd: 
1 × wk ..... 169.31 
2 × wk ..... 324.67 
3 × wk ..... 453.55 
4 × wk ..... 610.65 
5 × wk ..... 762.43 
Additional pick-up ..... 181.15 
(5)  8 yd: 
1 × wk ..... 209.97 
2 × wk ..... 391.89 
3 × wk ..... 586.11 
4 × wk ..... 813.01 
5 × wk ..... 1,015.39 
Additional pick-up ..... 222.28 
(d)  Rates for roll-offs: 
(1)  Delivery fee ..... 118.03 
(2)  Monthly rental ..... 141.63 
(3)  Pull price (per pull) ..... 150.78 
(4)  Disposal fee-Loose (per yard) ..... 8.26 
(5)  Disposal fee-Compact (per yard) ..... 9.74 
(e)  Rates for other services: 
(1)  Hourly rate ..... 115.57 
(2)  Disposal per cubic yard ..... 8.07 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, Sched. A, 8-25-08; Ord. No. 2009-12, 11-9-09; Ord. No. 2010-16, Sched. A, 11-22-10; Ord. No. 2011-20, 11-14-11; Ord. No. 2012-16, 11-12-12; Ord. No. 2016-07, 8-30-16; Ord. No. 2017-14, 10-23-17) 
Secs. 86-105-86-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER WELLS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 86-131. - Enforcing authorities-Named. 
    The city manager and the superintendent of the department of water and sewerage are hereby charged with the enforcement of this article and shall exercise the powers granted in this article to them for this purpose. 
(Code 1978, § 20-65) 
Sec. 86-132. - Same-Obedience to. 
    It shall be deemed a violation of this article for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any order of the superintendent of the department of water and sewerage or the city manager made in conformity with and under the authority of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 20-66) 
Sec. 86-133. - Powers and duties of superintendent. 
(a)  Powers. Under this article the superintendent of the department of water and sewerage shall have the power to: 
(1)  Make examinations of all wells within the city, whether privately owned or otherwise. 
(2)  Make or have made at any time the necessary analyses and tests of water therefrom. 
(3)  Go upon the land and property of the owners of wells for that purpose. 
(4)  Require the owners to furnish all information requested concerning the wells. 
(5)  Supervise the construction, repair, abandonment and plugging of wells and the operation of the wells. 
(b)  Duties. The superintendent shall keep an accurate register of all wells within the city, which shall show the name of the owner, the location and date of construction of each well, its depth and diameter, the purpose for which the well was constructed, and if abandoned, the date of such abandonment. At such intervals as may be considered necessary by the superintendent, but not exceeding two years, there shall be entered in the register the then existing condition of each well registered, together with an analysis of the water from each of such wells. 
(Code 1978, § 20-73) 
Sec. 86-134. - Pipe casing weights. 
(a)  Standard pipe; weights. Every well constructed after November 25, 1985, shall be cased with standard pipe which shall weigh per foot not less than the weights specified in the following table: 
Size of casing 
 and screen Minimum weight per foot of casing 
(pounds)  4? inside diameter 10  5? inside diameter 14  6? inside diameter 18  8? inside diameter 28 10? inside diameter 40 12? inside diameter 49 15? outside diameter 60 18? outside diameter 80 20? outside diameter 89  
(b)  PVC. Wells up to eight inches in diameter may use PVC, provided such PVC is schedule 640 or better. In no case shall wells over eight inches in diameter be permitted to use PVC. 
(c)  Approval of pipe and screen. The pipe and also the screen proposed to be used shall in all cases be subject to the approval of the superintendent of the department of water and sewerage. 
(Code 1978, § 20-74) 
Sec. 86-135. - Extension of casing above surface; records and samples of earth. 
    The casing of every well shall extend above the ground surface either to the level of the 100-year floodplain or one foot above the surface of the ground at the location of the well, whichever level is greater. If in the judgment of the superintendent of the department of water and sewerage greater extension is required to prevent the possible contamination and pollution of the city's water supply, the casing shall extend such distance above the surface of the ground as in the superintendent's judgment is necessary to effect such purpose. The owner of the well shall furnish to the superintendent a complete log during the construction of the well, which shall record the top and bottom of each change in formation and shall also furnish, if required by the superintendent, samples of the material at each change in formation, these samples to be enclosed in covered glass containers and plainly labelled with the depth at top and bottom of the section of the well from which they were taken. If any stratum is of greater thickness than ten feet, samples shall be taken of such section and preserved in the manner described in this section. 
(Code 1978, § 20-75) 
Sec. 86-136. - Furnishing water samples. 
    The owner of every well shall furnish to the superintendent of the department of water and sewerage, for analysis, samples of water when and as required, not only during the construction of the well, but also at any time thereafter when requested. 
(Code 1978, § 20-76) 
Sec. 86-137. - Change in casing size; sealing off openings; approval of method of casing and sealing. 
    The owner of a well under construction shall furnish to the superintendent of the department of water and sewerage a complete record of the length, position and size of each change in diameter of the well casing, together with the position and size of screens and number and size of screen openings. Where similar casings are inserted inside those of larger diameter, an overlap of at least ten feet shall be used, and every opening between the different sizes of casings shall be completely sealed in a manner satisfactory to the superintendent, and all water above and below if required by the superintendent, the depth from which a supply will be taken, shall be sealed off and prevented from mixing with the supply source of such well. The method of casing and sealing in all particulars shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the supervision of the superintendent. The superintendent shall give such authorization when the superintendent has been satisfied that the provisions of this article governing the construction and operation of the well have been completely satisfied. 
(Code 1978, § 20-77) 
Sec. 86-138. - Wells over certain depth. 
    Any well over 80 feet in depth shall be so drilled, installed or constructed that it will prevent the mixing of water or liquid from above or below such water-bearing strata, such construction, drilling and installation to be accomplished in the following manner: 
(1)  Test holes. A test hole must first be drilled to the full depth at which it is proposed to finish the well and at the exact location of the proposed well. This test hole must be at least six inches bottom diameter and the driller shall keep an accurate log or record of all formations penetrated, such log to contain information concerning the depth and nature of each formation penetrated, as well as the depth of the top and bottom of each formation below the ground surface; and shall, during the drilling of such test hole, obtain true samples of water or liquid from each water-bearing formation penetrated. When the test hole is finished or completed, the owner shall submit two copies of such log or record to the superintendent of the department of water and sewerage, together with the certified chemical analyses of true samples of water obtained from all water-bearing formations penetrated. The superintendent shall determine which strata penetrated and which water obtained from the test hole are objectionable and likely to pollute the water-bearing strata from which the water supply of the city is taken or drawn. 
(2)  Plugging, closing off contaminated strata. If it is apparent that a stratum of contaminated water or water having a high mineral content has been encountered in the test hole below the water-bearing strata from which the water supply of the city is taken or drawn, it shall be imperative that such contaminated or highly mineralized stratum be plugged or closed off from the remainder of the well. This shall be accomplished by pumping through a pipe extending to the bottom of the test hole a plastic or aqueous mixture of quick-setting cement of sufficient quantity to completely plug or extend entirely through such contaminated or mineralized stratum and well up into the first impervious or non-water-bearing stratum above. The test hole shall then be allowed to remain undisturbed for a period of at least 72 hours in order that the cement plug become thoroughly set or hardened. 
(3)  Preventing contamination of water-bearing strata. In order to prevent contaminated, polluted, highly mineralized or otherwise objectionable water encountered in any stratum above those from which the water supply of the city is taken or drawn from entering or mixing with the water-bearing strata from which the city supply is taken or drawn, and to prevent the entrance of surface water to such water-bearing strata in each case of a well drilled over 80 feet and penetrating the water-bearing strata from which the city supply is taken or drawn, the following procedure shall be used: The test hole shall be reamed out to the desired diameter of the finished well down to the first impervious or non-water-bearing stratum above the strata from which the water supply of the city is taken or drawn. The casing shall then be set down to the specified point or depth and upon a non-water-bearing or impervious stratum. The annular space between the outside of the casing and bore hole or natural formations shall then be completely filled with a plastic or aqueous mixture of quick-setting cement which shall be pumped into the well under pressure through a pipe or conduit extending to the bottom of the casing as set, such cement entering the annular space between the outside of the casing and the bore hole at the bottom of such casing and filling such annular space by flowing upward to the top of the well or surface of the ground. Evidence of such annular space being completely filled shall be by the plastic or aqueous cement mixture returning to and flowing from the annular space at the surface of the ground. 
(4)  Cementing work done by approved person. All cementing work called for in this section shall be performed by a person regularly engaged in such business and approved by the superintendent of the department of water and sewerage; provided, however, the drilling contractor or driller of the well may perform such work if he submits satisfactory evidence to the superintendent that the driller is thoroughly capable, qualified and equipped to do any and all such cementing work. No person shall begin or perform such cementing work without having been approved for the work by the superintendent. 
(5)  Defective wells declared nuisance; notice to owner; abatement. Every well which for any reason does not completely prevent the mixing of the water or other liquid from above and below the source of the city's water supply with the water in the source of the city's water supply or which for any reason would tend to pollute or contaminate the water in the course of the city's water supply shall be considered a defective well and is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance. The superintendent, on his own initiative or upon information or complaint from any source, shall make an examination of any well suspected of being defective and shall issue written instructions to the owner or his agents in charge of such well or property upon which it is situated for correcting the defects in order to comply with this article. The superintendent shall prescribe a time which, in his judgment, under all the circumstances, is reasonable and within which time such instructions shall be complied with. It shall be unlawful for the owners or operators of such defective well to fail to comply with such instructions and abate such nuisance within the time limit prescribed by the superintendent. In addition, such nuisance may be abated by the city as provided in this section. 
(6)  Application of certain provisions; notice; compliance required; penalty for violation. The provisions in subsection (2) of this section, relating to the plugging of wells where contaminated water or water having a high mineral content has been encountered below the stratum of strata from which the water supply of the city is taken or drawn, and the provisions of subsection (3) of this section, relating to the sealing or casing of wells above the strata from which the water supply of the city is taken or drawn, shall apply to all wells drilled prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived or which may have been abandoned, as well as all wells which are drilled after such effective date; and upon proper notice, as called for in section 86-142, being given to the owner, agent of the owner or lessee of the property on which any such well is situated, such well shall be plugged or sealed as called for in this section. Upon the owner, agent of owner or lessee's failing to comply, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor for maintaining a nuisance and punished as provided for in section 1-5. In addition, if the owner, agent of owner or lessee fails to comply with the order of the superintendent, the superintendent may apply to the city council for permission to plug, seal or case such defective well and thereby abate such nuisance and place a lien on such property and a personal charge against the owner to cover the costs thereof and setting forth in the application the location of the well, the name of the record owners of such property, the agents, if any, in charge of the property and the lessees, if any, in possession of such property; and, in addition, the superintendent shall state in such application the manner in which such well is defective. Notice of the filing of such application to plug, case or seal such well and place a lien on the property and a personal charge against the owner to cover the costs thereof, directed to the record owners, shall be published once in the official newspaper of the city. Not less than five days thereafter, at any regular meeting of the city council, such city council may hear such application, and if it determines by resolution that such well is defective and thereby constitutes a nuisance, it shall by resolution order the superintendent to proceed with the plugging, casing or sealing of such well and to file upon completion of the work with the city secretary a sworn statement setting forth the expenses incurred in plugging, sealing or casing the well. Upon the filing of such statement, the city manager shall incorporate the statement in a notice to be executed and acknowledged by him and filed with the county clerk, setting forth the claim of the city for expenses incurred in plugging, sealing or casing such well. Upon the filing of such notice, the notice shall constitute a lien against the property on which such well is located and a personal charge against the owner and suit may be instituted thereon and such lien foreclosed as provided by law for the foreclosure of other liens. Notice shall be given to any person in possession of the property on which the defective well is located by mailing a copy of the published notice to such person. 
(Code 1978, § 20-78) 
Sec. 86-139. - Wells outside city; abating nuisance; drilling. 
    The owner or lessee of property on which any well drilled outside the city which is found to be a contaminating or polluting influence to the underground water-bearing strata from which the water supply of the city is taken or drawn, as well as the owner or lessee of all wells drilled inside the city, shall be subject to all the provisions of section 86-133 and all other provisions of this article relating to the protection of the water supply of the city, and any such contaminating well may be abated as provided therein. Any person wishing to drill a well outside of the city at any location within the radius of one mile of any well inside or outside the city from which the water supply of the city is taken or drawn shall, prior to drilling such well, fully comply with all provisions of section 86-138 and the provisions of this article relating to the protection of the water supply of the city, and upon failure to do so such person shall be punished as provided therein. 
(Code 1978, § 20-79) 
Sec. 86-140. - Filing statement of correction of defects. 
    Upon completion of the work of correcting the defects of any well and before putting it into operation, the owner of such well shall file with the superintendent of the department of water and sewerage a sworn statement that all defects have been corrected to comply with this article in accordance with instructions issued by the superintendent, and failure to file such statement within 30 days after completion of correction of the defects shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 20-80) 
Sec. 86-141. - Filling and plugging abandoned wells-Method. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, an abandoned well is: 
(1)  A defective well which, in the judgment of the superintendent of the department of water and sewerage cannot be corrected to comply with the requirements of this article, or 
(2)  Any well which has been continuously out of use for a period of two years or longer. 
Whenever any well has not been in active use for more than two years, the owner or operator of the well shall report such fact to the superintendent. 
(b)  Every abandoned well shall be filled or plugged with such materials and in such manner as, in the judgment of the superintendent, will prevent the pollution and contamination of the city's water supply. Such filling and plugging shall be done under the supervision of the superintendent and at the expense of the owner of such well. Whenever the superintendent shall receive notice from any source of the existence of an abandoned well which has not been plugged and filled in accordance with the provisions of this article, he shall notify the owner or agent in charge of such well or of the property upon which it is situated that such well is abandoned and shall instruct him to fill and plug such well in accordance with this article, and the owner or operator of such well shall comply with such order within 60 days after the date of such order. If the owner or operator fails to so comply within such period or if, after using reasonable diligence, the superintendent fails to locate the owner or agent in charge of such well or of the property owner or agent in charge of such well or of the property upon which the well is situated, the superintendent shall go on the land or property upon which the well is situated and fill and plug the well in the manner required by this article. Whenever it becomes necessary for the superintendent to fill and plug any abandoned well, the owner thereof shall be liable to the city for the cost of doing such work. 
(Code 1978, § 20-81) 
Sec. 86-142. - Same-Notice to owner; performance of work. 
    Any well or other opening constructed penetrating the underground water supply and which pollutes or contaminates or tends, in the judgment of the superintendent of the department of water and sewerage, to pollute or contaminate the city's water supply and which, in the judgment of the superintendent, cannot be corrected to prevent pollution or contamination, is hereby declared a nuisance. On notice issued by the superintendent to the owner of such well or opening or to his agent in charge of it or of the property on which it is situated, such nuisance shall be abated by the owner within 60 days from date of such notice, by filling and plugging the well or opening in the manner provided for in this article for abandoned wells. If the owner shall fail to abate such nuisance within such time or if, after exercising reasonable diligence, the superintendent is unable to locate the owner or his agent, the superintendent shall go on the land or property upon which the well is situated and abate such nuisance in the manner provided in this article, and the owner thereof shall be liable to the city for the cost of such work. 
(Code 1978, § 20-82) 
Sec. 86-143. - Interconnection with public water supply. 
    Notwithstanding any provision contained in this article to the contrary, no private water supply shall be interconnected with any public water supply. 
(Code 1978, § 20-83) 
Secs. 86-144-86-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 86-166. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drill or otherwise construct, repair, correct, abandon or plug a water well or to engage in such work, within the city, without first applying for and securing a permit from the superintendent of the department of water and sewerage, with the approval of the city manager. Such permit shall be granted by the superintendent, with the approval of the city manager, to any person who files with the superintendent the application provided for in this division, pays the fee required in this division, and complies with all other provisions of this article applicable to him. 
(Code 1978, § 20-67) 
Sec. 86-167. - Contents of application. 
    Every application for a permit for the construction, repair and correction, abandonment or plugging of a water well shall state the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner thereof; 
(2)  The purpose for which the permit is desired, which shall be one or more of the acts mentioned in this section; 
(3)  The definite location of the well or proposed well; 
(4)  Approximate depth of the well; 
(5)  If for a permit for the drilling or construction or repair and correction of a water well, the estimated amount of water to be or which is pumped daily, monthly or annually, and the uses for which the water will be or is required; 
(6)  If for a permit for the drilling or construction or for the repair and correction of a well, the proposed method of drilling or construction or the proposed method of repair and correction and the kind of equipment to be used; and 
(7)  In all cases, the name of the contractor when the owner wishes to drill or construct, repair and correct or do the work pursuant to an abandonment of a well through a contractor in compliance with this article. 
(Code 1978, § 20-68) 
Sec. 86-168. - Fees. 
    The fees for the permits required by this division shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the drilling or construction of a new well up to 50 feet deep, $10.00. 
(2)  For the drilling or construction of a new well 50 feet deep to 100 feet deep, $20.00. 
(3)  For the drilling or construction of a new well 150 feet deep to 400 feet deep, $30.00. 
(4)  For the drilling or construction of a new well over 400 feet deep, the fee stated in subsection (3) of this section and in addition thereto, for each 100 feet or fraction thereof in excess of 400 feet, $10.00. 
(Code 1978, § 20-69) 
Sec. 86-169. - Additional permit where depth extended. 
    It shall be unlawful for any applicant who obtains a permit to construct a water well of a certain depth to extend such well to a depth exceeding the depth provided for in such permit without first obtaining an additional permit therefor. 
(Code 1978, § 20-70) 
Sec. 86-170. - Shallow wells. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to water wells or other openings less than 50 feet in depth; provided, however, the owner of any proposed well less than 50 feet in depth shall be required to apply for and receive from the superintendent of the department of water and sewerage a permit to construct such well, the application for which shall supply all the information required under section 86-167. For such permit the superintendent shall charge and receive the fee provided for in this division. 
(Code 1978, § 20-71) 
Sec. 86-171. - Executing in duplicate. 
    All permits required in this division shall be executed in duplicate, one copy to be delivered to the applicant and one copy to be retained in the office of the superintendent of the department of water and sewerage. 
(Code 1978, § 20-72) 
Secs. 86-172-86-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN 

Sec. 86-201. - Declaration of policy, purpose, and intent. 
(a)  In order to conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection, and to protect and preserve public health, welfare, and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply emergency conditions, the City of Wharton hereby adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water. 
(b)  Water uses regulated or prohibited under this drought contingency plan (the plan) are considered to be non-essential and continuation of such uses during times of water shortage or other emergency water supply condition are deemed to constitute a waste of water which subjects the offender(s) to penalties as defined in section 86-211 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2000-08, Exh. A(§ I), 3-13-00) 
Sec. 86-202. - Public involvement. 
    Opportunity for the public to provide input into the preparation of the plan was provided by the city by means of scheduling and providing public notice of a public meeting to accept input on the plan. 
(Ord. No. 2000-08, Exh. A(§ II), 3-13-00) 
Sec. 86-203. - Public education. 
    The city will periodically provide the public with information about the plan, including information about the conditions under which each stage of the plan is to be initiated or terminated and the drought response measures to be implemented in each stage. This information will be provided by means of public events, press releases or utility bill inserts. 
(Ord. No. 2000-08, Exh. A(§ III), 3-13-00) 
Sec. 86-204. - Coordination with regional water planning groups. 
    The service area of the City of Wharton is located within the LCRA Planning Group and city has provided a copy of this plan to the Lower Colorado Regional Water Planning Group. 
(Ord. No. 2000-08, Exh. A(§ IV), 3-13-00) 
Sec. 86-205. - Authorization. 
    The city manager or his/her designee is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this plan upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare. The city manager, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought or other water supply emergency response measures as described in this plan. 
(Ord. No. 2000-08, Exh. A(§ V), 3-13-00) 
Sec. 86-206. - Application. 
    The provisions of this plan shall apply to all persons, customers, and property utilizing water provided by the city. The term's "person" and "customer" as used in the plan include individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, and all other legal entities. 
(Ord. No. 2000-08, Exh. A(§ VI), 3-13-00) 
Sec. 86-207. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this plan, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Aesthetic water use: Water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools, and water gardens. 
    Commercial and institutional water use: Water use which is integral to the operations of commercial and non-profit establishments and governmental entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants, and office buildings. 
    Conservation: Those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses. 
    Customer: Any person, company, or organization using water supplied by City of Wharton. 
    Domestic water use: Water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation, or for cleaning a residence, business, industry, or institution. 
    Even number address: Street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8 and locations without addresses. 
    Industrial water use: The use of water in processes designed to convert materials of lower value into forms having greater usability and value. 
    Landscape irrigation use: Water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly or privately owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks, and rights-of-way and medians. 
    Non-essential water use: Water uses that are not essential nor required for the protection of public, health, safety, and welfare, including: 
(1)  Irrigation of landscape areas, including parks, athletic fields, and golf courses, except otherwise provided under this plan; 
(2)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle; 
(3)  Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced areas; 
(4)  Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
(5)  Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; 
(6)  Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or Jacuzzi-type pools; 
(7)  Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where necessary to support aquatic life; 
(8)  Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s); and 
(9)  Use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or any other purposes other than fire fighting. 
    Odd numbered address: Street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9. 
(Ord. No. 2000-08, Exh. A(§ VII), 3-13-00) 
Sec. 86-208. - Criteria for initiation and termination of drought response stages. 
(a)  The city manager or his/her designee shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of the Plan, that is, when the specified "triggers" are reached. 
(b)  The triggering criteria described below are based on the amount of water the city is able to pump in a day. 
(1)  Stage 1 triggers-Mild water shortage conditions. 
a.  Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be requested to voluntarily conserve water and adhere to the prescribed restrictions on certain water uses, defined in section 86-207, Definitions, when total daily water demand equals or exceeds three million gallons for three consecutive days or 3.25 million gallons on a single day (e.g,, based on the "safe" operating capacity of water supply facilities. 
b.  Requirements for termination. Stage 1 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three consecutive days. 
(2)  Stage 2 Triggers-Moderate water shortage conditions. 
a.  Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain nonessential water uses provided in section 86-209 of this plan when total daily for three consecutive days 3.25 MGD or 3.5 MGD on a single day. 
b.  Requirements for termination. Stage 2 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three consecutive days. Upon termination of Stage 2, Stage 1 becomes operative. 
(3)  Stage 3 triggers-Severe water shortage conditions. 
a.  Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain non-essential water uses for Stage 3 of this plan when total daily for three consecutive days 3.5 MGD or 3.75 MGD on a single day. 
b.  Requirements for termination. Stage 3 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three consecutive days. Upon termination of Stage 3, Stage 2 becomes operative. 
(4)  Stage 4 triggers-Critical water shortage conditions. 
a.  Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain non-essential water uses for Stage 4 of this plan when total daily for three (3) consecutive days 3.75 MGD for 4.0 MGD on a single day. 
b.  Requirements for termination. Stage 4 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three (3) consecutive days. Upon termination of Stage 4, Stage 3 becomes operative. 
(5)  Stage 5 triggers-Emergency water shortage conditions. 
a.  Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions for Stage 5 of this plan when the city manager or his/her designee, determines that a water supply emergency exists based on: 
1.  Major water line breaks, or pump or system failures occur, which cause unprecedented loss of capability to provide water service; or 
2.  Natural or manmade contamination of the water supply source(s). 
b.  Requirements for termination. Stage 5 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three consecutive days. 
(6)  Stage 6 Triggers-Water allocation. 
a.  Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the water allocation plan prescribed in section 86-209 of this plan and comply with the requirements and restrictions for Stage 5 of this plan when total daily water demand equals of exceeds 90 percent of water system production capability for three consecutive days. 
b.  Requirements for termination. Water allocation may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 2000-08, Exh. A(§ VIII), 3-13-00) 
Sec. 86-209. - Drought response stages. 
(a)  The city manager, or his/her designee, shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and, in accordance with the triggering criteria set forth in section viii of this plan, shall determine that a mild, moderate, severe, critical, emergency or water shortage condition exists and shall implement the following notification procedures: 
(1)  Notification. 
a.  Notification of the public: The city manager or his/her designee shall notify the public by means of publication in a newspaper of general circulation, and cable TV. 
b.  Additional notification: The city manager or his/her designee shall notify directly, or cause to be notified directly, the following individuals and entities: 
Examples: 
Mayor/and members of the city council fire chief 
City and/or county emergency management coordinator(s) 
County judge and commissioner(s) 
State disaster district/department of public safety 
TNRCC (required when mandatory restrictions are imposed) 
Major water users 
Critical water users, i.e. hospitals 
Parks/street superintendents and public facilities managers 
Emergency medical director 
(b)  Response stages. 
(1)  Stage 1 response-Mild water shortage conditions. 
a.  Goal: Achieve a voluntary five-percent reduction in daily water demand (e.g., total water use, daily water demand, etc.). 
b.  Supply management measures: 
1.  Reduced or discontinued flushing of water mains. 
c.  Voluntary water use restrictions: 
1.  Water customers are requested to voluntarily limit the irrigation of landscaped areas to Sundays and Thursdays for customers with a street address ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6 or 8), and Saturdays and Wednesdays for water customers with a street address ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7 or 9), and to irrigate landscapes only between the hours of midnight and 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m to midnight on designated watering days. 
2.  All operations of the city shall adhere to water use restrictions prescribed for Stage 2 of the plan. 
3.  Water customers are requested to practice water conservation and to minimize or discontinue water use for non-essential purposes. 
(2)  Stage 2 response-Moderate water shortage conditions. 
a.  Goal: Achieve a ten percent reduction in daily water demand (e.g., total water use, daily water demand, etc.). 
b.  Supply management measures: 
1.  Reduced or discontinued flushing of water mains. 
2.  Reduced or discontinued irrigation of public landscaped areas. 
c.  Water use restrictions. Under threat of penalty for violation, the following water use restrictions shall apply to all persons: 
1.  Irrigation of landscaped areas with hose-end sprinklers or automatic irrigation systems shall be limited to Sundays and Thursdays for customers with a street address ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6 or 8), and Saturdays and Wednesdays for water customers with a street address ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7 or 9), and irrigation of landscaped areas is further limited to the hours of 12:00 midnight until 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on designated watering days. However, irrigation of landscaped areas is permitted at anytime if it is by means of a hand-held hose, a faucet filled bucket or watering can of five (5) gallons or less, or drip irrigation system. 
2.  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. Such washing, when allowed, shall be done with a hand-held bucket or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. Vehicle washing may be done at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash or commercial service station. Further, such washing may be exempted from these regulations if the health, safety, and welfare of the public are contingent upon frequent vehicle cleansing, such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables. 
3.  Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wading pools, or Jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
4.  Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a recirculation system. 
5.  Use of water from hydrants shall be limited to fire fighting, related activities, or other activities necessary to maintain public health, safety, and welfare, except that use of water from designated fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed under special permit from the city. 
6.  Use of water for the irrigation of golf course greens, tees, and fairways is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. However, if the golf course utilizes a water source other than that provided by the city, the facility shall not be subject to these regulations. 
7.  All restaurants are prohibited from serving water to patrons except upon request of the patron. 
8.  The following uses of water are defined as non-essential and are prohibited: 
(i)  Wash down of any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced areas; 
(ii)  Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
(iii)  Use of water for dust control; 
(iv)  Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; and 
(v)  Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s). 
(3)  Stage 3 response-Severe water shortage conditions. 
a.  Goal: Achieve a fifteen percent reduction in daily water demand. 
b.  Supply management measures: 
1.  Reduced or discontinued flushing of water mains. 
2.  Reduced or discontinued irrigation of public landscaped areas. 
c.  Water use restrictions. All requirements of Stage 2 shall remain in effect during Stage 3 except: 
1.  Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8 p.m. and 12:00 midnight and shall be by means of hand-held hoses, hand-held buckets, drip irrigation, or permanently installed automatic sprinkler system only. The use of hose-end sprinklers is prohibited at all times. 
2.  The watering of golf course tees is prohibited unless the golf course utilizes a water source other than that provided by the City of Wharton. 
3.  The use of water for construction purposes from designated fire hydrants under special permit is to be discontinued. 
(4)  Stage 4 response-Critical water shortage conditions. 
a.  Goal: Achieve a 20 percent reduction in daily water demand. 
b.  Supply management measures: 
1.  Reduced or discontinued flushing of water mains. 
2.  Reduced or discontinued irrigation of public landscaped areas. 
c.  Water use restrictions. All requirements of Stages 2 and 3 shall remain in effect during Stage 4 except: 
1.  Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight and shall be by means of hand-held hoses, hand-held buckets, or drip irrigation only. The use of hose-end sprinklers or permanently installed automatic sprinkler systems are prohibited at all times. 
2.  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle not occurring on the premises of a commercial car wash and commercial service stations and not in the immediate interest of public health, safety, and welfare is prohibited. Further, such vehicle washing at commercial car washes and commercial service stations shall occur only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and between 6:00 p.m. and 10 p.m. 
3.  The filling, refilling, or adding of water to swimming pools, wading pools, and Jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited. 
4.  Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a recirculation system. 
5.  No application for new, additional, expanded, or increased-in-size water service connections, meters, service lines, pipeline extensions, mains, or water service facilities of any kind shall be approved, and time limits for approval of such applications are hereby suspended for such time as this drought response stage or a higher-numbered stage shall be in effect. 
(5)  Stage 5 response-Emergency water shortage conditions. 
a.  Goal: Achieve a 25-percent reduction in daily water demand. 
b.  Supply management measures: 
1.  Reduced or discontinued flushing of water mains. 
2.  Reduced or discontinued irrigation of public landscaped areas. 
c.  Water use restrictions. All requirements of Stages 2, 3, and 4 shall remain in effect during Stage 5 except: 
1.  Irrigation of landscaped areas is absolutely prohibited. 
2.  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is absolutely prohibited. 
(6)  Stage 6 response-Water allocation. In the event that water shortage conditions threaten public health, safety, and welfare, the City Manager is hereby authorized to allocate water according to the following water allocation plan: 
a.  Single-family residential customers. 
1.  The allocation to residential water customers residing in a single-family dwelling shall be as follows: 
Persons per Household Gallons per Month 1 or 2  6,000 3 or 4  7,000 5 or 6  8,000 7 or 8  9,000 9 or 10 10,000 11 or more 12,000  
3.  "Household" means the residential premises served by the customer's meter. "Persons per household" includes only those persons currently physically residing at the premises and expected to reside there for the entire billing period. It shall be assumed that a particular customer's household is comprised of two (2) persons unless the customer notifies the City of a greater number of persons per household on a form prescribed by the city manager. The city manager shall give his/her best effort to see that such forms are mailed, otherwise provided, or made available to every residential customer. If, however, a customer does not receive such a form, it shall be the customer's responsibility to go to the city offices to complete and sign the form claiming more than two persons per household. New customers may claim more persons per household at the time of applying for water service on the form prescribed by the city manager. When the number of persons per household increases so as to place the customer in a different allocation category, the customer may notify the city on such form and the change will be implemented in the next practicable billing period. If the number of persons in a household is reduced, the customer shall notify the city in writing within two days. In prescribing the method for claiming more than two persons per household, the city manager shall adopt methods to insure the accuracy of the claim. Any person who knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence falsely reports the number of persons in a household or fails to timely notify the city of a reduction in the number of person in a household shall be fined not less than $500.00. 
3.  Residential water customers shall pay the following surcharges: 
(1)  $10.00 for the first 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
(ii)  $20.00 for the second 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
(iii)  $30.00 for the third 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
(iv)  $40.00 for each additional 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
4.  Surcharges shall be cumulative. 
b.  Master-metered multi-family residential customers. 
1.  The allocation to a customer billed from a master meter which jointly measures water to multiple permanent residential dwelling units (e.g., apartments, mobile homes) shall be allocated 6,000 gallons per month for each dwelling unit. It shall be assumed that such a customer's meter serves two dwelling units unless the customer notifies the city of a greater number on a form prescribed by the city manager. The city manager shall give his/her best effort to see that such forms are mailed, otherwise provided, or made available to every such customer. If, however, a customer does not receive such a form, it shall be the customer's responsibility to go to the city offices to complete and sign the form claiming more than two dwellings. A dwelling unit may be claimed under this provision whether it is occupied or not. New customers may claim more dwelling units at the time of applying for water service on the form prescribed by the city manager. If the number of dwelling units served by a master meter is reduced, the customer shall notify the city in writing within two days. In prescribing the method for claiming more than two dwelling units, the city manager shall adopt methods to insure the accuracy of the claim. Any person who knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence falsely reports the number of dwelling units served by a master meter or fails to timely notify the city of a reduction in the number of person in a household shall be fined not less than $500.00. Customers billed from a master meter under this provision shall pay the following monthly surcharges: 
(i)  $10.00, for 1,000 gallons over allocation up through 1,000 gallons for each dwelling unit. 
(ii)  $20.00, thereafter, for each additional 1,000 gallons over allocation up through a second 1,000 gallons for each dwelling unit. 
(iii)  $30.00, thereafter, for each additional 1,000 gallons over allocation up through a third 1,000 gallons for each dwelling unit. $40.00, thereafter for each additional 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
(iv)  $40.00, thereafter for each additional 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
2.  Surcharges shall be cumulative. 
c.  Commercial customers. 
1.  A monthly water allocation shall be established by the City of Wharton or his/her designee, for each nonresidential commercial customer other than an industrial customer who uses water for processing purposes. The non-residential customer's allocation shall be approximately 75 percent of the customer's usage for corresponding month's billing period for the previous 12 months. If the customer's billing history is shorter than 12 months, the monthly average for the period for which there is a record shall be used for any monthly period for which no history exists. Provided, however, a customer, 75 percent of whose monthly usage is less than 6,000 gallons, shall be allocated 5,000 gallons. The city manager shall give his/her best effort to see that notice of each non-residential customer's allocation is mailed to such customer. If, however, a customer does not receive such notice, it shall be the customer's responsibility to contact the city to determine the allocation. Upon request of the customer or at the initiative of the city manager, the allocation may be reduced or increased if, (1) the designated period does not accurately reflect the customer's normal water usage, (2) one nonresidential customer agrees to transfer part of its allocation to another nonresidential customer, or (3) other objective evidence demonstrates that the designated allocation is inaccurate under present conditions. A customer may appeal an allocation established hereunder to the City Council. Nonresidential commercial customers shall pay the following surcharges: 
(i)  Customers whose allocation is 6,000 gallons through 10,000 gallons per month: 
(A)  $10.00 per thousand gallons for the first 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
(B)  $20.00 per thousand gallons for the second 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
(C)  $30.00 per thousand gallons for the third 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
(D)  $40.00 per thousand gallons for each additional 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
(ii)  Customers whose allocation is 10,000 gallons per month or more: 
(A)  Two times the block rate for each 1,000 gallons in excess of the allocation up through five percent above allocation. 
(B)  Three times the block rate for each 1,000 gallons from five percent through ten percent above allocation. 
(C)  Four times the block rate for each 1,000 gallons from ten percent through 15 percent above allocation. 
(D)  Five times the block rate for each 1,000 gallons more than 15 percent above allocation. 
3.  The surcharges shall be cumulative. As used herein, "block rate" means the charge to the customer per 1,000 gallons at the regular water rate schedule at the level of the customer's allocation. 
d.  Industrial customers. 
1.  A monthly water allocation shall be established by the city manager, or his/her designee, for each industrial customer, which uses water for processing purposes. The industrial customer's allocation shall be approximately 90 percent of the customer's water usage baseline. Ninety days after the initial imposition of the allocation for industrial customers, the industrial customer's allocation shall be further reduced to 85 percent of the customer's water usage baseline. The industrial customer's water use baseline will be computed on the average water use for the 12-month period ending prior to the date of implementation of Stage 2 of the plan. If the industrial water customer's billing history is shorter than 12 months, the monthly average for the period for which there is a record shall be used for any monthly period for which no billing history exists. The city manager shall give his/her best effort to see that notice of each industrial customer's allocation is mailed to such customer. If, however, a customer does not receive such notice, it shall be the customer's responsibility to contact the city to determine the allocation, and the allocation shall be fully effective notwithstanding the lack of receipt of written notice. Upon request of the customer or at the initiative of the city manager the allocation may be reduced or increased, (1) if the designated period does not accurately reflect the customer's normal water use because the customer had shutdown a major processing unit for repair or overhaul during the period, (2) the customer has added or is in the process of adding significant additional processing capacity, (3) the customer has shutdown or significantly reduced the production of a major processing unit, (4) the customer has previously implemented significant permanent water conservation measures such that the ability to further reduce water use is limited, (5) the customer agrees to transfer part of its allocation to another industrial customer, or (6) if other objective evidence demonstrates that the designated allocation is inaccurate under present conditions. A customer may appeal an allocation established hereunder to the city council. Industrial customers shall pay the following surcharges: 
(i)  Customers whose allocation is 10,000 gallons through 10,000 gallons per month: 
(A)  $10.00 per thousand gallons for the first 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
(B)  $20.00 per thousand gallons for the second 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
(C)  $30.00 per thousand gallons for the third 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
(D)  $40.00 per thousand gallons for each additional 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
(ii)  Customers whose allocation is 100,000 gallons per month or more: 
(A)  Two times the block rate for each 1,000 gallons in excess of the allocation up through five percent above allocation. 
(B)  Three times the block rate for each 1,000 gallons from five percent through ten percent above allocation. 
(C)  Four times the block rate for each 1,000 gallons from ten percent through 15 percent above allocation. 
(D)  Five times the block rate for each 1,000 gallons more than 15 percent above allocation. 
2.  The surcharges shall be cumulative. As used herein, "block rate" means the charge to the customer per 1,000 gallons at the regular water rate schedule at the level of the customer's allocation. 
(Ord. No. 2000-08, Exh. A(§ IX), 3-13-00) 
Sec. 86-210. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly or intentionally allow the use of water from the city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this plan, or in an amount in excess of that permitted by the drought response stage in effect at the time pursuant to action taken by city manager, or his/her designee, in accordance with provisions of this plan. 
(b)  Any person who violates this plan is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00. Each day that one or more of the provisions in this Plan is violated shall constitute a separate offense. If a person is convicted of three or more distinct violations of this plan, the city manager shall, upon due notice to the customer, be authorized to discontinue water service to the premises where such violations occur. Services discontinued under such circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of a reconnection charge, hereby established at $20.00, and any other costs incurred by the City of Wharton in discontinuing service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the city manager that the same action shall not be repeated while the plan is in effect. Compliance with this plan may also be sought through injunctive relief in the district court. 
(c)  Any person, including a person classified as a water customer of the city in apparent control of the property where a violation occurs or originates shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof that the violation occurred on the person's property shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the person in apparent control of the property committed the violation, but any such person shall have the right to show that he/she did not commit the violation. Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for violations of their minor children and proof that a violation, committed by a child, occurred on property within the parents' control shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the parent committed the violation, but any such parent may be excused if he/she proves that he/she had previously directed the child not to use the water as it was used in violation of this plan and that the parent could not have reasonably known of the violation. 
(d)  Any employee of the city police department, or other city employee designated by the city manager, may issue a citation to a person he/she reasonably believes to be in violation of this article. The citation shall be prepared in duplicate and shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, if known, the offense charged, and shall direct him/her to appear in the Municipal Court on the date shown on the citation for which the date shall not be less than three days nor more than five days from the date the citation was issued. The alleged violator shall be served a copy of the citation. Service of the citation shall be complete upon delivery of the citation to the alleged violator, to an agent or employee of a violator, or to a person over 14 years of age who is a member of the violator's immediate family or is a resident of the violator's residence. The alleged violator shall appear in municipal court to enter a plea of guilty or not guilty for the violation of this plan. If the alleged violator fails to appear in municipal court, a warrant for his/her arrest may be issued. A summons to appear may be issued in lieu of an arrest warrant. These cases shall be expedited and given preferential setting in municipal court before all other cases. 
(Ord. No. 2000-08, Exh. A(§ X), 3-13-00) 
Sec. 86-211. - Variances. 
(a)  The city manager, or his/her designee, may, in writing, grant temporary variance for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this plan if it is determined that failure to grant such variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or the person requesting such variance and if one or more of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or other condition for which the plan is in effect. 
(2)  Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in water use. 
(b)  Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this article shall file a petition for variance with the city within five days after the plan or a particular drought response stage has been invoked. All petitions for variances shall be reviewed by the City Manager, or his/her designee, and shall include the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the petitioner(s). 
(2)  Purpose of water use. 
(3)  Specific provision(s) of the plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief. 
(4)  Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of the plan adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this article. 
(5)  Description of the relief requested. 
(6)  Period of time for which the variance is sought. 
(7)  Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of this Plan and the compliance date. 
(8)  Other pertinent information. 
(c)  Variances granted by the city shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the city manager or his/her designee: 
(1)  Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance. 
(2)  Variances granted shall expire when the plan is no longer in effect, unless the petitioner has failed to meet specified requirements. 
(d)  No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this plan occurring prior to the issuance of the variance. 
(Ord. No. 2000-08, Exh. A(§ XI), 3-13-00) 
APPENDIX A - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
An Ordinance Providing Rules and Regulations Governing the Platting or Replatting of Land Into Subdivisions in the City of Wharton and Within Five Miles of the Corporate Limits of the City of Wharton and Requiring Plats and Replats To Conform To Such Rules and Regulations in Order To Procure the Approval of the City Planning Commission, City of Wharton; Providing a Penalty and Savings Clause and Repealing All Conflicting Ordinances. 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the subdivision ordinance, as adopted by the council on March 26, 1964. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Charter reference- Planning commission, § 127. 
Cross reference- Mobile homes and trailers, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and public ways, ch. 70; utilities and services, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Regulation of subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - General. 
    These regulations shall govern every person, firm, association, or corporation owning any tract of land within the city limits of the City of Wharton who may hereafter divide the same into two or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of any tract of land or any addition to said city, or for laying out suburban lots or building lots, or any lots, streets, alleys, parks or other portions intended for public use, or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto. 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
    2.01 City or the city shall mean City of Wharton. 
    2.02 Subdivision shall mean the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more parts or lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development or transfer of ownership, and shall include resubdivision. 
    2.03 Resubdivision shall mean the division of an existing subdivision, together with any change of lot size therein, or with the relocation of any street lines. 
    2.04 The word "shall" shall be deemed as mandatory. The word "may" shall be deemed as permissive. 
    2.05 Plat shall mean a map or chart of the subdivision. It shall include plan, plat or replat, in both singular and plural. 
    2.06 Commission shall mean the city planning commission. 
Sec. 3. - Purpose, authority and jurisdiction. 
    3.01 Under the authority of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq., which is hereby made a part of these regulations, the city council does hereby adopt the following regulations to hereafter control the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the city and in the unincorporated areas lying within one mile of the city limits, in order to provide for the orderly development of the areas and to secure adequate provision for traffic, light, air, recreation, transportation, water, drainage, sewage, and other facilities. 
    3.02 As used herein, the term "subdivision" shall mean the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, and shall include resubdivision. "Resubdivision" shall mean any change in the division of any existing subdivision or any change in lot size therein, or the relocation of any street lines. 
    3.03 Any owner of land located inside of or within one mile of the corporate limits of the city wishing to subdivide such land shall submit to the planning commission a plan of subdivision which shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in these regulations. An owner subdividing his land into parcels of not less than five acres each for agricultural use and not involving new streets shall be exempt from these requirements. 
    3.04 No subdivision plat shall be filed or recorded, and no lot in a subdivision inside of or within one mile of the corporate limits of the city shall be improved or sold, until the plat shall have been approved by both the planning commission and the city council. The city shall have the authority to prohibit the installation of public utilities in unapproved streets and to prohibit the issuance of building permits for structures on lots abutting on unapproved streets. 
(Ord. No. 78-5, 2-27-78; Ord. No. 81-2, 1-26-81; Ord. No. 82-8, 3-22-82) 
Sec. 3.5. - [Extraterritorial jurisdiction.] 
3.5.01 Extraterritorial jurisdiction area defined. 
    Under the authority of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 42.021 and 212.001 et seq., which are hereby made a part of these regulations, the city council of the City of Wharton does hereby exercise its authority and does hereby designate all lands lying outside of the corporate limits of the City of Wharton and within one mile of the city limits of the City of Wharton to be within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Wharton as authorized by law to include all of such areas both north and south of the Colorado River and also within one mile of the Wharton Municipal Airport, which is in the city limits of the City of Wharton. 
3.5.02 Lands lying within one-half mile of the city limits, rules and regulations. 
    All of the rules, regulations and provisions of sections 1 through 6 of the subdivision ordinance of the City of Wharton, Texas [this appendix], are hereby adopted and declared and shall be applied to all unincorporated areas lying outside of the city limits of the City of Wharton and within one-half mile of said city limits, same being the exact same rules, regulations and provisions applied to lands lying within the corporate limits of the City of Wharton. 
3.5.03 Lands lying within the area from one-half mile outside the city limits to one mile outside the city limits, special rules and regulations. 
    All of the rules, regulations and provisions of sections 1 through 6 of the subdivision ordinance of the City of Wharton, Texas [this appendix], are hereby adopted and declared and shall be applied to all unincorporated areas lying outside of the city limits of the City of Wharton and within the area from one-half mile outside the city limits to one mile outside the city limits, the same being the exact same rules, regulations and provisions applied to lands lying within the corporate limits of the City of Wharton; except, however, the city planning commission may consider and grant certain variances within this outer one-half-mile area if the developer provides sufficient evidence to establish that such variances are reasonable and necessary under the circumstances and that they would not have any substantial detrimental effect on the growth patterns of the city, said variances being listed as follows: 
A.  Variance number one-Private sanitary sewer systems. The requirement that the developer install sanitary sewer lines as provided in the subdivision ordinance may be waived by the planning commission, and private or individual sewage disposal systems substituted therefor provided each specific building site is subjected to soil percolation test by the owner or developer, the results of such test to be approved by the city of wharton building inspection department after complete information is furnished to the city, including the specific number of family units to be built on each specific site. Such percolation test shall conform to the plumbing code of the city of wharton, texas, with each disposal field and seepage size to be computed from table E-4 of said code. Each leaching area shall be determined according to table E-5 of the city plumbing code, and each system shall have not less than a 750-gallon septic tank and a 100-gallon grease tank as per table E-1 of said code. If some other type of private sanitary sewer system is desired other than septic tanks, the same must be approved by the city planning commission and city building inspection department after submission of detailed plans and specifications. 
B.  Variance number two-Private water systems. Private water systems may be allowed provided that the plans and specifications and construction of same are in conformance with city and state standards and subject to inspection by the city. 
C.  Variance number three-Streets. All streets shall meet all of the existing requirements of the city subdivision ordinance except that the planning commission may allow streets within such area to be built without curb, gutter and storm sewer if adequate drainage is provided, said streets to have the following minimum dimensions: 
Street Width 
Classification Right-of-Way 
Width Paving Width Major streets 100 feet  40 feet Secondary streets 100 feet  34 feet Local streets  80 feet  28 feet  
3.5.04 Plat notice requirements for outer one-half-mile variances. 
    If the city planning commission grants either a sanitary sewer system variance or a street variance in the outer one-half-mile area, any plat submitted to the commission must have substantially the following notice placed on the plat, said notice to be in full capital letters as follows: 
"NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS: THIS SUBDIVISION IS BEING DEVELOPED WITH PRIVATE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEMS AND WITHOUT CURB, GUTTER AND STORM SEWERS. THIS SUBDIVISION IS WITHIN THE EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION OF THE CITY OF WHARTON, AND THE PROPERTY WITHIN THIS SUBDIVISION IS SUBJECT TO THE POSSIBILITY OF FUTURE ASSESSMENT BY THE CITY OF WHARTON FOR CURB, GUTTER, STORM SEWER AND/OR SANITARY SEWAGE IMPROVEMENTS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF TEXAS." 
(Ord. No. 78-5, 2-27-78) 
Sec. 4. - Procedure. 
    4.01 Preliminary plat. 
    A preliminary plat of any proposed subdivision, prepared by a registered engineer or a registered public surveyor and bearing his seal, shall be submitted to the planning commission for approval before the subdivider proceeds with the final plat for record. 
1.  This preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of 100 feet to the inch. 
The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
2.  Existing features inside subdivision. 
a.  The existing boundary lines of the land to be subdivided. Boundary lines shall be drawn in heavy for easy identification. 
b.  The location of existing watercourses, railroads, and other similar drainage and transportation features. 
c.  The location and width of existing streets, alleys, easements, buildings and structures. 
d.  Topographical information with contour lines at two-foot intervals. 
3.  Existing features outside subdivision. 
a.  The name and property lines of adjoining property owners. 
b.  The name and location of adjacent subdivisions, streets, easements, pipelines, watercourses, etc. 
All lines outside of subdivision boundaries to be dashed. 
4.  New features inside of subdivision. 
a.  The proposed name of the subdivision. 
b.  The location and width of proposed streets. 
c.  The approximate width and depth of all lots. If the sidelines are not parallel, the approximate distance between them at the building line and at the narrowest point should be given. 
d.  The location of building lines, alleys and easements. 
e.  The location and approximate size of sites for schools, churches, parks, and other special land uses. 
f.  The approximate acreage of the property to be subdivided. 
5.  Key map. A key map showing relation of subdivision to well-known streets in all directions to a distance of at least one mile. 
6.  Title, etc. The date, scale, north point and title under which the plat is to be recorded, with the name of the owner and engineer or surveyor platting the tract. 
7.  Submission. The planning commission shall be furnished with three legible prints of the preliminary plat and with three copies of a letter of transmittal stating briefly the type of street surfacing, drainage, sanitary facilities, and water supply proposed, and the name and address of the owner or agent and engineer or surveyor, seven days or more before the regular planning commission meeting. These documents shall be filed in the office of the superintendent of public works. 
8.  Approval. The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove within 30 days any preliminary plat submitted to it. Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute final acceptance of the final plat. Preliminary approval will expire six months after the approval by the planning commission of the preliminary plat or of final sections thereof, except that if the subdivider shall apply in writing prior to the end of such six-month period, stating reasons for needing the extension, this period may be extended for another six months but not beyond the total of one year. 
9.  Street names. The planning commission shall have the authority to designate names of all proposed streets within the subdivision. The planning commission, in exercising its authority to name streets, may take into consideration suggestions from the developers of the subdivisions regarding the naming of streets. 
    4.02 Final plat. 
    After approval of a preliminary plat by the planning commission, a final plat, prepared by a registered engineer or a registered public surveyor and bearing his seal, shall be submitted to said planning commission by filing in the office of the superintendent of public works. Such plat shall have all changes and alterations made on it that were required on the previously submitted preliminary plat. 
1.  Sheet size and scale. All final plats shall be drawn in India ink or tracing cloth sheets 24 inches by 30 inches (24? × 30?) and to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet. Where more than one sheet is required, an index sheet of maximum size 24 inches by 30 inches (24? × 30?) shall be filed showing the entire subdivision. Where the area to be developed can be drawn on a sheet one-half size or less with the scale of the drawing remaining one inch equals 100 feet, a sheet 24 inches by 15 inches (24? × 15?) may be used. 
The final plat shall contain the following information: 
2.  Existing features inside subdivision. 
a.  The existing boundary lines of the land to be subdivided. Boundary lines shall be drawn in heavy for easy identification. 
b.  The location of existing watercourses, railroads, and other similar drainage and transportation features. 
c.  The location and width of existing streets, alleys, easements, buildings and structures to be retained. 
3.  Existing features outside subdivision. 
a.  The name and property lines of adjoining subdivisions and of the adjoining property owners, together with the respective plat or deed references. 
b.  The name and location of adjacent streets, alleys, easements, watercourses, etc. 
All lines outside of subdivision boundaries to be dashed. 
4.  Streets, alleys, easements. The lines and names of all proposed streets or other ways or easements to be dedicated to public use, with the following engineering data: 
a.  For streets. 
Complete curve data (L, R, P.C., P.R.C., P.T.) shown on the centerline or on each side of street. 
Length and bearings of all tangents. 
Dimensions from all angle points and points of curve to an adjacent side lot line. 
b.  For watercourses and easements. Distances to be provided along the side lot lines from the front lot line or the high bank of a stream. Traverse line to be provided along the edge of all large watercourses in a convenient location, preferably along a utility easement if paralleling the drainage easement or stream. 
5.  [ Name; acreage. ] Name of subdivision and total acres. 
6.  Lots and blocks. The lines and numbers of all proposed lots and blocks with complete bearings and dimensions for front, rear and side lot lines. 
7.  [ Building lines. ] Building lines shall be shown on all lots. 
8.  Reservations. The use and property dimensions of all special reservations, including sites for schools, churches, and parks. 
9.  Monuments and control points. 
a.  The description and location of all permanent survey monuments and control points. 
b.  Suitable primary control points to which all dimensions, bearings and similar data shall be referred. Dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of a foot. 
10.  Certificate of approval to be placed on the plat. 
"Know all men by these presents: 
    That I, ___________, do hereby certify that I prepared this plat from an actual and accurate survey of the land and that the corner monuments shown thereon were properly placed under my personal supervision, in accordance with the subdivision regulations of the City of Wharton, Texas. 
    "Approved this _____ day of ________, 19___ by the City Planning Commission of the City of Wharton, Texas. 
_____
Chairman _____
Secretary  
    "Approved this _____ day of ________, 19___, by the City Council of the City of Wharton, Texas. 
_____
Mayor _____
City Secretary"  
11.  Key map. A key map showing relation of subdivision to well-known streets in all directions to a distance of at least one mile. 
12.  Title, etc. The date, scale, north point and subdivision title. 
13.  Dedications and certificates. Such dedications and certificates as are applicable. 
14.  Special restrictions. Where restrictions of use of land, other than those given in these regulations are to be imposed by the subdivider, such restrictions may be placed on the final plat or on a separate instrument filed with the plat. 
15.  Tax receipt. A receipt showing that all taxes have been paid is to be submitted concurrent with the final plat. 
16.  Submission. The planning commission shall be furnished with three legible prints and the original tracing or a reproducible copy of the final plat seven days or more before the regular planning commission meeting. These documents shall be filed in the office of the superintendent of public works. 
17.  Approval. Final approval will expire one year after planning commission action granting approval of any plat unless the plat has been filed for record, except that if the subdivider shall apply in writing prior to the end of such one-year period, stating reasons for needing the extension, this period may, at the discretion of the commission, be extended for another year but not beyond that period. 
(Ord. No. 82-8, 3-22-82; Ord. No. 87-4, 2-9-87) 
Sec. 5. - General requirements and design standards. 
    5.01 Streets. 
1.  Conformity to major street plan. The width and location of streets shall conform to such major street plan as the planning commission may have adopted, both as to horizontal and vertical alignment and right-of-way widths. 
2.  Relation to adjoining street system. The proposed street system shall extend all existing major streets and such existing secondary and local-access streets as may be desirable for convenience of circulation. Where possible, the width and the horizontal and vertical alignment of extended streets shall be preserved. 
3.  Street jogs. Where offsets in street alignment are, in the opinion of the planning commission, unavoidable, such offsets may be employed provided the distance between centerlines is not less than 125 feet. 
4.  Large-lot subdivisions. If the lots in the proposed subdivision are large enough to suggest resubdivision in the future, or if part of the tract is not subdivided, consideration must be given to possible future street openings and access to future lots which could result from such resubdivision. 
5.  Through traffic. Local residential streets shall be designed so as to discourage high-speed or through traffic. 
6.  Topography. The street system shall bear a logical relationship to the natural topography of the ground. 
7.  Street widths. "Street width" shall be measured from front lot line to front lot line of opposite lots. 
a.  Local streets. Local streets shall have a minimum width of 50 feet. 
b.  Secondary streets. Secondary or feeder streets shall have a minimum width of 60 feet. 
c.  Major streets. The width of major streets shall be determined by the planning commission, the major street plan, and adopted standards. Major streets with a right-of-way width of less than 100 feet are to be increased to a width of 100 feet for a distance of 150 feet at the approach to a major street intersection, with a transition back to normal right-of-way over a distance of an additional 150 feet. 
8.  Street alignment. The maximum deflection in alignment permitted without use of curve shall be ten degrees. 
9.  Major street curves. Curves in major streets shall have a centerline radius of 2,000 feet or more with exceptions to this standard granted only by the planning commission. 
10.  Secondary street curves. Curves in secondary or feeder streets shall have a centerline radius of 800 feet or more, with exceptions to this standard granted only by the planning commission. 
11.  Local street curves. Curves in local streets are to have a centerline radius of 300 feet or more, except for "loop" or partial "loop" streets. 
12.  Reverse curves. Reverse curves shall be separated by a minimum tangent of 100 feet. 
13.  Vertical curves. See: Engineering and Construction Standards [section 6]. 
14.  Dead-end streets-Cul-de-sacs. 
a.  Turnarounds. Turnarounds are to have a minimum right-of-way radius of 50 feet for a single-family and two-family use and 60 feet for other uses. 
b.  Maximum length. The maximum length of a dead-end street with a permanent turnaround shall be 600 feet, except in conditions of unusual topography. 
c.  Temporary turnarounds. Temporary turnarounds are to be provided at the end of streets more than 400 feet long that will be extended in the future. The following note should be placed on the plat: "Cross-hatched area is temporary easement for turnaround until street is extended (give direction) in a recorded plat." 
15.  Street intersections. 
a.  Angle of intersection. Except where existing conditions will not permit, all streets, major and minor, shall intersect at a 90-degree angle. Variations of more than ten degrees on minor streets and more than five degrees on major or secondary streets must first be approved by the planning commission. 
b.  Radius at acute corners. Acute angle intersections approved by the planning commission are to have 25-foot or greater radii at acute corners. 
c.  Centerline tie with existing streets. Each new street intersecting with or extending to meet an existing street shall be tied to the existing street on centerline with dimensions and bearings to show relationship. 
16.  Partial or half-streets. Partial or half-streets may be provided where the planning commission feels that a street should be located on a property line. The following note shall be used in all [each] such dedication: 
"This _____-foot strip is dedicated as an easement for all utility purposes including storm and sanitary sewers and shall automatically become dedicated for street purposes when and insofar as a _____-foot strip adjacent to it is so dedicated and the required improvements as are installed." 
17.  Reserve strips. Provisional one-foot reserves may be used along the side or end of streets that abut acreage tracts, accompanied by a note on the plat as follows: 
"One-foot reserve to become automatically dedicated for street purposes when adjacent property is subdivided in a recorded plat." 
18.  Street names. New streets shall be named so as to provide continuity of name with existing streets and so as to prevent conflict with identical or similar names in other parts of the city. 
19.  Private streets. Private streets are prohibited. 
    5.02 Lots. 
1.  Use. All lots shown on the plat will be for residential purposes unless otherwise noted. Standards that apply to residential lots follow. 
2.  Lot size. To conform with zoning ordinance. On the basis of the district in which they lie and the use to which they are to be put, all lots must conform to the regulations of the zoning ordinance, including minimum area, width, and depth. 
3.  Minimum width. Sixty feet. Radial lots to have minimum width of 60 feet at and for a distance of 30 feet behind the building line. 
4.  Minimum depth. One hundred twenty feet. 
5.  Minimum area. Seven thousand two hundred square feet. 
6.  Corner lots. Corner lots with a width of less than 75 feet are to be at least five feet wider than average of interior lots in the block. Corner lots with a width of less than 85 feet adjacent to a major thoroughfare are to be at least 15 feet wider than the average of interior lots in the block. 
7.  Lots on major streets. Lots facing or backing on major streets shall be at least ten feet deeper than average of lots facing on adjacent minor streets. 
8.  Lots on drainage easements. Minimum usable lot depths for lots backing on natural drainage easements shall be not less than 80 feet measured between front lot line and drainage easement. 
9.  Lot width. The lot width is the average of the front and rear lot dimensions. 
10.  Lot shape. Lots should be rectangular insofar as practicable. Sharp angles between lot lines should be avoided. The ratio of depth to width should not ordinarily exceed 21/2 to one. 
11.  Lot lines. Side lot lines should be perpendicular or radial to street frontage and the following note may be used in lieu of bearings: 
"All side lot lines are either perpendicular or radial to street frontage unless otherwise noted." 
12.  Lot facing. 
a.  Street frontage. Each lot shall be provided with adequate access to an existing or proposed public street by frontage on such street. 
b.  Double front. Double front lots are prohibited except when backing on major thoroughfares. 
c.  Front facing. Wherever feasible, each lot should face the front of a similar lot across the street. In general, an arrangement placing adjacent lots at right angles to each other should be avoided. 
13.  Lot numbering. All lots are to be numbered consecutively within each block. Lot numbering may be cumulative throughout the subdivision if the numbering continues from block to block in a uniform manner that has been approved on an overall preliminary plat. 
14.  Driveway restrictions. Rear and side driveway access to major thoroughfares shall be prohibited. 
    5.03 Blocks. 
1.  Block length. 
a.  Residential. Maximum block length for residential use shall be 1,200 feet, measured along the center of the block. Six hundred feet is a desirable minimum. 
b.  On major street. Maximum block length along a major street shall be 1,600 feet except under special conditions and upon approval of the planning commission. 
2.  Block width. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots of at least minimum depth, except when prevented by the size of the property or the need to back up to a major thoroughfare. 
3.  Block numbering. Blocks are to be numbered consecutively within the overall plat and/or sections of an overall plat as recorded. 
    5.04 Building lines. 
1.  Front street. The front building line shall not be less than 25 feet from the front property line, except that where the lots face on a major street, the front building line shall not be less than 35 feet from the front property line. 
2.  Side street. The building line on the side of corner lots shall not be less than 15 feet from the side street property line, except that where the lots side on a major street, the building line shall not be less than 25 feet from the side street property line, and where the side of a corner lot is across the street from or adjacent to the front of other lots, the building line shall be at the same distance from the street as the front building line of the opposite or adjacent lots. 
3.  Rear street. The rear building line where lots back on a major street shall not be less than 25 feet from the rear property line. 
    5.05 Alleys. 
1.  Width. Where provided, alleys shall not be less than 20 feet in width. 
2.  Cutoffs. In case of intersecting alleys, a cutoff shall be required at each corner. Cutoffs shall be triangles having two equal sides each of which shall be not less than ten feet in length. 
3.  Dead-end alleys. Dead-end alleys will not be permitted. Alleys in new subdivisions shall connect to alleys in adjacent subdivisions wherever feasible. 
4.  Alleys required. Alleys shall be required in all business areas and in those portions of new residential subdivisions where partial blocks are needed to complete existing blocks with alleys. 
    5.06 Easements. 
1.  Size. The size of easements where alleys are not provided shall not be less than five feet on each side of rear lot lines, with additional five feet on each side beginning at a plane 20 feet above the ground. The full width of easement shall be not less than ten feet at ground level nor less than 20 feet aboveground. 
2.  Use. Where necessary, easements shall be retained for poles, wires, conduits, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water lines, open drains, gas lines, or other utilities. Such easements may be required across parts of lots (including side lines) other than as described above, if in the opinion of the planning commission same is needed. 
    5.07 Improvements. 
1.  Monuments. Concrete monuments eight inches in diameter and 15 inches long shall be placed at all block corners and at all corners of the boundary lines of a subdivision. The exact intersection point on the monument shall be marked by a reinforcing bar one-half inch in diameter and 12 inches long embedded in the concrete monument. Intermediate property corners, curve points and angle points shall be marked with a piece of one-half-inch round reinforcing rod driven flush with the finished ground level or lower if necessary in order to keep same from being disturbed. 
2.  Sidewalks. The subdivider will be required to install concrete sidewalks not less than four feet in width on both sides of all major and feeder streets in his subdivision. The planning commission may require installation along one or both sides of specified local streets. 
3.  Other required improvements. See: Engineering and Construction Standards [section 6]. 
    5.08 Reservations. 
1.  Permitted purposes. No land contained in the proposed subdivision shall be reserved for any use other than a use permitted by the zoning ordinance for the district in which the land to be reserved is located. 
2.  Designation on plat. The specific use for which each piece of land is to be reserved must be shown by appropriate label or description on the subdivision plat. Provision for future abandonment of a reservation as may be appropriate must likewise be shown on said plat. 
3.  Parks and playgrounds. The location and size of parks and playgrounds shall be in accordance with the planning commission's park sites plan and with the requirements of the city council. Park sites are to be purchased at the developer's acreage cost plus a prorated cost of improvements. 
4.  Schools. The location and size of schools shall be in accordance with the planning commission's school sites plan and with the requirements of the school district. 
    5.09 Variances. 
    When a subdivider can show that a provision of these regulations would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to and where, because of some condition peculiar to the site in the opinion of the planning commission a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provisions, the planning commission may authorize a variance. 
    5.10 Penalty. 
    Any person violating this ordinance or any portion thereof shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00, and each day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense and punishable accordingly. 
    5.11 Savings clause. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, void or invalid, the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby, it being the intent of the city council in adopting this ordinance, that no portion thereof, or provision or regulation continued herein shall become inoperative or fail by reason of the unconstitutionality or invalidity of any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or provision of this ordinance. 
Sec. 6. - Engineering and construction standards. 
    6.01 Policies. 
    Policies, terms and conditions to be followed in paving work, and the extending of water and sewer lines, are included in city ordinances. All improvements shall be installed by the developer. The city shall not participate in the development unless a larger facility or improvement is required by the city. The city will participate in the cost of the facility to the extent of the difference in the cost of the facility or improvement required to serve the developer's land and that required by the city to be installed. 
    6.02 Engineering. 
    The developer will be required to retain the services of an engineer registered in the State of Texas, whose seal shall be placed on the drawings, for the design and inspection of the drainage, roads and streets, sewer and water facilities within the subdivision. 
    The services performed by the developer's engineer shall be as designated in the current issue of "Manual of Professional Practice-General Engineering Service," as published by the Texas Society of Professional Engineers, and shall include both design and inspection as defined therein. 
    6.03 Streets. 
    All streets will be either reinforced concrete pavement on a compacted subgrade or a flexible base with an asphaltic concrete surface course on a compacted subgrade. Concrete pavement shall be provided with either an integral curb poured with the pavement or a separate curb constructed on top of, and doweled to, the concrete pavement. Flexible base pavement shall be provided with a combination curb and gutter section. 
1.  Alignment, grade and width. Alignment of streets shall be as hereinbefore stated in General Requirements and Design Standards [section 5]. 
2.  Grades. Gutter gradients shall be a minimum of one-quarter of one percent. Crown sections shall slope not less than one-quarter inch per foot for asphaltic concrete and one-eighth inch per foot for Portland cement concrete. The minimum drop around curb return will be one-tenth of one foot. The maximum drop of grade tangents from opposite direction to a common low point shall not exceed 11/2 feet. All gutter grades shall be above the design water surface of ditches and storm sewers. All grade changes with an algebraic difference of one percent or more shall be connected with a vertical curve. 
3.  Width. Minimum width of streets shall be as follows: 
Classification Row width Street width 
back to back 
of curb Major streets 80' 61 ft. Secondary or feeder streets 60' 39 ft. Local streets (flexible base) 50' 32 ft. Local streets (concrete) 50' 30 ft.  
4.  Pavement design. Pavement design shall conform to the following general requirements unless otherwise approved by the planning commission. References to state department of transportation specifications regarding street work are references to the "Standard Specification for Road and Bridge Construction" adopted by the state department of transportation, January 2, 1961. 
5.  Concrete pavement. Concrete pavement shall conform to the requirements of item 360, state department of transportation, standard specification. Concrete pavements shall have a minimum thickness of six inches for local streets and a minimum thickness of seven inches for secondary streets, feeder streets, and major streets. Concrete pavement shall be reinforced with three-eighths-inch deformed bars at 24 inches center to center each way. 
6.  Flexible base pavement. Flexible base pavement shall consist of a base course of the thickness and of the type materials indicated for flexible bases, and shall be surfaced with one of the types of surface courses indicated below: 
a.  Flexible base courses. 
Seven inches of compacted cement stabilized shell using 11/2 sacks of Portland cement per ton. 
Eight inches of compacted crushed stone conforming to item 242, state department of transportation, standard specifications. 
Eight inches of compacted iron ore conforming to item 240, state department of transportation, standard specifications. 
Six inches of compacted crushed stone conforming to item 242, state department of transportation, standard specifications, provided that the subgrade is lime treated, subject to inspection and approval by the city engineer. 
b.  Surface courses. 
One and one-half inches of cold mix limestone rock asphalt pavement conforming to item 330, state department of transportation, standard specifications. 
One and one-half inches of hot mix asphaltic concrete pavement conforming to item 340, state department of transportation, standard specifications. 
One and one-half inches of hot mix cold laid asphaltic concrete pavement conforming to item 350, state department of transportation, standard specifications. 
Two-course surface treatment conforming to item 322, state department of transportation, standard specifications. 
7.  Curb and gutter. Curb and combination curb and gutter shall be constructed of reinforced concrete. Cross section and shapes shall conform to standards on file with the superintendent of public works. 
    6.04 Alleys. 
1.  Pavement type. All alleys shall be paved as a minimum with six inches of crushed stone flexible base, conforming to requirements for street paving. 
2.  Pavement width. A minimum paved width of ten feet shall be required for all alleys. 
3.  Drainage. Drainage shall be collected by swales outside the edge of the base course where no concrete gutter is provided. Depth of swale shall be as required for drainage with a minimum slope of one-half of one percent. 
    6.05 Drainage criteria. 
    Adequate drainage shall be provided by developers and their engineers within the limits of subdivisions. The protection of adjoining property shall be considered in the review of plans submitted to the city. 
    All drainage plans shall be developed in accordance with the Wharton County Drainage Criteria Manual. Wharton County's manual uses the following terms: "Drainage Regulation Entity"; "Drainage Review Authority"; "Wharton County"; "County or County's"; and "County Engineer". These terms appear throughout the manual so that other governmental entities such as the City of Wharton can adopt the criteria and a county-wide drainage coordination can be achieved. The City of Wharton hereby adopts the Wharton County Drainage Criteria Manual; therefore the generic terms mentioned above shall be generally defined as follows unless the specific context of a reference to the "county" should remain: 
"Wharton County": City of Wharton. 
"County" or "county's": City, or city's. 
"Drainage regulation entity": City of Wharton. 
"Drainage review authority": City engineer. 
"County engineer": City engineer. 
    Variances to the Wharton County Drainage Criteria Manual may be granted by the City of Wharton's engineer. 
    6.06 Water and sewer system. 
    The developer will be required to submit a certificate to the superintendent of public works, certifying that the systems have been designed in accordance with requirements of the state health department and existing laws. 
    The developer of the subdivision shall provide all water and sewer lines necessary to properly serve the subdivision and shall insure that: (1) existing and/or new water facilities can supply the required demand for domestic use and for fire flow at the desired pressure; and (2) that existing and/or new sewage facilities are adequate to carry the expected load. 
1.  Sewer lines. 
a.  Location. Where the location of the sewer is not clearly defined by dimensions on the drawings, the sewer shall not be closer horizontally than ten feet to a water supply main or service line. Gravity sewer lines passing over water lines shall be constructed for a distance of ten feet each side of the crossing with cast iron pipe with no joints with three feet of crossing. 
b.  Materials. Sewer lines may be of the following materials: Vitrified clay pipe and fittings conforming to ASTM C-261-60T, class II standard strength. Extra strength where required by superintendent of public works. 
c.  Construction. Sewers shall be constructed according to superintendent of public works specifications as to trenching, bedding, backfill, and compaction. 
d.  Manholes. Manholes shall be spaced a distance not to exceed 400 feet and shall be constructed in accordance with specifications of superintendent of public works. 
e.  Forced mains. Forced mains shall be cast iron pipe and fittings, pressure class. Pipe shall have either mechanical joints or single rubber gasket joint approved by the superintendent of public works. 
2.  Water lines. 
a.  Piping. Piping for water mains and connections shall be cast iron, class 150, either mechanical joint or single rubber gasket joint approved by the superintendent of public works. The pipe and accessories shall be new and unused. All cast iron pipe and fittings shall conform to American Standard A21.2, A21.6, or A21.8. 
b.  Threading. Threading on fire hydrant outlets shall be suitable for use with city fire protection equipment. 
c.  Valves. At intersections of water distribution lines, the number of valves will be one less than the number of radiating lines (two valves for tee connection and three for cross connection). 
3.  Off-site extensions required to serve subdivisions and other developments. 
a.  Developers (including individuals, subdividers and owners of multifamily dwelling units) shall pay the entire cost of water and sewer main extensions from present city lines as are necessary to extend to and reach the subdivision; and, if necessary, lift stations that are required to serve that development; as determined by the planning commission. For purposes of this section, a water main in excess of eight inches inside diameter and a sanitary sewer main in excess of 12 inches inside diameter may be considered oversize and the city may participate in any costs of oversize water or sewer mains, at its option, provided the oversize capacity is not required to serve the development and provided that such city funds are available. Otherwise, the city will not participate in extensions and lift stations. 
b.  The city shall approve all contracts for utility construction prior to their execution by the developer. In the event the city cannot justify the costs involved in any such contract where reimbursement is involved, the city shall have the right to submit the specifications and subject matter for sealed bids, the developer then accepting and paying the lowest and best bid as determined by the city and if the developer desires to proceed with the project. 
    6.07 Street lighting. 
    The developer shall be required to install street lighting in the subdivision. Street lighting shall conform to the guidelines and recommendations of the power company as shall be approved or amended by the planning commission. Prior to final approval of the subdivision plat, the developer shall submit a proposed street lighting plan showing proposed locations, proposed construction details and lighting levels. The location of the proposed streetlights shall be shown on the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 73-2, 1-22-73; Ord. No. 75-22, 11-10-75; Ord. No. 76-25, 12-13-76; Ord. No. 82-6, 3-8-82; Ord. No. 2004-10, 4-12-04; Ord. No. 2013-11, 6-10-13) 
Sec. 7. - Townhouses. 
    7.01 Townhouse lots. 
    Townhouse lots may be created by special permit to be issued by the city planning commission where each townhouse lot is to be served by a public sewage and water system, subject to the following conditions in addition to those applicable to all other subdivisions under the subdivision ordinance: 
1.  Subdivisions with townhouse lots within the corporate limits of the city, or outside the corporate limits of the city, but within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city for subdivision control, may be approved only after approval of such project has been given by the city planning commission in accordance with applicable Code provisions, and then only as the proposed townhouse subdivision is in strict accordance with the terms and provisions of the special permit. 
2.  Subdivisions with townhouse lots must be accompanied by site plan in connection with such subdivision showing location and dimensions of all proposed buildings, accessory uses and other improvements in addition to the other requirements provided for other subdivisions. 
3.  All common area shall be clearly identified on the plat and adequate provisions made for maintenance and taxation. 
4.  A legal opinion by an attorney licensed to practice law in Texas accurately describing and defining the rights and duties of the owners, the legal status of the common areas and facilities, if any, and provisions for taxation and maintenance of such common areas, if any, shall accompany each subdivision with townhouse lots. 
    7.02 Definitions. 
Common area: An area held, designed and designated principally for the common use of the occupants of a townhouse project. 
Private yard: An area open space within a townhouse but which is unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure. 
Townhouse: A dwelling unit structure having a common wall with one or more adjoining dwelling unit structures. 
Townhouse group: Two or more contiguous townhouses connected by common walls. 
Townhouse lot: A parcel of land designed to be developed with a townhouse as that term is defined in the zoning ordinance. 
Townhouse project: A townhouse development or plan which is submitted and approved by a single special permit and which is laid out on contiguous land, all uninterrupted by intervening public streets. 
    7.03 Townhouse requirements. 
    Townhouses, as hereinafter limited, may be constructed on approved townhouse lots provided they meet the following requirements: 
1.  Each townhouse lot is located on an individual lot. 
2.  The following unit and area requirements are complied with: 
a.  That there be at least four connected units in each townhouse project; 
b.  That the townhouse project site contains not less than 3,500 square feet of area per unit, including common area, if any; 
c.  That not less than 80 percent of the townhouse lots in a project be at least 20 feet in width, provided that the remaining lots in a project be at least 16 feet in width; 
d.  That each lot 20 feet or more in width shall contain not less than 1,800 square feet, and each lot less than 20 feet in width shall contain not less than 1,440 square feet; 
e.  That each townhouse group shall have not less than four adjoining townhouse units, provided that the commission may approve up to 20 percent of said units in two- and three-unit groups when the project contains 12 or more units. 
3.  The following height, coverage and setback requirements are met: 
a.  That no building or accessory structure shall exceed 35 feet in height; 
b.  That coverage of a project shall not exceed 45 percent of the total site area; those structures constituting "coverage" under this provision include, but are not limited to, buildings, and required parking spaces; 
c.  That coverage of the common area or areas, if any, shall not exceed 30 percent of said common area or areas; those structures constituting coverage in this provision include, but are not limited to, all buildings, structures and required parking, but shall not include driveways or walkways; 
d.  Each lot shall contain a private yard with not less than 400 square feet of area; not more than one-half the required private yard may be occupied by a driveway, but parking areas shall not be included in the computation of the required private yard area; a wall or solid fence, not less than five feet in height, shall be required on side lot lines where the required private yard adjoins said lot lines; a private yard may contain a patio cover or roof which does not cover more than 25 percent of the private yard; each wall or fence shall have a three-foot gate, except that gates may be in back wall or fence only where a townhouse lot has access to a public alley; 
e.  All buildings shall be set back from the front street 25 feet for the building line, and the front line of any porch shall be set back from the front street 20 feet; except that the commission may approve a setback of ten feet, including porches, when said buildings are located on a minor street, not classified as a collector, arterial or expressway, and when the reduced setback will not, in the opinion of the commission, detrimentally affect existing or proposed development adjacent to and across the street, and within 200 feet on each side of the area of proposed reduction of setback within the project; 
f.  All buildings shall be set back from the side street ten feet for the building line; 
g.  No side yard shall be required between connected townhouses or units; 
h.  Within a townhouse project there shall be at least 15 feet of separation or combined side yard between each townhouse group; 
i.  At least ten feet of side yard shall be provided at the side property line of any townhouse project; 
j.  All townhouses shall set back from the rear lot line at least ten feet; garages or carports having direct access to a rear alley or common driveway shall set back from the rear lot line at least ten feet; other accessory buildings shall set back from the rear lot line at least five feet; however the commission may reduce or waive the required rear yard requirements where a common area of at least 15 feet in width is provided and there is provision for pedestrian and vehicular safety, utility service and privacy. 
4.  No townhouse group shall exceed 200 feet in length. 
5.  The following parking and driveway requirements are complied with: 
a.  Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each townhouse, which shall be located on the individual townhouse lot, but any required parking space not located on the individual lot shall be located within 100 feet of the lot; 
b.  No parking shall be provided in the front 15 feet of a townhouse lot or common area, nor in the ten feet adjacent to a side street; 
c.  No driveway located in the front yard of a townhouse lot shall exceed 50 percent of the lot width; 
d.  One-way common driveways shall be at least nine feet in width and two-way common driveways shall be at least 18 feet in width. 
6.  Townhouse exterior walls may be erected on the division property line if built of two-hour, fire-resistant construction. The walls shall be extended from its lowest foundation to 18 inches above the finished roof, with all other provisions of group A occupancies of the building code to remain applicable. The outside end walls may be built of one-hour, fire-resistant construction. 
(Ord. No. 71-4, 5-10-71) 
Sec. 8. - Patio homes. 
    8.01 Patio home lots. 
    Patio home lots may be created by special permit to be issued by the city planning commission where each patio home lot is to be served by a public sewage and water system, subject to the following conditions in addition to those applicable to all other subdivisions under the subdivision ordinance: 
1.  Subdivisions with patio home lots within the corporate limits of the City of Wharton, or outside the corporate limits of the City of Wharton, but within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city for subdivision control, may be approved only after approval of such project has been given by the city planning commission in accordance with applicable code provisions, and then only as the proposed patio home subdivision is in strict accordance with the terms and provisions of the special permit. 
2.  Subdivisions with patio home lots must be accompanied by site plan in connection with such subdivision showing location and dimensions of all proposed buildings, accessory uses and other improvements in addition to the other requirements provided for other subdivisions. 
3.  All common area shall be clearly identified on the plat and adequate provisions made for maintenance and taxation. 
4.  A legal opinion by an attorney licensed to practice law in Texas accurately describing and defining the rights and duties of the owners, the legal status of the common areas and facilities, if any, and provisions for taxation and maintenance of such common areas, if any, shall accompany each subdivision with patio home lots. 
    8.02 Definitions. 
Common area: An area held, designed and designated principally for the common use of the occupants of a patio home project. 
Patio home: A single-family dwelling unit structure located on a patio home lot. 
Patio home group: Six or more contiguous patio home lots. 
Patio home lot: A parcel of land designed to be developed with a patio home as that term is defined and authorized herein. 
Patio home project: A patio home development or plan which is submitted and approved by a single special permit and which is laid out on contiguous land. 
Private yard: An area open space within a patio home lot but which is unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure. 
    8.03 Patio home requirements. 
    Patio homes, as hereinafter limited, may be constructed on approved lots provided they meet the following requirements: 
1.  Each patio home is located on an individual lot. 
2.  The following unit and area requirements are complied with: 
a.  That there be at least six units in each patio home project; 
b.  That the patio home project site contain not less than 2,700 square feet of area per unit, including common area, if any; 
c.  That each patio home group shall have not less than six patio home lots, with each patio home lot to have not more than one single-family dwelling unit; 
d.  Individual building permits may be issued for the construction of patio homes on patio home lots one at a time to individual lot owners. 
3.  The following height, coverage and setback requirements are met: 
a.  That no building or accessory structure shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
b.  Each lot shall contain a private yard with not less than 400 square feet of area; not more than one-half the required private yard may be occupied by a driveway, but parking areas shall not be included in the computation of the required private yard area. 
c.  Each patio home lot shall be enclosed by a wall or solid fence, not less than five feet in height, said wall or fence to be placed along the rear lot line and along the side lot lines to a point on the side lot line extending no further than the front wall of the house and then running parallel to the front wall of the house so as to join the same and completely enclose that portion of the lot to the rear of the front wall of the house. There shall be at least one three-foot gate along that portion of the fence closest to the street in front of the house. 
d.  All buildings shall be set back from the front street or curbline at least 20 feet for the building line, and the front line of any porch shall be set back from the front street at least 15 feet; except that the commission may approve a setback of ten feet, including porches, when said buildings are located on a minor street, not classified as a collector, arterial or expressway, and when the reduced setback will not, in the opinion of the commission, detrimentally affect existing or proposed development adjacent to and across the street, and within 200 feet on each side of the area of proposed reduction of setback with the project. 
e.  All buildings shall be set back from the side street ten feet for the building line. 
f.  All patio homes shall be set back from the rear lot line at least five feet; garages or carports having direct access to a rear alley or common driveway shall be set back from the rear lot line at least five feet; other accessory buildings shall [be] set back from the rear lot line at least five feet; however the commission may reduce or waive the required rear yard requirements where a common area of at least 15 feet in width is provided and there is provision for pedestrian and vehicular safety, utility service and privacy. 
g.  All buildings shall be set back from the side lot lines at least five feet, except that one exterior wall of a patio home may be erected on the division property line if built of two-hour, fire-resistant construction. Such walls shall be extended from their lowest foundation to 18 inches above the finished roof, with all other provisions of group A occupancies of the building code to remain applicable. Where one of the exterior walls is erected along the division property line, the side wall on the other side of such patio homes shall not be on the property line and shall be set back at least ten feet from side property line. 
(Ord. No. 76-24, 12-13-76; Ord. No. 79-14, 11-26-79) 
Sec. 9. - Mobile homes. 
    9.01 Definitions. 
1.  For the purpose of this section, the following terms are defined and shall be construed as herein set forth unless it shall be apparent from the context that they have different meanings: 
a.  Mobile home: Any vehicle or similar portable structure having no foundation other than wheels, jacks, blocks, or skirtings, and so designed or constructed as to permit occupancy for dwelling and be equipped with a flush toilet, lavatory, tub, or shower, and sink. 
b.  Physical barrier: Any river, pond, canal, railroad, levy, or embankment; or any fence or hedge at least six feet in height so as to cause a 100 percent obstruction of any view up to the height of six feet. 
    9.02 Procedure. 
1.  The general procedures set out in section 4 (Procedure) of appendix A (Subdivisions) of the City of Wharton Code of Ordinances shall apply to the establishment of mobile home subdivisions. 
2.  In addition to the above-mentioned general requirements, any plans for a mobile home subdivision must conform to the following requirements: 
a.  Any property adjacent to the area included in the plan shall not be adversely affected. 
b.  A physical barrier shall surround all of the borders of the proposed subdivision. 
    9.03 General requirements and design standards. 
    The general requirements and design standards for mobile home subdivisions shall be the same as those set out in section 5 (General Requirements and Design Standards) of appendix A (Subdivisions) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Wharton, Texas. 
    9.04 Engineering and construction standards. 
    The engineering and construction standards for mobile home subdivisions shall be the same as set out in section 6 (Engineering and Construction Standards) of appendix A (Subdivisions) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Wharton, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 88-9, 2-22-88) 
Sec. 10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 10 of App. A formerly contained building setback requirement enacted by Ord. No. 2000-03, § 2, adopted Jan. 10, 2000. The provisions of Ord. No. 2000-03 are found at § 18-77 of this Code. 
Sec. 11. - Modular home/building. 
    11.01. Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Modular home/building shall mean a structure or building module as defined, under the jurisdiction and control of the Texas Department of Labor and Standards and the Texas Industrialized Building Code Council and that is installed and used by a consumer, transportable in one or more sections on a temporary chassis or other conveyance device, and designed to be used on a permanent foundation system. The term includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. The term does not include a mobile/manufactured home as defined in the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act. 
    11.02. Requirements. 
1.  Modular homes/buildings are allowed in the corporate city limits providing the following requirements are met: 
a.  The home/building meets or exceeds all building code and setback requirements that apply to other buildings concerning on-site construction. 
b.  The home/building is permanently secured to a concrete foundation and the running gear (wheels and axles) is removed. 
c.  The home/building is skirted with matching weatherized material if any space is exposed between the structure and the slab or ground. 
d.  The building official is so notified in writing, in form of application, for the purpose of establishing procedures for the inspection, issuing of building permits and the compliance with the Texas Industrialized Housing and Buildings Act. (Article 5221f.1 V.T.C.S.). 
1.  All requirements throughout this chapter shall apply to modular homes/buildings as here within. 
(Ord. No. 2001-08, 4-9-01) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1978 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1978 Code, as updated through August 22, 1988, which are included herein. Sections of the 1978 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1978 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-6 1-1-1-6 2-1-2-3 2-1-2-3 2-21-2-25 2-31-2-35 2-30-2-34 2-51-2-55 2-51-2-59 2-121-2-129 2-71-2-76 2-146-2-151 3-1 6-1 3-20-3-28 6-36-6-44 3-30-3-35 6-66-6-71 3-36 6-73 3-37 6-72 3-38-3-42 6-74-6-78 4-1-4-5 10-1-10-5 5-1-5-4 14-1-14-4 5-4.1 14-5 5-5-5-7 14-6-14-8 5-8(a) 14-9 5-8(b) 14-1 5-8.1 14-10 5-9 14-11 5-12 14-12 5-13 14-13 34-7 5-14 14-14 5-17 14-15 5-19 14-16 5-31-5-37 14-46-14-52 5-41-5-52 14-76-14-87 5-61 14-111 6-1-6-5 18-36-18-40 6-6 18-1 6-7 18-66 6-7.1 18-68 6-8 18-67 6-9 18-69 6-30-6-38 18-96-18-104 6-39 18-137 6-40 18-136 6-41-6-48 18-138-18-145 6-50-6-59 18-171-18-180 6-65-6-79 18-201-18-215 6-85 18-251 6-86 18-137 6-86(1)-6-86(29) 18-252-18-280 6-87 18-281 6-90 18-66, 18-67 6-100 18-66, 18-67 18-70 6-107 18-66, 18-67 6-111 18-302 6-112 18-301 6-113-6-115 18-303-18-305 6.5-1 22-1 7-1-7-8 26-1-26-8 8-1-8-3 30-1-30-3 8-5, 8-6 30-4, 30-5 8-21-8-31 30-36-30-46 8-40 18-66, 18-67 8-41-8-46 30-72-30-77 8-51, 8-52 30-101, 30-102 9-1-9-10 34-1-34-10 9-20-9-26 34-46-34-52 9-27-9-29 34-54-34-56 9-31 34-57 9-40 1-2 34-81 9-41-9-49 34-82-34-90 9-60-9-68 34-111-34-119 9-69-9-83 34-161-34-175 9-101, 9-102 34-201, 34-202 10-1-10-3 38-1-38-3 10-4-10-7 38-66-38-69 10-8-10-13 38-91-38-96 10-14-10-18 38-36-38-40 10-19 38-4 10-20-10-28 38-41-38-49 10-29, 10-30 38-5, 38-6 11-1(a), (b) 42-36 11-1(c) 42-37 11-2-11-6 42-38-42-42 11-20-11-28 42-76-42-84 11-30-11-39 42-101-42-110 11-50, 11-51 42-151, 42-152 11-52-11-56 42-176-42-180 11-57, 11-58 42-153, 42-154 11-61-11-65 42-201-42-205 11-71-11-79 42-236-42-244 11-91(a) 42-276 11-92, 11-93 42-277, 42-278 11-95, 11-96 42-279, 42-280 11-98-11-107 42-281-42-290 11-116 42-291 11-141-11-143 42-326-42-328 12-1-12-8 46-1-46-8 12-10 46-9 12-11(b) 46-10 12-12 46-11 12-18 46-12 12-20-12-26 46-46-46-52 12-30-12-33 46-76-46-79 12-35-12-44 46-81-46-90 13-1-13-4 50-1-50-4 13-20-13-34 50-51-50-65 13-40-13-55 50-91-50-106 14-1-14-6 54-1-54-6 15-1-15-3 58-1-58-3 15-20-15-25 58-36-58-41 15.5-21-15.5-26 62-36-62-41 17-1, 17-2 70-1, 70-2 17-11-17-16 70-36-70-41 17.5-21 74-51 17.5-22 74-53 17.5-31-17.5-36 74-76-74-81 17.5-41-17.5-46 74-101-74-106 17.5-51-17.5-53 74-136-74-138 18-1-18-7 78-1-78-7 18-9 78-8 18-20-18-29 78-41-78-50 18-40-18-46 78-81-78-87 19-1-19-15 82-1-82-15 19-30 82-51 19-31-19-34 82-91-82-94 19-35-19-38 82-52-82-55 19-38.1 82-56 19-39-19-44 82-57-82-62 19-44.1 82-63 19-45 82-64 19-50-19-54 82-126-82-130 19-54.1 82-131 19-55-19-59 82-132-82-136 19-61 82-138 20-1, 20-2 86-1, 86-2 20-4-20-7 86-3-86-6 20-20-20-47 86-41-86-68 20-50-20-64 86-91-86-105 20-65, 20-66 86-131, 86-132 20-67-20-72 86-166-86-171 20-73-20-83 86-133-86-143  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1978 Code, as updated through August 22, 1988, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1978 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede August 22, 1988, but which were never included in the 1978 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since August 22, 1988, and not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 71-4  5-10-71 App. A, § 7 73-2  1-22-73 App. A, § 6 75-22 11-10-75 App. A, § 6 76-24 12-13-76 App. A, § 8 76-25 12-13-76 App. A, § 6 78-5  2-27-78 App. A, § 3 App. A, § 3.5 79-14 11-26-79 App. A, § 8 81-2  1-26-81 App. A, § 3 82-6  3- 8-82 App. A, § 6 82-8  3-22-82 App. A, § 3, 
App. A, § 4 87-4  2- 9-87 App. A, § 4 88-9  2-22-88 App. A, § 9 1978-16  8-14-78 3 1-7 1988-28  9-12-88 10-4 1989-01  1-23-89 18-99 1989-02  1-23-89 82-132 1989-03  1-23-89 82-53 1989-06  3-27-89 82-55 1989-07  3-27-89 6-39 18-105 1989-08  3-27-89 8.32 30-47 1989-09  4-10-89 C 34-54 1989-10  5- 8-89 9-103 34-203 1989-11  5-22-89 9-105-9-107 34-204-34-206 1989-16  8-28-89 18-66 1989-18  8-28-89 86-3, 86-4 1989-19  9-25-89 34-207 1989-20  9-25-89 1 82-53 1989-23 11-13-89 82-63 1989-30 12-11-89 86-6 1989-32 12-11-89 1 74-52 1990-05  3-27-90 1 74-52 1990-09  5- 8-90 82-137 1990-13  6-26-90 82-63 1990-15  8-28-90 86-3, 86-4 1990-17 10- 9-90 82-133 1990-19 10-23-90 2-171 1990-20 11-13-90 82-55 1990-21 12-11-90 1-13 2-71-2-83 1990-24  9-11-90 1 82-53 1991-03  2-12-91 2-191 exh. A, § 1- 2-192-2-224 exh. A, § 33 1991-09  7-23-91 16.1-1, 16.1-2 66-2, 66-3 16.1-3 66-1 16.1-4-16.1-17 66-4-66-17 16.1-18-16.1-31 66-18-66-31 16.1-32-16.1-42 66-76-66-86 16.1-43 66-111 1991-12  8-13-91 82-133 1991-13  8-13-91 82-132 1991-14  8-13-91 82-65 1991-17  8-27-91 18-66 1991-18  9-24-91 86-2 86-4 1991-19  9-24-91 14-1 1991-21 10- 8-91 1-5 1-5 12-10-91 9-26.1 34-53 1991-23 11-12-91 1-3 86-7 1991-24 11-12-91 66-17 1991-25 11-12-91 6.5-2 22-2 1991-29 12-10-91 8-46-8-49 30-77-30-80 1992-08  5-11-92 82-65 1992-09  6-16-92 82-132 1992-10  6-16-92 82-64 1992-13  8-11-92 34-51 34-55 1992-14  8-11-92 86-4(1), (2)a. 1992-15  8-11-92 86-3 1992-19 10-13-92 1-3       Added 58-42-58-44 1992-22 11-24-92 86-5(d), (e)       Added 86-5(g) 1992-23 11-24-92       Added 34-208 1993-01  1-12-93       Added 46-13 1993-02  1-25-93 14-1 1993-05  3- 8-93 1-14       Added 82-161-82-174 1993-06  3-22-93 82-62 1993-08  4-12-93 82-63 1993-09  4-12-93 82-63 1993-11  4-26-93 82-53 1993-13  5-10-93 1-7 Adopting ord., p.ix 1993-15  9-13-93 82-63 1993-19 10-25-93 86-98 86-104 1994-02  1-24-94 86-5(a), (d), (e)       Dltd 86-5(b) 1994-04  2-14-94 82-63 1994-05  2-14-94 82-63 1994-10  2-28-94 82-55 82-63 82-64 82-132 1994-12  2-28-94       Added 82-61.1 1994-16  6-27-94 1 82-53 1994-18  8-22-94 I(A.) 82-62 I(B.) 82-56 I(C.) 82-55 1994-23 10-10-94 86-98 1995-01  1- 9-95 86-98 1995-04  2-27-95 18-137 1995-05  2-27-95       Added 18-326-18-329 1995-11 11-27-95 1 30-130-30-133 1995-12 12-11-95 1       Rpld 42-236-42-244, 42-276-42-291 2       Added 42-236-42-250 1996-01  1- 8-96 86-3 1996-02  1- 8-96 86-4(1), (2)a. 1996-08  5-13-96 82-61.1-82-64 1996-09  6-24-96 86-3 1996-10  6-24-96 1, 2 86-4(1), (2)a. 1996-11  7- 8-96 2-171, 2-191-2-227 1996-16 11-25-96 1 58-41(1) 1996-17 11-25-96 1, 2 58-41(7) 1997-01  1-13-97 2 18-136-18-145, 18-171-18-180, 18-201-18-214 18-251-18-259 1997-02  1-13-97 18-66-18-68, 18-70-18-75 1997-03  1-27-97 82-62, 82-63 1997-05  3-24-97 82-2, 82-3, 82-6, 82-135 1997-06  3-24-97 1-8 6-91-6-98 1997-07  4-28-97 86-98 1997-09  8-25-97 82-138(f) 1997-16 10-13-97 1-27 42-421-42-447 1997-18 10-13-97 Exh. A       Rpld 27-1       Added 27-1-27-5, 27-12-27-16 1997-19 10-13-97 I 82-54, 82-56(a) 82-62, 82-63, 82-133 1997-20 10-27-97 1 58-45 1997-23 12- 8-97 I-XIV 42-371-42-384 1998-02  2- 3-98 2, 3 74-1 1998-04  3- 9-98 2-5 2-156 1998-06  3-22-98 I       Rpld 86-1-86-7, 86-41-86-68       Added 86-1-86-7, 86-41-86-78 1998-07  4-27-98 1 46-14 1998-09  6-22-98 Attach. A       Rpld 2-121-2-129       Added 2-121-2-129 1999-04  3-22-99 I       Rpld 34-81-34-90       Added 34-81-34-91 1999-05  4-15-99 I 18-137 II 18-209 III 18-145 1999-06  4-12-99 2-4 66-5.5 1999-08  9-13-99 1 46-15 1999-13 10-25-99 1-9 70-61-70-69 1999-15 11-22-99 Pt. 1(b)-(d), 
Pt. 2 42-401 2000-03  1-10-00 2 18-77 2000-06  2-14-00 2       Rpld 38-1-38-6, 38-36-38-49, 38-66-38-69, 38-91-38-96       Added 38-1-38-5, 38-36-38-39, 38-90-38-96, 38-118-38-122, 38-166-38-172, 38-179-38-187, 38-195-38-198, 38-201-38-221, 38-230, 38-236-38-246, 38-261, 38-262, 38-271, 38-272 2000-08  3-13-00 Exh. A, I-XI 86-201-86-211 2000-09  3-13-00 18-260 2000-13  6-12-00 34-58 2000-15  8-28-00 2(Exh. A)       Rpld 66-1-66-31, 66-76-66-86, 66-111, 66-112       Added 66-1-66-51, 66-76, 66-111, 66-112 2000-16  8-28-00 2 42-471-42-492 2000-18  9-11-00 I       Rpld 18-66-18-75       Added 18-66-18-76 2000-23 10- 9-00 86-98 2000-24 10-23-00 38-187 2001-04  2-12-01 54-3 2001-08  4- 9-01 App. A, § 11 2001-09  5-14-01 18-68(g), 18-69.1 2001-11  8-27-01 86-91 2001-19 10-22-01 82-135 2001-20 11-26-01 18-72 2002-01  1-14-02 34-7 2002-04  2-25-02       Rpld 62-36-62-44       Added 62-36-62-41 2002-05  3-11-02 18-137, 18-269 2002-07  4- 8-02       Rpld 14-1-14-16, 14-46-14-52, 14-76-14-87, 14-111       Added 14-1-14-17, 14-46-14-54, 14-76-14-87, 14-111, 14-200, 14-242 2002-09  4-22-02 82-55, 82-135-82-137, 82-139 2002-11  5-28-02 I 18-66(4) II       Rpld 18-326-18-329,       Added 18-326-18-329, 18-356-18-359, 18-411-18-414 2002-12  6-24-02 18-73 2002-13  7- 8-02 82-132 2002-14  7-22-02 18-72 2002-16  8-26-02 I       Rpld 86-1-86-7, 86-41-86-78       Added 86-1-86-22, 86-41-86-70 2002-21  9-23-02 54-7 2002-22  9-23-02 10-5 2002-24 10-14-02 34-58(2), 34-59 2002-25 10-14-02 82-66 2003-002  1-13-03 2, 3 82-135 (note) 2003-04  2-24-03 82-133 2003-05  4-24-03 18-173, 18-174, 18-176, 18-177 2003-06  5-27-03       Rpld 54-3(f)       Rnbd 54-3(g)       as 54-3(f) 2003-07  8-11-03 18-173 2003-08  8-11-03 26-1 2003-12 11-10-03 82-133 2003-16 12- 8-03 82-135-82-140 2004-001  1-26-04 19-138 2004-002  1-26-04 18-72 2004-003  1-26-04 18-74.1 2004-08  2-23-04 74-82(note), 74-83(note) 2004-09  3- 8-04 1 74-82 2 74-83 2004-10  4-12-04 App. A, §§ 6.06, 6.07 2004-11  6-14-04 18-173, 18-174, 18-176, 18-177 2004-12  6-28-04 82-56 2004-13  8 -9-04 18-136-18-138, 18-141, 18-171, 18-173, 18-202-18-204, 18-214, 18-254, 18-256, 18-260 2004-14  8- 9-04 82-133 2004-16  8-23-04 I       Rpld 86-1-86-22       Added 86-1-86-22 2005-002  2-28-05       Rpld 2-171, 2-191-2-227       Added 2-171, 2-191-2-223 2005-003  3-14-05 18-137 2005-004  4-11-05 I 86-98 2005-07  8- 8-05 46-77-46-79 2005-08  8-22-05 30-6 2005-9  9-12-05 74-102 2006-01  1-23-06 34-51-34-55 2006-06  3-13-06       Rpld 18-301-18-305       Added 18-301-18-306 2006-07  4-24-06 18-77 2006-14  8-28-06       Rpld 86-91-86-105,       Added 86-91-86-106 2006-21 10-23-06 18-66(a) 18-67-18-70.2, 18-72-18-77       Rpld 18-236-18-329, 18-356-18-359, 18-411-18-414       Added 18-326-18-329, 18-356-18-359, 18-411-18-414 2006-22 10-23-06 30-81, 30-82 2006-24 12-11-06       Rpld 27-1-27-5, 27-12-27-16,       Added 27-1-27-5, 27-12-27-16 2007-07  2-23-07 18-78 2007-10  6-11-07 I       86-1-86-22       Added 86-1-86-22 2007-11  6-25-07 2-171 2-191-2-223 2007-12  6-25-07       Rpld 54-1-54-7       Added 54-1-54-14 2007-13  6-25-07 1 34-7(11) 2007-22  9-24-07       Rpld 86-91-86-106       Added 86-91-86-109 2007-15  8-13-07 82-63 2007-27 10-22-07 I       Added 74-2 2008-01  1-14-08 82-63 82-64 2008-03  3-24-08 18-137 18-260       Added 18-261 2008-04  4-14-08 34-51-34-55 2008-06  5-27-08 82-132-82-134 2008-07  6- 9-08 66-2, 66-29 2008-09  8-25-08 74-107 2008-10  8-25-08 I       Rpld 86-1-86-22       Added 86-1-86-22 2008-11  8-25-08 1-13       Rpld 86-91-86-109       Added 86-91-86-104 2008-16 10-27-08 54-1-54-19 2009-04  5-26-09 18-302, 18-305 2009-11 11- 9-09 I       Rpld 86-1-86-22       Added 86-1-86-22 2009-12 11- 9-09 86-104 2010-02  2-22-10 34-51-34-55 2010-03  4-12-10       Rpld 82-1-82-15, 82-51-82-66, 82-91-82-94, 82-126-82-140 82-161-82-174       Added 82-1-82-15, 82-51-82-66, 82-91-82-94, 82-126, 82-127 82-139, 82-140, 82-161-82-174 2010-09  8-23-10 I 86-1-86-22 2010-12  9-27-10       Added 42-220-42-228 2010-16 11-22-10 Sched. A 86-104 2010-17 11-22-10 1 Ch. 10, tit.       Added 10-6-10-11 2010-19 12-13-10       Added 82-55(d), 
82-134(d) 2011-08 5-9-11 27-5 2011-08 
(Corr.) 5-9-11       Dltd 27-1-27-24       Added 27-1-27-26 2011-13 9-12-11 18-137 2011-14 9-12-11 2-212, 2-213 2011-20 11-14-11 86-103, 86-104 2012-01 1-9-12 66-2 66-14 66-17 66-20 66-25, 66-26 66-29, 66-30 66-76 18-145 2012-02 1-9-12       Added 18-79 2012-09 6-11-12 38-262 2012-10 8-27-12 I       Dltd 86-1-86-22       Added 86-1-86-22 2012-11 9-10-12 18-66(a) 18-69, 18-69.1 18-70-18-70.2 18-72-18-74 18-74.1 18-75 18-145 2012-15 10-22-12       Dltd 30-1-30-133       Added 30-1-30-133 2012-16 11-12-12 86-104 2013-11  6-10-13 App. A, § 6.05 2013-12  6-10-13       Added 18-466-18-468 2013-13  6-10-13 30-132 2013-14  6-24-13 58-1-58-3       Added 58-4 2013-18  7-22-13 82-62 2013-19  7-23-13       Dltd 78-1-78-87       Added 78-1-78-87 2013-16  7- 8-13 1-5       Added 46-171-46-175 2013-20  8-26-13 I 86-16 86-17(a) 86-21(a)(2), (b)(2) 2013-25 10-14-13 66-26 2014-06  8-25-14 1 86-15(1), (2) 86-16 86-17(a) 86-21(a)(2), (b)(2) 2014-13 12-18-14 18-137-18-139       Dltd 18-172-18-180       Added 18-172-18-175 18-202-18-205 18-208 18-251 18-258 18-260 2015-04  1-26-15 I 86-1 II       Added 86-23 2015-05  2-23-15 I 86-1 2015-09  8-10-15 82-62 2015-10  8-24-15 86-15(1), (2) 86-16 86-17(a) 86-21(a)(2), (b)(2) 2015-15 12-14-15 18-145       Rpld 30-130-30-133       Added 30-130-30-133 2016-06  8-22-16 I 86-15-86-17 86-21 2016-07  8-30-16 86-104 2016-11 10-24-16 2-171 2-191-2-214       Dltd 2-215       Rnbd 2-216-2-223       as 2-215-2-222 2017-03  2-13-17       Dltd 66-1-66-112       Added 66-1-66-112 18-145 2017-04  2-13-17 42-151-42-205 18-145 2017-05  2-13-17       Dltd 18-96-18-105       Added 18-96-18-113 18-145 2017-09  8-28-17 I 86-15-86-17 86-21 2017-10  8-28-17 18-145 18-204 18-206 18-208-18-210 2017-14 10-23-17 86-104 2017-15 12-11-17 18-302 18-303(6) 18-305(a)(1)       Dltd 18-305(b)(6)       Rnbd 18-305(b)(7)       as 18-305(b)(6) 18-306 2018-03  2-26-18 18-137 18-254 18-256 18-257 18-261 2018-06  8-27-18 I 86-15-86-17 86-21 2018-07  6-11-18 54-7 2019-02  1-14-19 86-1 86-23 2019-03  1-14-19       Dltd 42-220-42-228       Added 42-220-42-231 2019-04  1-14-19 2-122, 2-123  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law. 
Vernon's Ann. 
Civ. Stat. 
Article Section Section 
this Code 1f Ch. 46, Art. III 1.04 46-80 1.05 46-111 1.07, 1.08 46-113, 46-114 3.02 46-111 46c-1 et seq. Ch. 6 46d-1 et seq. Ch. 6 46d-1-46d-22 6-40 46d-6 Ch. 6, Art. II 135b-6 Ch. 34, Art. II, Div. 3 695g Ch. 58, Art. II Char. § 144 970a Char. § 9 974a Char. § 126 1011a Char. § 126 1011a-1011j Char. § 126 1086 et seq. Ch. 70 1105a Char. § 126 1105b Char. § 7 1174f et seq. Char. § 147 1175 Char. § 17 1175(2) Char. § 9 1175(3) (5) Ch. 82 1175(5) Char. § 6 46-9 1179 Char. § 7 1180 Char. § 7 1201 Char. § 5 1446c 42-424, Ch. 86 2372dd-1 Ch. 42, Art. III 4413(29bb) 14-232, Ch. 42 4436 34-206 4512k Ch. 42, Art. V, 42-236 4 42-242 14 42-237 5069-13.01 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. IV 5069-51.01 et seq. Ch. 42 5221f Ch. 38, App. A, § 11 38-1, 38-93, 38-213, 38-217, 38-241 6049h et seq. Ch. 50 6081h et seq. Ch. 54 6243-101 15 18-66 6252-10a Char. § 137 6252-17 Char. § 25 6252-17a Char. § 27 Char. § 52 Char. § 127 Char. § 132 6336 et seq. Char. § 5 6573a 46-111 6675-5e.1 6A(c) 82-139 6675a-5e.1 82-139 37 Ch. 34, Art. II, Div. 2 6687-2 Ch. 34, Art. II, Div. 2 6698 Ch. 42 78-47 6701d 82-1 1 et seq. 1-2 12 Ch. 82 25 Ch. 42, Art. VI 26, 27 Ch. 82 27(a)(1) Ch. 82, Art. IV 27(a)(2) 82-10 27(a)(3) 82-91 31 Ch. 82 40 82-12 43 82-11 43A Ch. 82 49 Ch. 82 82-11 51 82-59 65 Ch. 82 76 Ch. 82 87 Ch. 82 91 Ch. 82 94 Ch. 82 Ch. 82, Art. IV 82-6 95, 96 Ch. 82 96(c) Ch. 82, Art. IV 165 Ch. 82 169 Ch. 82 82-53 170 Ch. 82 176 82-128 181 82-52 185 82-59 6701d-6 Ch. 82 6701d-11 2(d) Ch. 82 6701d-16 2 Ch. 82 6701g-2 Ch. 82 6701j-1 5(b) Ch. 82 8307c et seq. Char. § 144 8402 et seq. Ch. 42 8501-1 42-42 8700 Ch. 42 9003 82-91 9102 82-138  
Vernon's Ann. 
C.C.P. 
Article Section 
this Code 9.01 et seq. Ch. 34 14.03 46-5 18.05 18-100 V.A.T.S. 
Insurance Code 
Article Section  
this Code1.14-1, 1.14-2 42-41 21.60 42-41 21.60, § 2 42-36 V.T.C.A. 
Alcoholic 
Beverage Code 
Section Section  
this Codech. 11 et seq. 10-1 11.38 Ch. 10 10-1 29.01 et seq. 10-2 33.01 et seq. 10-2 ch. 61 et seq. 10-1 61.36 Ch. 10 10-1 ch. 62 46-171 47-174 105.01 et seq. 10-2 105.06 10-2 107.017 46-14 109.31 et seq. Ch. 10 109.32, 109.33 10-2, 10-3 205.03 10-1 V.T.C.A. 
Business 
Commerce Code 
Section Section  
this Code17.81 et seq. Ch. 42 V.T.C.A. 
Civil Practice 
& Remedies Code 
Section Section  
this Code101.001 et seq. Char. § 4 101.027 Ch. 2, Art. III V.T.C.A. 
Education Code 
Section Section  
this Code4.23 46-11 21.484 46-11 61.003 14-216, 74-101 V.T.C.A. 
Election Code 
Section Section  
this Code1.001 et seq. Char. § 12 41.001 et seq. Char. § 32 43.001 et seq. Char. § 34 52.003 Char. § 36 141.001 et seq. Char. § 13 22-1 143.001 et seq. 22-1 Char. § 36 146.001 et seq. 22-2 146.051 et seq. 22-2 V.T.C.A. 
Government Code 
Section Section  
this Code29.002 Char. § 17 Char. § 24 29.003 1-5 29.004 Char. § 24 ch. 54 86-65 311.001 et seq. 1-2 411.043 46-1 417.001 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. II 418.001 et seq. Ch. 26 26-2 418.044 26-3 418.071 et seq. 26-7 418.101 et seq. Ch. 26 418.104 26-4 418.106 26-3 418.108, 418.109 26-2 418.173 26-3 418.174 26-6 419.040 et seq. 30-3 441.151 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV 791.001 et seq. 2-3 ch. 851 et seq. 58-36 58-40, 58-41 851.001 et seq. Char. § 144 853.305 58-45 853.401- 
853.404 58-42 853.404(d), (e) 58-44 853.601 58-42 854.202(f) 58-41 854.203 58-43 854.204 58-41 854.301 et seq. 58-41 854.408- 
854.410 58-41 855.401 58-39 V.T.C.A. 
Health and Safety Code 
Section Section  
this Codech. 11 et seq. Ch. 34 121.001 et seq. Ch. 34 121.021 et seq. Ch. 34 ch. 341 et seq. Ch. 34 341.011(5) 34-50 341.012 34-56 341.013 Ch. 86, Art. III 341.014 34-3 341.037 34-3 341.061 34-3 342.001 et seq. 30-80 34-56 70-2 342.007 30-80 34-56 361.001 et seq. 34-46 Ch. 86, Art. III 361.181 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. IV 365.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 2 365.012 34-46, 34-47 382.001 et seq. 34-1 382.051 34-1 433.001 et seq. Ch. 34 435.001 et seq. Ch. 34 435.021 et seq. Ch. 34 437.001 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. III 438.001 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. III 481.134 46-171 751.001 et seq. 82-91 753.001 et seq. 30-4 756.011 et seq. 34-10 chs. 771, 772 42-427 821.003 14-2 822.001 et seq. Ch. 14 Ch. 824 14-211, 14-216 824.001 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. II 824.003 46-2 825.001 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II, Div. 3 826.001 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. III V.T.C.A. 
Local 
Government 
Code 
Section Section  
this Code9.001 et seq. Ch. 2 9.004 Char. § 147 42.021 App. A, § 3.5 43.001 et seq. Char. § 8, Char. § 9 53.001 et seq. 1-1 ch. 54 18-96 18-101 86-57 54.001 1-5 105.001 et seq. Char., Art. VII 141.004 Char. § 14 ch. 201 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV 201.001 et seq. 2-73 211.001 et seq. Char. § 126 212.001 et seq. Char. § 126 App. A App. A, § 3 App. A, § 3.5 213.001 et seq. Char. § 126 214.001 et seq. Ch. 18 Ch. 18, Art. IV 214.001(k) 18-103 214.0011(e) 18-99 214.0012 18-105 214.0015 18-108 214.003 18-102 215.001 et seq. Ch. 42 215.073 Ch. 78 Ch. 82 216.001 et seq. Ch. 66 241.001 et seq. Ch. 6 Ch. 6, Art. III 241.019 6-71 241.020 6-73 241.032 6-74 241.036 6-75 241.041 6-76 243.001 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. V, 243.010 42-250 251.001 et seq. Char. § 5 252.001 et seq. Char. § 77 252.002 Char. § 151 253.005 50-2 50-55 283.002 70-63 ch. 315 Ch. 54 331 et seq. Ch. 54 341.003 Ch. 62 341.012 Ch. 62, Art. II 342.001 et seq. Ch. 30 342.012 Ch. 18, Art. IV 18-1 362.001 et seq. 2-3 372.041 Char. § 7 373.001 et seq. 2-1 374.001 et seq. Char. § 139 392.001 et seq. Char. § 139 431.001 et seq. Ch. 82 V.T.C.A. 
Natural 
Resources Code 
Section Section  
this Codech. 81 et seq. Ch. 50 89.001 et seq. 50-104 91.101 86-91 V.T.C.A. 
Occupations 
Code 
Section Section  
this CodeTit. 8, Ch. 1305       18-136 1305.166 18-175 1305.252 18-139 18-173 18-208 V.T.C.A. 
Parks and 
Wildlife Code 
Section Section  
this Code64.001 et seq. 14-2 V.T.C.A. 
Penal Code 
Section Section  
this Code1.08 Ch. 46 Tit. 5 42-236 Tit. 6 42-236 Tit. 11 42-236 21.02 42-236 28.02 30-1 28.03 86-68 30.05 Ch. 42, Art. IV 37.11 26-8 42.01(a)(9) 46-3 42.01(a)(11) 46-3 42.02(a)(2) 30-2 42.03 Char. § 6 46-9 42.03(a)(2) 30-2 42.05 46-6 42.06 Ch. 30 42.061 Ch. 30 ch. 43 42-290 48.01 2-35 V.T.C.A. 
Property Code 
Section Section  
this Codech. 21 66-45-66-47 21.001 et seq. Char. § 5 ch. 41 38-36 V.T.C.A. 
Tax Code 
Section Section  
this Code11.253(a)(2) 74-2 21.01 et seq. Char. § 84 ch. 23 74-51 33.07 74-53 101.008 Ch. 42 182.021 et seq. Ch. 42 191.081 et seq. Ch. 42 ch. 312 66-49 74-1 321.210(a), 321.210(b) 74-136 351.001 et seq. Ch. 74, Art. III 351.101 2-149 351.101 et seq. 74-102 V.T.C.A. 
Transportation Code 
Section Section  
this Code683.071 34-81 683.072 34-89 V.T.C.A. 
Utility Code 
Section Section  
this Codech. 54 70-63 V.T.C.A. 
Water Code 
Section Section  
this Code16.311 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. VI 16.313 18-301 ch. 26 86-91 26.001 et seq. 34-3 86-6  
