CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF YOAKUM, TEXAS 
____________ 
Published in 2014 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS of the CITY OF YOAKUM, TEXAS AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Anita R. Rodriguez 
Mayor 
____________ 
Elorine Sitka 
Mayor Pro-Tem 
____________ 
Tim Faulkner 
Rodney Jahn 
Tim McCoy 
City Council 
____________ 
Kenneth E. Kvinta 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kevin M. Coleman 
City Manager Theresa A. Bowe 
City Clerk Mark Herchek 
Fire/EMS Director Sandra Jacob 
Director of Finance Derrick Smith 
Director of Community Services Jack Maloney 
Director of Public Works/Utilities Arthur Rogers 
Police Chief  
Staff 
____________ 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Yoakum, Texas. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1973 Code, as supplemented through January 10, 2012, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1973 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Senior Code Attorney, and Ramona Connors, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Kevin Coleman, City Manager, and Theresa A. Bowe, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Yoakum, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Yoakum, Texas. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Yoakum, Texas. 2014. 
ORDINANCE NO.  2063  
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF YOAKUM, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF YOAKUM, TEXAS: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled the "Code of Ordinances, City of Yoakum, Texas," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 52, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 14, 2014, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,000 or such other maximum penalty as may be required or permitted by state law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city council may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the *[City] to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after January 14, 2014, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. The provisions of this ordinance shall become effective, and be in full force after the date of final passage and publication thereof. 
    PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED ON FIRST READING:  March 11, 2014  
    PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED AS AMENDED ON SECOND AND FINAL READING, this day of  8th  of  April  , 2014. 
  
      Anita R. Rodriguez, Mayor 
      City of Yoakum, Texas     
ATTEST: 
      Theresa A. Bowe, City Clerk     
PUBLISHED:  4/16/2014  
  
Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the City Council, held on the  8th  day of  April    , 2014. 
  
      City Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. 2063  4- 8-2014 Include 1 2075 12- 9-2014 Include 1 2084  4-14-2014 Include 2 2086  7-14-2015 Include 3 2088  7-14-2015 Include 3 2090  7-14-2015 Include 3 2110  5-10-2016 Include 4 2116 10-11-2016 Include 5 2118 12-13-2016 Include 5 2119 12-13-2016 Include 5 2121  3-14-2017 Include 5 2122  3-14-2017 Omit 5 1990  9-13-2011 Include 6 2141  4-10-2018 Include 6 2142  6-12-2018 Include 6 2146  7-10-2018 Include 6  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in this part is the most recent city Charter, adopted at an election held on January 16, 1988, and put into effect on January 19, 1988, by Resolution No. 88-02. (The former Charter, previously contained in this part, was adopted April 1, 1915.) The new Charter is set out herein substantially as printed in pamphlets, except that a uniform style and system of capitalization and punctuation have been employed and material has been added in brackets for clarity or to correct obvious errors. Amendments to the Charter will be indicated by a historical notation enclosed in parentheses following the affected section; the absence of such a notation indicates the section derives unchanged from the Charter adopted January 16, 1988. 
State Law reference- Home rule type of municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 5.004; adoption or amendment of home rule charter, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 9.001 et seq.; general powers of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.001 et seq.; form of government in home rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.021. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, BOUNDARIES 

Section 1. - Incorporation. 
    The inhabitants of the city in DeWitt and Lavaca Counties, Texas, within the corporate limits as now established, or as hereafter established in the manner prescribed by the Charter, shall be and shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name of the "City of Yoakum, Texas." 
State Law reference- Home rule type of municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 5.004. 
Section 2. - Form of government. 
    The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the "council-manager" form of government. Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the state constitution, by the statutory laws of Texas, and by this Charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in an elective governing body, hereinafter referred to as the "city council," which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, appoint the city attorney and the city manager, who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the city. 
Section 3. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries and limits of the city, until changed as provided by law, shall be the same as have heretofore been established and exist on the date of the adoption of this Charter, which boundaries have been set by ordinance and are on file with the city clerk. 
State Law reference- Municipal boundaries, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 41.001 et seq. 
Section 4. - Changing of boundaries. 
    The changing of city boundaries by annexation or disannexation of land shall be permitted in the manner allowed by law. 
ARTICLE II. - POWERS OF THE CITY 

Section 1. - General. 
[a.]  The city shall have all powers granted now, or that hereafter may be granted, to municipalities by the constitution and laws of this state. All such powers, whether expressed or implied, shall be exercised and enforced in a manner prescribed by this Charter, and when not prescribed herein, in such manner as may be provided by ordinance or resolution of the city council of the city. 
[b.]  In the exercise of its powers, the city may: 
(1)  Design, adopt and use a corporate seal. 
(2)  Contract and be contracted with. 
(3)  Sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded in all courts in all matters. 
(4)  Cooperate with the government of this state and any agency thereof, the federal government and any agency thereof, and any political subdivision of this state. 
(5)  Own property and acquire property within or without its boundaries, for any municipal purposes, in fee simple or in any lesser estate of interest, by purchase, gift, devise, lease or condemnation. 
(6)  Hold, sell, lease, manage, control and police any property now owned by the city or which may be acquired by the city. 
(7)  Lease property owned by the city whether such property is located inside or outside the city, subject to the limitations herein provided. 
(8)  Construct, own, lease, operate, and regulate public utilities. 
(9)  Impose taxes for general and special purposes on all lawful subjects of taxation. 
(10)  Borrow money on the faith and credit of the city by the issuance of bonds, certificates of obligations, warrants or notes of the city. 
(11)  Appropriate the money of the city for all lawful purposes. 
(12)  Regulate and control the use of streets and other public places. 
(13)  Pass and enforce such ordinance as may be expedient for the protection and maintenance of good government, the peace and welfare of the city, the performance of the functions of the city and the order and security of the residents of the city. 
(14)  Provide suitable penalties for violations of city ordinance. 
(15)  Except as prohibited by the constitution and laws of this state, exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. 
Section 2. - General powers adopted. 
    The enumeration of the particular powers in this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive but in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied or appropriated to the exercise of such powers, the city shall have and may exercise all power of local self government and all powers which, under the constitution and laws of this state, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. The city shall have and may exercise all the powers enumerated in Article 1175, Chapter 13, Title 28 of the Revised Civil Statutes of this state of 1925, as now or hereafter amended. 
Editor's note- Form Title 28 of the Revised Civil Statutes no longer exists. The provisions of that former title relating to municipalities is now located in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 1.001 et seq. General powers of municipalities are set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 1.001 et seq. General powers of home rule municipalities are set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.071 et seq. 
ARTICLE III. - THE CITY COUNCIL 

Section 1. - Number, selection, term. 
    The city council shall be composed of five councilmembers. All councilmembers shall be elected from the city at large and each councilmember shall occupy a position on the city council, such positions being numbered one through five consecutively. The councilmembers shall be elected in the manner outlined by article V of this Charter to serve for two-year terms. Councilmember place four and councilmember place five shall be elected in the even years. Councilmember place one, councilmember place two, and councilmember place three shall be elected in odd years. 
Section 2. - Qualifications. 
    In order to file for or serve in office, each member of the city council shall: 
a.  Be at least 21 years of age. 
b.  Be a citizen of the United States of America. 
c.  Be a registered voter of the city. 
d.  Live within the corporate limits of the city. 
Section 3. - Judge of election qualifications. 
    The city council shall be final judge of all elections and of qualifications of its members and any other elected officials of the city. 
Section 4. - Compensation; expenses. 
    The council may determine the annual salary of councilmembers by ordinance, but no ordinance increasing such salary shall become effective until the date of commencement of the terms of councilmembers elected at the next regular election. Councilmembers shall receive compensation for their actual and necessary expenses incurred in performance of the duties of their office. 
Section 5. - Mayor and mayor pro tem. 
[a.]  The council shall, at the first regular meeting following the regular annual election, elect from among its membership a mayor and a mayor pro tem, who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council and shall be recognized as the head of city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the Governor of Texas for purpose of military law, but shall have no regular administrative duties. The mayor pro tem shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor. 
[b.]  The mayor may make or second motions, and vote on all issues, proposals, ordinances, resolutions and motions on which the council votes, but shall have no veto power. 
Section 6. - Vacancies, forfeiture, filling of vacancies. 
a.  Vacancies. The office of a councilmember shall become vacant upon death, resignation, removal from office in any manner authorized by law, or forfeiture of office. 
b.  Forfeiture of office. If the councilmember: 
(1)  Fails to maintain the qualifications as required in section 2 herein; 
(2)  Violates any expressed prohibition of this Charter; or 
(3)  Fails to attend three consecutive regular city council meetings without being excused by the city council. 
c.  Filling of vacancies. A single vacancy in the city council shall be filled by appointment within 30 days after the vacancy, by a majority of the remaining city councilmembers. The appointee shall serve until the position is filled at the next regular city election. When more than one vacancy shall develop at any time, a special election shall be called by the city council within 30 days following the occurrence of the vacancies in the same manner as described herein for regular elections. However, if the vacancies occur within 120 days of a regular election, then no special election shall be called and the remaining city councilmembers shall appoint qualified persons to fill vacancies until the regular election. All vacancies filled by election shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of the office so filled. 
Section 7. - General powers and duties. 
    All powers of the city shall be vested in the city council, except as otherwise provided by this Charter and the city council shall provide for the exercise thereof and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the city by law. 
Section 8. - Prohibitions. 
a.  Holding other office. Except where authorized by law, no councilmember shall hold any other city office or employment during the term for which the councilmember was elected to the council, and no former councilmember shall hold any compensated appointive city office or employment until one year after the expiration of the term for which the councilmember was elected to the council. 
b.  Appointments and removals. Neither the council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any city administrative officers or employees whom the city manager or any of his subordinates are empowered to appoint, but the council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees. 
c.  Interference with administration. Except for the purpose of investigation under section 9 [of this article], the council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the manager, and neither the council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employees, either publicly or privately. 
Section 9. - Investigations. 
    The council may make investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any city department, office or agency and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable in a manner provided by ordinance. 
Section 10. - Meetings of council. 
    The city council shall hold at least one regular meeting each month and as many additional meetings as it deems necessary to transact the business of the city. The city council shall fix, by ordinance, the days and time of the regular meetings. Special meetings of the city council shall be held on the call of the mayor, or a majority of the city councilmembers. 
Section 11. - Quorum. 
    Three city councilmembers shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of the transaction of business, and no action of the city council shall be binding or valid unless adopted by the affirmative vote of three or more members of the city council. 
Section 12. - Ordinances. 
[a.]  The city council may legislate by ordinance and the enacting clause of every ordinance shall be: "Be it ordained by the city council of the city." 
[b.]  No ordinances, except emergency ordinances, shall be finally passed until they have been read on two separate days not less than 72 hours apart. All ordinances which levy a fine, or deal with the budget, taxes, franchises, public utilities, or the setting of their rates shall be read at two regular meetings and published by caption in at least one issue of a newspaper of general circulation within the city. 
State Law reference- Ordinance, rule or regulation necessary to carry out municipal powers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.001; authority of local self-government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.072. 
Section 13. - Emergency ordinances. 
    To meet a public emergency affecting life, property, the public peace, or other reasons deemed necessary by the city council, the council may adopt emergency ordinances. Such ordinances shall require only one reading. An emergency shall be introduced in the form generally prescribed for ordinances, except that it shall be plainly designated in the title as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 

Section 1. - City manager. 
a.  Appointment and qualifications. The city council, by majority vote, shall appoint a city manager. The method of selection shall be left to the discretion of the city council so long as the method insures orderly, non-partisan action in securing a competent and qualified person to fill the position. The city manager shall be chosen upon the basis of executive and administrative training, experience and ability. 
b.  Compensation. The city manager shall receive compensation as may be fixed by the city council and that may be changed at the discretion of the council. 
c.  Removal. The city manager may be removed at the discretion of the city council, by vote of the majority of the city council. The action of the city council in suspending or removing the city manager shall be final. It is the intention of this Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibilities of such suspension or removal in the city council. 
d.  Powers and duties. The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city, and shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of all the affairs of the city, and to that end shall have the power to: 
(1)  See that all state laws and city ordinances are effectively enforced. 
(2)  Appoint, suspend or remove all or any one of the directors of departments, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
(3)  Attend all meetings of the city council, except when excused by the city council. 
(4)  Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the city council and be responsible for its administration after its adoption. 
(5)  Prepare and submit to the city council at the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year. 
(6)  Make reports as the city council may require concerning the operation of city departments, offices and agencies subject to the manager's direction and supervision. 
(7)  Perform duties prescribed by this Charter and duties required by the city council. 
(8)  Insure that all public records are accessible to the public and available upon request. 
e.  Acting city manager. The city manager, within 60 days after taking office, shall designate by letter filed with city clerk, a qualified administrative officer of the city, approved by the city council, to perform the duties of the city manager in his absence or disability. No member of the city council shall serve as acting city manager. 
Section 2. - Municipal court. 
a.  There shall be established and maintained a court, designated as a "municipal court" of the city for the trial of misdemeanor offenses, with all such powers and duties as are now, or may hereafter be prescribed by laws of this state relative to municipal courts. 
b.  The municipal judge shall be appointed and removed by the city manager with approval of the city council. The judge shall be entitled to compensation as recommended by the city manager and approved by the city council. 
c.  There shall be a clerk of the court and deputies as needed, appointed and removed by the city manager. 
d.  The clerk of the court and deputies shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of the court thereto, and perform any and all acts usual and necessary to be performed by the clerks of courts and conducting the business thereof. 
e.  The city manager shall have the power to appoint additional associate judges as provided by law and as authorized by the city council. 
f.  All costs, fees, special expenses and fines imposed by the municipal court shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city except as otherwise required by state law. 
Section 3. - City attorney. 
    The city council shall appoint a competent and duly licensed attorney practicing law in this state, who shall be the city attorney. Compensation for services shall be fixed by the city council and the office shall be held at the pleasure of the city council. The city attorney, or such other attorneys selected by him with the approval of the city council, shall represent the city in all litigations. He shall be the legal advisor of and attorney for the city and all officers and departments in the conduct of city business. 
Section 4. - City clerk. 
    The city clerk shall be appointed and removed by the city manager with approval of the city council. The duties of the city clerk shall be as follows: 
a.  To give notice of the city council meetings. 
b.  To keep the minutes of city council meetings. 
c.  To authenticate by signature and record in full, in a book indexed for this purpose, all ordinances and resolution[s]. 
d.  To perform such other duties as the city manager shall assign and as elsewhere provided for in this Charter. 
Section 5. - Additional departments. 
    There shall be such administrative departments as exist, as are established by this Charter, and as may be hereafter established by the city council, and, except where otherwise provided in this Charter, these administrative departments shall be under the control and direction of the city manager. 
ARTICLE V. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 

Section 1. - City elections. 
a.  Schedule. The regular city election shall be held annually on the state uniform election date closest to May 1. The city council shall be responsible to specify places for holding such election. 
b.  Special elections. The city council may, by resolution, order a special election for purposes deemed appropriate by the council and allowable by law. The city council shall fix time and places for holding such special elections, and provide all means for holding same. 
c.  Conduct and regulation of election. All city elections shall be governed by the state constitution, general laws of the state, this Charter, and ordinances of the city, in the order named. Municipal elections shall be conducted by the election officials appointed or approved by the city council. 
Section 2. - Official ballots. 
a.  Names on ballot. The name of each candidate for office, except those who have withdrawn, died or become ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballots without party designation or symbol, and in the form designated by the candidate and allowable by law. If two or more candidates have the same surname or surnames so similar as to be likely to cause confusion, their resident addresses shall be printed with their names on the ballot. 
b.  Order of listing. The order on the ballot of the names of the candidates shall be determined by lot in a drawing to be held under the supervision of the city clerk. 
c.  Absentee ballots. Procedures for voting by absentee ballot shall be consistent with current state election laws. 
d.  Ballots for ordinances, bond issues, and Charter amendments. Ballots for ordinances, bond issues, and Charter amendments to be voted on by registered voters of the city shall be presented for voting by ballot title. The ballot title of a measure may differ from its legal title but shall be a clear, concise statement, approved by majority of the city council, describing the substance of the measure without argument or prejudice. Below the ballot title shall appear the following question: "Shall the above described (ordinance) (bond issue) (amendment) be adopted?" Immediately below or to the left of such question shall appear, in the following order, the words "Yes" and "No," each with a square in which the voter may cast his vote by marking a cross (×). 
e.  Write-in votes. Procedures for write-in votes shall be consistent with state election laws. 
Section 3. - Canvassing. 
    The returns of every municipal election shall be delivered from the election judges to the city clerk not later than 12 hours after the closing of the polls. The city council shall canvas the returns in accordance with state election laws. The returns of every municipal election shall be recorded in the minutes of the city council by total for each candidate, or for and against each issue submitted. 
Section 4. - Election by majority. 
    A majority vote for an elective office is that number of votes which is greater than one-half of the total number of valid ballots cast for the office concerned. Any candidate for elective office who receives a majority shall be declared elected. If none of the candidates for an elective position receives a majority vote, none of such candidates shall be elected. 
Section 5. - Run-off election. 
    In the event no candidate for an elective office receives a majority of the votes cast for that position in the regular or special election or there is a tie for first place, a run-off election shall be held between the two candidates who received the greatest number of votes. Such run-off election shall be held not less than ten or more than 28 days following the preceding regular or special election. 
ARTICLE VI. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 

Section 1. - Power of initiative. 
    The people of the city reserve the power of direct legislation by initiative, and in the exercise of that power, may propose any ordinance, except ordinances appropriating money, levying taxes, annexing land, zoning ordinances or ordinances repealing ordinances appropriating money, levying taxes, annexing land, or zoning ordinances, not in conflict with this Charter or state law or constitution. Any initiated ordinance may be submitted to the council by a petition signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least ten percent of all qualified voters of the city. 
Section 2. - Power of referendum. 
    The people of the city reserve the power to approve or reject at the polls any city council legislation which is subject to the initiative process under this Charter, except that ordinance authorizing the issuance of either tax or revenue bonds, whether original or refunding bonds, annexing land and zoning ordinance shall not be subject to referendum. To exercise the power of referendum, a petition signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least ten percent of all qualified voters of the city must be filed with city clerk requesting that an existing ordinance be either repealed or submitted to a vote of the people. When such a petition has been certified as accurate and sufficient by the city clerk, all action authorized by the specified ordinance shall be suspended until the ordinance has been approved by the voters as herein provided. 
Section 3. - Form of petitions. 
    Initiative petition papers shall contain the full text of the proposed legislation in the form of an ordinance, including a descriptive caption. Referendum petition papers shall contain a sufficient description of the ordinance sought to be referred to, identify it, or, if the ordinance has been passed by the city council, the full text of the ordinance sought to be referred shall be included in the papers. The signature to the initiative or referendum petitions need not be all appended to one paper, but each signer's name shall be printed and signed in ink as shall the resident's address, precinct number, and serial number from the voter registration certificate, or other document prescribed by the laws of this state to identify qualified voters. No signature shall be counted if there is reason to believe it is not the actual signature of the purported signer or that it is a duplication either of name or of handwriting used in any other signature on the petition, and no signature shall be counted unless the resident address of the signer is shown, and unless it is signed exactly as the name of the voter appears on the official copy of the current voter registration list or other document prescribed by the laws of this state to identify qualified voters, and unless the precinct number and serial number that appeared on the signer's voter registration certificate or other document prescribed by state law to identify voters are noted as above required. Before the signature on any petition paper may be counted, one of the persons signing the petition paper, a qualified voter, shall make oath before the city clerk or other officer competent to administer oaths that the statements made in the affidavit are true, that each signature to the paper appended is the genuine signature of the person whose name purports to be signed thereto. 
Section 4. - Filing, examination and certification of petitions. 
    Within 30 days after an initiative or referendum petition is filed, the city clerk shall determine whether it is properly signed by the requisite number of qualified voters. The city clerk shall declare void any petition paper which does not have an affidavit attached thereto as required in section 3 of this article. In examining the petition, the city clerk shall indicate the names of signers found not qualified. The city clerk shall certify the results of the petition examination to the council at its next regular meeting. If the certificate of the city clerk shows an initiative or referendum petition to be insufficient, the city clerk shall notify the person filing the petition, and it may be amended within 15 days from the date of such notice by filing a supplementary petition upon additional papers signed and filed as prescribed for the original petition. Within 15 days after the amendment is filed, the city clerk shall examine the amended petition and certify as to its sufficiency. If the amended petition is then found to be insufficient, no further proceeding shall be had with regard to it. 
Section 5. - City council consideration and submission to voters. 
[a.]  If the city council receives an authorized initiative petition certified by the city clerk to be sufficient, the city council shall: 
(1)  Pass the initiated ordinance without amendment within 30 days after the date of the certification to the city council; 
(2)  Submit the initiated ordinance without amendment to a vote of the qualified voters of the city at a regular or special election to be held within 90 days after the date of the certification to the city council or as soon thereafter as permitted by the laws of this state; or 
(3)  At an election as described in subsection "b," submit to a vote of the qualified voters of the city the initiated ordinance without amendment and an alternative ordinance on the same subject proposed by the city council. 
[b.]  If the initiated and the alternative ordinances are both approved by a majority of the votes cast at the election, the ordinance receiving the greater number of votes shall be effective as an ordinance of the city; the other ordinance shall be considered rejected and shall not be effective. If the city council receives an authorized referendum petition certified by the city clerk to be sufficient, the city council shall reconsider the referred ordinance, and if upon reconsideration the ordinance is not repealed within 30 days, it shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the city at a regular or special election to be held not more than 90 days after the date of the certification to the city council or at the earliest time thereafter permitted by law. Special elections on initiated or referred ordinances shall be held when necessary as permitted by state law. No ordinance on the same subject as an initiated ordinance which has been defeated or on the same subject as a referred ordinance which has been approved at any election may be initiated by the voters within one year from the date of the election. 
Section 6. - Results of election. 
    Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election in accordance with the provisions of this article. If a majority of the legal votes cast are in favor of an initiated ordinance, it shall thereupon be effective as an ordinance of the city. An ordinance thus adopted may not be repealed or amended until after the expiration of one year and then only by a vote of four-fifths of the city councilmembers. A referred ordinance which is rejected by a majority of the legal votes cast in a referendum election shall be repealed. An ordinance thus rejected may not be re-enacted until after the expiration of one year and then only by a vote of four-fifths of the city councilmembers. 
Section 7. - Power of recall. 
    The people of the city reserve the power to recall any elected officer of the city and may exercise the power by filing with the city clerk a petition signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least ten percent of all qualified voters of the city, demanding the removal of the elected officer. The petition shall be signed and verified as required for an initiative petition. 
Section 8. - Recall election. 
    The provision regulating examination, certification, and amendment of initiative petitions shall apply to recall petitions. If the petition is certified by the city clerk to be sufficient, the city council shall order and hold a special election to determine whether the officer shall be recalled. 
Section 9. - Results of recall election. 
    If the majority of the legal votes cast at a recall election is for the recall of the officer named on the ballot, the city council shall immediately declare the office vacant and call a special election to fill the vacancy. 
Section 10. - Limitation on recall. 
    No recall petition shall be filed against an elected officer within six months after taking office, and no officer shall be subjected to more than one recall election during the term of office. 
Section 11. - Failure of city council to call an election. 
    In the event all of the requirements of this Charter shall have been met and the city council shall fail or refuse to receive the recall petition, or order such recall election, or discharge any other duties imposed upon the city council by the provisions of this Charter with reference to such recall, then the county judge of Lavaca County, Texas, shall discharge any such duties herein provided to be discharged by the person performing the duties of city clerk by the city council. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION 

Section 1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall be set by the city council. The dates of the fiscal year cannot be changed but once every three years. 
Section 2. - Preparation and submission of budget. 
    The city manager, at least 30 days prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, shall prepare and submit the budget covering the next fiscal year to the council. The city manager's budget document shall contain: 
a.  An outline of the proposed financial policies for the next fiscal year with explanations of any changes from preceding years in expenditures and any major changes of policy and a complete statement regarding the financial condition of the city. 
b.  An estimate of all revenue from taxes and other sources, including the present tax structure. 
c.  A carefully itemized list of proposed expenses by office for the budget year, as compared to actual expenses of the last ended fiscal year, and the present year-to-date. 
d.  A description of all outstanding bonded indebtedness, as well as any other indebtedness which the city has incurred and which has not been paid. 
e.  A statement proposing any capital expenditures deemed necessary for undertaking during the next budget year and recommended provision for financing. 
f.  A list of capital projects which should be undertaken within the next five succeeding years. 
Section 3. - Budget is a public record. 
    The budget shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be open for public inspection. 
Section 4. - Council action on budget. 
a.  Notice and hearing. The council shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city the general summary of the budget and a notice stating: 
(1)  The times and places where copies of the message and budget are available for inspection by the public; and 
(2)  The time and place, not less than one week after such publication, for a public hearing on the budget. 
b.  Amendment before adoption. After the public hearing, the council may adopt the budget with or without amendment. In amending the budget, it may add or increase programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or amounts, except expenditures required by law or for debt service or for estimated cash deficit, provided that no amendment to the budget shall increase the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than the total of estimated income. 
c.  Adoption. The council shall adopt the budget on or before the last day of the fiscal year currently ending. If it fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for current operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items in it prorated accordingly, until such time as the council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall constitute appropriations of the amounts specified therein as expenditures from the funds indicated and shall constitute a levy of the property tax therein proposed. 
Section 5. - Amendments after adoption. 
a.  Supplemental appropriations. If during the fiscal year the city manager certifies that there are available for appropriation revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget, the council, by ordinance, may make supplemental appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess. 
b.  Emergency appropriations. To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public peace, the council may make emergency appropriations. Such appropriations may be made by emergency ordinance. To the extent that there is no available unappropriated revenue to meet such appropriating, the council may by such emergency ordinance authorize the issuance of emergency notes. 
c.  Reduction of appropriations. If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable to the city manager that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, the city manager shall report to the council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the shortfall, any remedial action taken, and make recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The council shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit, and for that purpose it may by ordinance reduce one or more appropriations. 
d.  Transfer of appropriations. At any time during the fiscal year, the city manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department, office or agency. Upon written request by the city manager, the council may, by ordinance, transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, office or agency to another. 
e.  Limitations; effective date. No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. The supplemental and emergency appropriations and reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective immediately upon adoption. 
Section 6. - Lapse of appropriations. 
    Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation. 
Section 7. - Financial reports. 
    The city manager shall provide to the city council sufficient financial reports to keep the council aware of the city's financial condition throughout the fiscal year. 
Section 8. - Independent audit. 
    At the close of each fiscal year, and at other times as necessary, the city council shall have a certified public accountant conduct an independent audit of all accounts of the city. The certified public accountant shall have no personal interest in the financial affairs of the city or of its officers. A summary of the results of the completed audit shall be on file in the city clerk's office as public record. 
Section 9. - Purchases and contracts. 
    The city shall make purchases and execute contracts only in accordance with state law and constitution. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES 

Section 1. - Limits on transfer of use of public property. 
    No right of control or use of public property of the city may be transferred except by ordinance consistent with this Charter. No act or omission of the city council or officer or agent of the city may be construed to grant, renew, extend, or amend, in any way, any right, franchise, or easement affecting public property of the city except as provided by this Charter. 
Section 2. - Power to grant franchises. 
    The city council shall have the power by ordinance to grant, renew and extend franchises of public utilities operating in the city. With consent of the franchise holder, the city council may, by ordinance, amend franchises of public utilities, but no franchise may be granted for an indefinite term. 
Section 3. - Limit on transfer of franchise. 
    No public or private utility franchise may be transferred or assigned by its owner except with the approval of the city council. 
Section 4. - Regulation of franchises. 
    Grants, renewals, extensions, and amendments of public utility franchises, whether or not provided in the ordinance granting the franchise, shall be subject to the right of the city council: 
a.  To forfeit the franchise by ordinance for failure of the holder to comply with the terms of the franchise. This right may be exercised only after written notice to the franchise holder stating how the holder has failed to comply with the terms of the franchise and setting a reasonable time for the correction of the failure. Forfeiture may occur only after a hearing and after expiration of a reasonable time for correction. 
b.  To impose reasonable regulations to ensure safe, efficient, and continuous service to the public. 
c.  To require expansion, extension, enlargement, and improvement of plant and facilities as necessary to provide adequate service to the public. 
d.  To require franchise holders to furnish the city, without cost to the city, full information regarding the location and precise description of all facilities of the franchise holder in, over, or under the city; and to regulate and control the location, relocation, and removal of the facilities. 
e.  To collect from public utilities operating in the city a proportionate part of the increased cost of city operations and services attributable to the occupancy by or use of public property by the public utility; to collect a proportionate part of the cost of city operations and services required as a result of damage to or disturbance of public property caused by the public utility; and to compel the public utility to perform at its own expense repairs or other operations made necessary by the occupancy or use of, or damage to or disturbance of, public or private property by the public utility. 
f.  To require one franchise holder to allow other holders to use its facilities, if the city council considers that joint use to be in the public interest. In the event of joint use, reasonable terms of use may be imposed by and a reasonable rental shall be paid to the owner for the use of the facility. The inability of franchise holders to agree on terms and rental for the use of each other's facilities shall not be an excuse for failure to comply with a joint use requirement by the city council. 
g.  To require franchise holders to keep records which accurately reflect the value of the franchise holder's property used and other property useful in rendering its service to the public and which reflect the franchise holder's expenses, receipts, and profits of all kinds. 
h.  To examine and audit at any time during business hours the accounts and other records of the franchise holder. 
i.  To require reports on the operations of the utility in the form, and containing information, that the city council directs. 
Section 5. - Grant not to be exclusive. 
    No grant or franchise to construct, maintain, or operate a public utility or renewal or extension of such grant shall be exclusive. 
Section 6. - Regulation of rates. 
    Subject to the laws of the United States of America and this state, the city council shall have the power after reasonable notice and hearing to regulate by ordinance the rates, charges and fares of public utilities operating in the city. 
ARTICLE IX. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 1. - Personal financial interest. 
    Any city officer or employee who has a substantial financial interest, direct or indirect or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract with the city or in the sale of any land, material, supplies or services to the city or to a contractor supplying the city shall make known the interest and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in his capacity as a city officer or employee in the making of such sale or in the making of performance of such contract. Any city officer or employee who willfully conceals such a substantial financial interest or willfully violates the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall forfeit his office or position. Violation of this section with the knowledge express or implied of the person or corporation contracting with or making a sale to the city shall render the contract or sale voidable by the city manager or the city council. 
Section 2. - Nepotism. 
    No person related within the second degree by marriage or the third degree by blood to any elected officer of the city, or to the city manager, shall be appointed to any office, position or clerkship or other service to the city. This prohibition shall not apply, however, to any person who shall have been employed by the city for one full year prior to and at the time of the election of the councilmember, or appointment to the city manager, so related to him. 
Section 3. - Public record. 
    All records of the city shall be open to inspection by the public at all reasonable times, provided that records closed to the public by state or federal law shall not be considered public records for the purpose of this section. During normal office hours, any person shall have the right to examine any such public records belonging to the city and shall have the right to make copies thereof under such reasonable rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the city council. 
Section 4. - Oath of office. 
    All elected officers of the city shall, before entering the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe to the official oath prescribed by the constitution of this state. 
Section 5. - Charter amendment. 
    This Charter may be amended in accordance with the laws of this state. 
Section 6. - Separability. 
    If any section or a part of a section of this Charter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not invalidate or impair the validity, force or effect of any other section or part of this Charter. 
Section 7. - Assignment, execution and garnishment. 
    The property, real and personal, belonging to the city shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ or execution or cost bill. The funds belonging to the city, in the hands of any person, firm or corporation, shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment, or sequestration; nor shall the city be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing any person. Neither the city nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ or garnishment on any account whatever. The city shall be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents or contractors. 
Section 8. - Prohibitions. 
    The following activities are prohibited: 
a.  In appointments to and removal from any city office of employment, no person shall be favored or discriminated against because of race, sex, political or religious opinions, or religious affiliations, age or handicap conditions. 
b.  No person who seeks appointment or promotion with respect to any city compensated position or appointive city administrative compensated office shall directly or indirectly give, render, or pay any money, service or other valuable thing to any person for or in connection with the appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion. 
c.  No city officer or employee, elected or appointed, shall orally, by letter, or otherwise solicit or assist in soliciting any assessment, subscription or contribution for any political purpose whatever from any subordinate city official or employee holding any compensated city position. 
d.  No person who holds any compensated city position shall solicit or receive any contribution to the campaign funds of any candidate for municipal office or take any part in the management, affairs, or political campaign of any municipal candidate. 
Section 9. - Gender. 
    When the context so requires, the masculine gender includes feminine or neuter. 
Section 10. - Transitional provisions. 
a.  Ordinances, rules, and regulations validated. All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city heretofore ordained, passed, or enacted, that are in force at the time this Charter becomes effective and which are not in conflict with such Charter, shall remain in force after such Charter takes effect. 
b.  Effective date of Charter. This Charter, if adopted, shall become effective after the votes cast at the election at which it is submitted to the voters shall have been counted and an order has been entered upon the records of the city council declaring it adopted. 
c.  Submission of Charter to voters. The charter commission, in preparing this Charter, concludes that it is impractical to segregate each subject so as to permit a vote of "yes" or "no" on the same, for the reason that the Charter is so constructed that in order to enable it to work and function it is necessary that it should be adopted in its entirety. For these reasons, the charter commission directs that the proposed Charter be voted upon as a whole and that it shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the city at an election to be held for that purpose on January 16, 1988. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
    This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Charter 88-02  1-16-1988(Res.) Char. (note)  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal codes of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001 et seq.; enforcement of municipal ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001 et seq.; municipal health and safety ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.012 et seq.; effect of codification of municipal ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.005; printed code of ordinances as evidence, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.006. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Yoakum, Texas" and may be so cited. This Code may also be referred to by the short title, "Yoakum City Code." 
(Code 1973, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt a civil and criminal code of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  The provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes expressed therein or implied from the expression thereof. In case of doubt or ambiguity in the meaning of such provisions, the general shall yield to the particular. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated. 
(b)  In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed and the following definitions shall apply, in addition to and not in lieu of specific definitions provided in other chapters of this Code, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
    City. The term "the city" or "this city" means the City of Yoakum, Texas, in the counties of DeWitt and Lavaca, Texas. 
    City council; council. The term "city council" or "council" means the governing body of the city. 
    City officers and departments. Whenever reference is made to an officer or a department, the same shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Yoakum, Texas." 
    Code. The term "Code" means this Code of Ordinances. 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time mentioned in the provisions of this Code, the day of the act, event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included, and the last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Sunday nor a holiday. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.014. 
    County. The term "county" or "this county" means the counties of DeWitt and Lavaca, Texas. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate, and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the provision specifically provide otherwise, and unless specifically authorized by city ordinance, city Charter, state law or federal law. 
    Gender. A term importing the masculine gender only shall extend to and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.012, 312.003. 
    Highway. The term "highway" includes any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Joint authority. Terms purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.004. 
    Law. The term "law" means and denotes applicable federal law, the state constitution and statutes, this Code, ordinances and resolutions of the city, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations that may be promulgated thereunder. 
    Manual of fees and service charges; city fee schedule. The term "manual of fees and service charges" or "city fee schedule" means the official consolidated list compiled and adopted by the city that lists city fees and service charges as determined from time to time by the city council. The fee schedule is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(7). 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be constructed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
State Law reference- Common and technical usage of words, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.011. 
    Number. Any term importing the singular number shall include the plural and any term importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.003(b). 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
State Law reference- Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(8). 
    Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the municipal governing body of a general and permanent nature. 
    Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. Where criminal prosecution may lie, the officers of any corporation shall jointly and severally be subject to prosecution as being included within the term "person." 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(11). 
    Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the city governing authority of a special or temporary character. 
    Roadway. The term "roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory, whereas the term "may" is permissive. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.016(1), (2). 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when a person cannot write. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(14). 
    Standard time. All hours of time mentioned in this Code refer to and shall be determined by Central Standard Time, or Central Daylight Saving Time, as the case may be, except that, if at any future time any different standard of time is established by this state for an area which includes this city, all such hours shall be determined by such officially proclaimed standard, so long as the same remains in effect. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
    Street. The term "street" includes any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Tex. Admin. Code. The abbreviation "Tex. Admin. Code" refers to the Texas Administrative Code. 
    V.T.C.A., [subject] Code. The term "V.T.C.A., [subject] Code" identifies a specific subject matter code of legislatively adopted statutes, as classified and numbered by the Texas Legislative Council under authority of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 323.007. 
    Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The abbreviation "Vernon's Ann. Civ. St." means the latest edition or supplement to Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. 
State Law reference- Statutory references, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.008. 
    Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(18). 
(Code 1973, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-3. - Interpretation of penal provisions. 
    The provisions of titles 1, 2 and 3 of the state penal code (V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.01 et seq.; V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 6.01 et seq.; and V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 12.01 et seq.) shall apply in the interpretation of all penal provisions of this Code to the extent that the penal code mandates that they shall apply. 
State Law reference- Concurrent jurisdiction of municipal court concerning certain violations of state statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003(b); municipality may not enact or enforce a law making conduct covered under state penal code an offense subject to criminal penalty, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.08; municipal authority to regulate discharge of firearms in municipal limits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 229.001(b). 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; editor's notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, not as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are intended merely to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, Charter references and state law references that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1973, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.024; construction of statutory references, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.027. 
Sec. 1-5. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
Sec. 1-6. - Form of Code; repository; maintenance. 
    A copy of this Code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, preserved in loose-leaf form, or in such other form as the city clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the city clerk or his designee to insert in their designated places all resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances that indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of this Code, when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from this Code all provisions that may be from time to time repealed by the city council. A copy of this Code shall be available in the office of the city clerk for examination by all persons. 
Sec. 1-7. - Responsibility of city personnel with respect to assigned copies of Code. 
    Each city official or employee assigned a copy of this Code shall be responsible for maintaining the same and for the proper insertion of amendatory pages as received. Each such copy shall remain the property of the city and shall be turned over by the official or employee having custody thereof, upon expiration of his term of office or employment, to his successor, or to the city clerk in case he shall have no successor. 
Sec. 1-8. - Additions and amendments deemed incorporated in Code. 
    Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated herein, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Sec. 1-9. - Exclusion of special or temporary ordinances. 
    Ordinances hereafter adopted which are not of a general or permanent nature shall be numbered consecutively, authenticated, published and recorded in the book of ordinances, but shall not be prepared for insertion in this Code, nor be deemed a part hereof. 
Sec. 1-10. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal, or in any way affect this Code shall be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section, or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Yoakum, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "The Code of Ordinances, City of Yoakum, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered ____________ , which said section reads as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1973, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-12. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
State Law reference- Repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.030, 312.007. 
Sec. 1-13. - Conflicting regulations. 
(a)  If the provisions of different chapters conflict with each other, the provisions of each individual chapter shall control all issues arising out of the events and persons intended to be governed by that chapter. 
(b)  If the provisions of different sections of the same chapter conflict with each other, the provision which is more specific in its application to the events or persons raising the conflict shall control over the more general provision. 
(c)  If any of the provisions hereof conflict, and the conflict cannot be resolved by application of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the more stringent regulation shall apply and the specific provision shall prevail over the general. 
Sec. 1-14. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when consistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city or creating interest and sinking funds. 
(2)  Any right or franchise, permit or other right granted by any ordinance. 
(3)  Any personnel regulations and any ordinance establishing salaries of city officers and employees or civil service rules. 
(4)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of such Code. 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with the state. 
(7)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the city. 
(8)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for adopting an annual budget. 
(9)  Any ordinance relating to local improvements and assessments therefor. 
(10)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(12)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or amending personnel rules or regulations. 
(13)  Any ordinance adopting the sales and use tax. 
(14)  Any ordinance or resolution prescribing taxicab passenger rates. 
(15)  Ordinances prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets, such as ordinances establishing speed limits or designating one-way streets, no parking areas, truck routes, stop intersections, intersections where traffic is to be controlled by signals, etc. 
(16)  Any ordinance calling municipal elections or prescribing the manner of conducting the election in accordance with state law. 
(17)  Any ordinance prescribing any fee or payment of money to the city. 
(18)  Any ordinance creating special districts or assessing taxes therefor. 
(19)  Any ordinance granting specific tax exemptions. 
(20)  Any temporary or special ordinance. 
(21)  Any administrative ordinance. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 1-15. - General penalty for violations of Code; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code, in any ordinance of the city, or in any rule, regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in him, an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code, or any such ordinance, rule, regulation or order, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed the maximum allowed by state law or, if no penalty is provided by state law, then $500.00, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  Any person, partnership, corporation or entity who shall violate any provision of this Code relating to fire, public safety, zoning, public health and sanitation or who shall commit an act relating to fire, public safety, zoning, public health and sanitation prohibited, declared to be unlawful or made and declared to be a misdemeanor in this Code or any other ordinances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be liable to a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. 
(c)  Any condition designated as a nuisance under any provision of this Code or any other ordinance is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor. 
(1)  Any person, partnership, corporation or entity that shall create, maintain or allow a nuisance upon property owned or under the control of such person, partnership, corporation or entity shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be liable to a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(2)  Any person, partnership, corporation or entity who shall create, maintain or allow a nuisance relating to fire, public safety, zoning, public health and sanitation upon property owned or under the control of such person, partnership, corporation or entity shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be liable to a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. 
(d)  Each day any violation of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  Any person who may be convicted in municipal court of the city or who may be committed to jail in default of the payment of the fine and costs adjudged against a person, may be ordered to community service work under the supervision of the chief of police, or some person appointed by him; and such person convicted and ordered to community service, or in default of payment, shall be allowed credit against the community service time ordered, or against the fine and cost adjudged in the amount established for each day's work. 
(Code 1973, §§ 1-6, 1-7; Ord. No. 1662, 12-12-1995) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001; authority of city to prescribe penalties for violation of Code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001; jurisdiction of municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003. 
Sec. 1-16. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code, or of any secondary code adopted herein, shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, or of such secondary code, since the same would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1973, § 1-5) 
State Law reference- Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.032, 312.013. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Open government generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq.; public information generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.001 et seq.; political activities by certain public entities and individuals, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 556.001; ethics, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 571.001 et seq.; public officers and employees generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 601.001 et seq.; municipal government generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 5.001 et seq.; removal of members of governing body of general law municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 21.021 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City government origin; city type. 
    The city was originally incorporated on May 13, 1889, and currently operates under its most recent Home Rule Charter, as set forth in part I of this volume. The city utilizes the council-manager form of government as permitted by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.021, and as provided in its Charter. 
Sec. 2-2. - City boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the city are as prescribed by the various enactments on file in the office of the city clerk, and as graphically displayed on a map of the city located in such office. 
State Law reference- Municipal boundaries, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 41.001 et seq.; extraterritorial jurisdiction of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 42.001 et seq.; municipal annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.001 et seq. 
Secs. 2-3-2-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Form of government in home rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.021; city manager form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 25.021 et seq.; general provisions affecting governing bodies of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 21.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-23. - Composition; election; terms; etc. 
    The composition of the city council and the number and terms of its members and other provisions defining the obligations, powers and duties of the council and its members shall be as set forth in the city's Charter. 
Secs. 2-24-2-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Meetings of municipal government bodies, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 22.038; open meetings, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq.; authority of governing body to compel attendance of council members, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 22.038. 

Sec. 2-50. - Meetings; notice. 
    There shall be regular public meetings of the city council at times and places as shall from time to time be established by the city council. Regular meetings of the city council shall be held at least once each calendar month. Special meetings may be called at any time by the mayor, on his own motion, or on the application of three councilmembers. Notice of special meetings shall be given to each member of the council, the city manager, the city clerk, and the city attorney. This notice shall be given by the city manager, the city clerk, or an officer designated by the mayor. The notice to councilmembers shall be in writing. 
State Law reference- Meetings of municipal government bodies, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 22.038; notice of public meeting required, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.041. 
Sec. 2-51. - Open meetings and minutes. 
    All meetings of the city council shall be open to the public, and minutes of all proceedings shall be kept, to which any citizen may have access at all reasonable times and which shall constitute one of the archives of the city. 
State Law reference- Open meetings, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq.; minutes or tape recording of open meeting required indicating vote taken and decision reached, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.021. 
Secs. 2-52-2-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-76. - Rules of procedure. 
    The city council shall determine its own rules of procedure and order of business and may compel the attendance of its members. At the first meeting of the council following the annual municipal election, the council shall adopt their rules of procedure. 
State Law reference- Authority of governing body to determine rules of procedure, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 22.038. 
Secs. 2-77-2-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COMMITTEES 

Sec. 2-96. - Appointment of committees and chairs by the mayor and city council. 
    All committees and committee chairs, and officers of the city council shall be recommended by the mayor and approved by the council and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. Furthermore, the mayor and council shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Secs. 2-97-2-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Public officers and employees generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 601.001 et seq.; municipal officers in city manager form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 25.051; authority to prescribe duties of and to require bond and security from appointed officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 23.052; removal of municipal officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 22.077. 

Sec. 2-121. - Personnel manual adopted. 
    The city has adopted the Yoakum, Texas, Personnel Policy and Procedure Manual, as amended from time to time, as fully as though set forth in this chapter. A copy of the manual is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 2-122. - Defense of officials, employees. 
(a)  The city shall provide for the legal defense of any elected or appointed public official and any employee of this city who may be sued individually for any act or omission arising out of or connected with the good faith performance by such individual of his official duties with or employment by the city and to pay all costs and charges in connection with such legal defense. 
(b)  If any such suit should result in an award of damages against any such official or employee, the city shall indemnify such official or employee for the amount of the damages and such legal defense. 
(c)  This authorization for legal defense and indemnity shall not extend to acts which are personal to the official or employee of this city or in which the city has no interest or in which it may have an adverse interest. 
(Code 1973, § 2-7; Ord. No. 1169, § 1, 10-12-1976) 
Sec. 2-123. - City manager. 
    The city council has appointed a city manager for the city, as contemplated by its Charter, who shall be the administrative head of the city under the direction of the city council. 
State Law reference- City manager form of government in general law municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 25.001 et seq.; city manager generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 25.026 et seq.; authority of municipality to establish powers and duties of city manager, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 25.029. 
Sec. 2-124. - Other officers. 
    In addition to the provisions of this chapter regarding specific officers, the city shall elect and appoint officers as provided in the city's Charter and pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26-041 et seq. 
Secs. 2-125-2-146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-147. - Departmental organization. 
    The administrative service of the city shall be divided into such departments as may be established from time to time by the mayor and council. The city manager shall appoint a director or head of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. The city manager may serve as head of one or more departments. 
Sec. 2-148. - Department heads generally. 
    Each department head shall be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his department or agency, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager. 
Sec. 2-149. - Intradepartmental cooperation. 
    Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the city manager, any other department such service, labor, and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of each department as its own facilities permit. 
Sec. 2-150. - Library department created. 
    A library department is created within the framework of the governmental organization of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 15-20; Ord. No. 992, § 1, 12-8-1970) 
Secs. 2-151-2-168. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND SIMILAR BODIES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Provisions regarding the city's building and standards commission are included in chapter 10, Buildings and Construction. Provisions regarding the city's construction board of adjustments and appeals is included in chapter 52, Zoning. Provisions regarding the city's parks and recreation advisory board are included in chapter 32, Parks, Recreation and Cultural Facilities. Provisions regarding the city's planning commission are included in chapter 52, article V, Planning and Development. 
State Law reference- Building and standards commissions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.033 et seq.; development boards, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 371.001 et seq.; municipal planning commissions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 371.042 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-169-2-189. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-190. - Created; membership. 
    The city has created the airport advisory board of the city, composed of three members. Members of the board are appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, to serve two-year terms and until their successors in office are appointed and qualified. Terms of the board members are staggered such that the term of two members expire in even-numbered years and the term of one member expires in odd-numbered years. Appointments to the board shall be made at the first regular meeting of the council after the annual city election, or as soon thereafter as possible. 
(Code 1973, § 2-1; Ord. No. 951, § 1, 1-9-1969) 
Sec. 2-191. - Conflict of interest. 
    No person having any financial interest in any commercial carrier by air, or in any concession, right or privilege to conduct any business or render any service for compensation upon the premises of the municipal airport shall be eligible for membership on the airport advisory board. 
(Code 1973, § 2-2; Ord. No. 951, § 4, 1-9-1969) 
Sec. 2-192. - Organization. 
    The airport advisory board shall select from among its members a chairperson and a vice-chairperson, and it shall adopt, subject to the approval of the city council, such rules and regulations governing its proceedings as it may deem proper. Such rules and regulations shall not be inconsistent with the ordinances of the city. The advisory board shall appoint a secretary, who may, but need not be, a member of the board. The secretary shall keep a record of all transactions of the board. The manager of the airport shall provide the advisory board with all information necessary for the performance of its duties. 
(Code 1973, § 2-3; Ord. No. 951, § 2, 1-9-1969) 
Sec. 2-193. - Duties. 
    The airport advisory board shall from time to time make such general studies of airport construction and operation as may be useful in keeping the municipal airport efficient and adequate to the needs of the city and of the air transportation industry; it shall make recommendations to the city council in respect to construction, expansion, improvements, maintenance and operation of such airport; it shall call the manager's attention to any failure by personnel of the airport to carry out any orders or policies adopted by the city council, general improvement of the airport and the advancement of the city as an air transportation center. 
(Code 1973, § 2-4; Ord. No. 951, § 3, 1-9-1969) 
Secs. 2-194-2-224. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - JOINT AIRPORT ZONING BOARD[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Authority for creation of joint airport zoning boards, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.014. 

Sec. 2-225. - Created, powers. 
    Subject to like provisions being made by the respective governing bodies of Lavaca and DeWitt counties, by proper order, the city has created a joint airport zoning board with such counties. The board shall have the powers and exercise the duties set in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.014. 
(Code 1973, § 2-5; Ord. No. 860, § 1, 10-12-1964) 
Sec. 2-226. - Membership, chairman. 
    The joint airport zoning board shall be composed of seven members, two to be appointed by the city council and two members to be appointed by the governing bodies of Lavaca and DeWitt counties. The seventh member shall be elected by a majority of the members so appointed and the seventh member shall serve as chairperson of the joint airport zoning board. 
(Code 1973, § 2-6; Ord. No. 860, § 2, 10-12-1964) 
Secs. 2-227-2-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - HOTEL OCCANCY TAX ADVISORY BOARD[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2088, §§ 1-6, adopted July 14, 2015, repealed the former div. 4, §§ 2-246 and 2-247 and enacted a new div. 4 as set out herein. The former div. 4 was entitled "Tourism Board" and derived from Ord. No. 2039, §§ 2-6, adopted Apr. 9, 2013. 

Sec. 2-246. - Hotel occupancy tax advisory board created; composition; qualifications, compensation. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a hotel occupancy tax board, an advisory board, to be composed of five members. 
(b)  Members of the hotel occupancy tax advisory board shall serve without compensation. Any person over 18 years of age living in the city or working in the city shall be eligible to serve on the advisory board, provided at least three members of the board shall live in the city. Members of the council may serve on the board; provided, however, no more than two shall serve at any one time. 
(Ord. No. 2088, § 2, 7-14-2015) 
Sec. 2-247. - Appointment; tenure of members. 
(a)  The original members of such board shall be appointed by the city council. 
(b)  Each member shall hold office for a term of two years, except that of those first appointed, two shall hold office for a term of one year, and three other members shall hold office for a term of two years, and thereafter, their successors shall hold office for two years and until their successors are appointed. 
(c)  The city council will, at its first official meeting in the month of June in each year (or as soon thereafter as practicable), act upon appointments made to the board in filling expired terms of members of the board. 
(Ord. No. 2088, § 3, 7-14-2015) 
Sec. 2-248. - Filling of vacancies; removal of members. 
(a)  Whenever a vacancy shall occur as a result of death, resignation, removal or expiration of the term of office of any member of the board, the city council shall appoint a person to serve the unexpired term or new term, as applicable. 
(b)  Any member of the board may be removed from office by the city council for any cause deemed by the city council sufficient for the board member's removal in the interest of the public service. 
(Ord. No. 2088, § 4, 7-14-2015) 
Sec. 2-249. - Officers; meetings. 
(a)  The board shall select its chair and a vice-chair at its next regular meeting after June. Such terms shall be for one year. 
(b)  The board shall meet at least quarterly. Additional meetings may be called by the chair or at the request of city council. 
(Ord. No. 2088, § 5, 7-14-2015) 
Sec. 2-250. - Powers and duties of hotel occupancy tax board. 
(a)  The board shall review all reports and information submitted by any entity, whether a governmental entity or private organization, to which the city has delegated the management or supervision of programs and activities funded with hotel occupancy tax revenue. The information and reports shall include any matter required by state statute to be reported to the city council or any other city authority, and shall include, but not be limited to, entities' annual budget, annual audit, monthly activity report, monthly financial summary of city hotel occupancy tax funds, and revenue and expenditures summary reports. 
(b)  The board shall make reports at least two times per year to the council, at least one of which shall include oral presentation to the city council during a public session. The board may also make such recommendations to the city council as it deems appropriate regarding the administration of hotel occupancy tax revenues and regarding entities to which the city council has designated management and supervision of programs and activities funded by hotel occupancy tax revenue. Recommendations of the hotel occupancy tax board shall not be prerequisite to any action the city council may undertake regarding any matter concerning the hotel occupancy tax. 
(Ord. No. 2088, § 6, 7-14-2015) 
Secs. 2-251-2-272. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - LIBRARY BOARD[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1990, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 2011, amended div. 5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 5, §§ 2-273-2-276, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Code 1973, §§ 15-22-15-25; and Ord. No. 992, §§ 3-5, adopted Dec. 8, 1970. 

Sec. 2-273. - Gifts, donations, etc. 
    The city hereby accepts all gifts and donations of books, videos and equipment made to the Carl & Mary Welhausen Library as outlined and authorized in the library policies reviewed and adopted as needed by the library board and city council, and the Texas State Library and Archives CREW Manual. 
(Ord. No. 1990, § 1, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 2-274. - Board-Created, function. 
    There is hereby continued a board which shall be known as the library board. Such board shall review policies and procedures of the library and its staff, and make recommendations to the city council regarding the adoption of such policies and procedures. The board may formulate rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary for the orderly and safe use of the library facilities. Operations and supervision of the library and any branches thereof as may be established by the city shall be under the administration and control of the city manager. The city manager shall appoint a department head in governing the performance of duties of the library employees and personnel. 
(Ord. No. 1990, § 1, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 2-275. - Board membership, terms. 
    The library board shall consist of at least seven members to be appointed by the city council for a term of two years; provided that at least four shall be appointed during even-numbered years and at least three shall be appointed during odd-numbered years. Membership on the board shall not exceed ten members. The board may meet on a quarterly basis or on an as needed basis in order to ensure that regular business items are addressed. 
(Ord. No. 1990, § 1, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 2-276. - Finances. 
    The library board shall have no power to obligate the city in any manner whatsoever; its finances shall be handled in the same manner as any other department of city government. 
(Ord. No. 1990, § 1, 9-13-2011) 
Sec. 2-277. - Librarians. 
    Librarians shall be recommended by the supervising department head and appointed by the city manager. All library employees shall be subject to the City of Yoakum Personnel Manual as any other city employee. Supervising department head or city manager may request the library board to assist with application review and/or the interview process for potential librarians. 
(Ord. No. 1990, § 1, 9-13-2011) 
Secs. 2-278-2-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal finances relating to home rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.021 et seq.; municipal budgets generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.001 et seq.; audit of municipal finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 103.001 et seq.; municipal depositories, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 105.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-301. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin on October 1 and end on September 30. All funds collected by the city during any fiscal year, including both current and delinquent revenues, shall belong to such fiscal year and, except for funds derived to pay interest and create a sinking fund on the bonded indebtedness of the city, may be applied to the payment of expenses, incurred during that fiscal year. Any revenues uncollected at the end of any fiscal year, and any unencumbered funds actually on hand, shall become resources of the next fiscal year. 
(Code 1973, § 7-1; Ord. No. 1603, 8-10-1993) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to establish fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.042. 
Sec. 2-302. - Adoption of identity theft prevention program. 
    The city has developed and adopts by reference as though fully set forth in this article an identity theft prevention program for the purpose of complying with 16 CFR 681.2 and in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. Pursuant to 16 CFR 681.1, the purpose of the adopted program is also to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
Sec. 2-303. - Manual of Fees and Service Charges. 
    The city has adopted the fees and charges set forth and embraced within the booklet entitled "Manual of Fees and Service Charges," sometimes referred to as the "city fee schedule," copies of which are available in the office of the city clerk. The fees and charges set forth within the manual are adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1973, § 2-9; Ord. No. 1494, §§ 1, 2, 10-11-1988; Ord. No. 1999, §§ 1-3, 1-10-2012) 
Sec. 2-304. - Dishonored check fees. 
    A fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule shall be charged for any check or electronic funds draft accepted by the city in payment of any fee, tax or other charge that is dishonored by the holder for insufficient funds or other cause. 
Sec. 2-305. - Claims against city. 
(a)  Written notice required; contents. The city shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone on his behalf, or in the event the injury results in death, the persons who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death or injury, shall, within 60 days or within six months for good cause shown from the date the damage or injury was received, give notice in writing to the city manager of the following facts: 
(1)  The date and time when the injury occurred and the place where the injured person or property was at the time when the injury was received. 
(2)  The nature of the damage or injury sustained. 
(3)  The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained. 
(4)  A specific and detailed statement of how, and under what circumstances the damage or injury occurred. 
(5)  The amount of which each claimant will settle. 
(6)  The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state, on the date the claim is presented. 
(7)  In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of the claimant, witnessed the happening of the injury or any part thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed. 
(8)  In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was submitted, along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage or any part thereof. 
(b)  Serving notice; location. All notices required by this section shall be effectuated by serving them upon the city clerk or city manager at the city hall, and all such notices shall be effective only when actually received in the office of the person named above. 
(c)  Verification of notice by plaintiff. The written notice required under this section shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or by someone authorized by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the city council as a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein. 
(d)  Prior refusal by city council. No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the city unless the plaintiff therein shall have and prove that previous to the filing of the original petition the plaintiff applied to the city council for redress, satisfaction, compensation, or relief, as the case may be, and that the same was, by vote of the city council, refused. 
(e)  Notice may not be waived. Neither the chairperson of the city council, a councilmember, or any other officer or employee of the city shall have the authority to waive any of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 2-8; Ord. No. 1439, § 4, 8-12-1986) 
Secs. 2-306-2-328. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUDGET AND APPROPRIATIONS 

Sec. 2-329. - Budget preparation and adoption. 
    At least 30 days prior to the end of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed budget presenting a complete financial plan for the ensuing fiscal year. A synopsis of the same shall be posted as stipulated by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 102. The budget shall be finally adopted not later than September 30th of the preceding fiscal year. 
(Code 1973, § 7-2; Ord. No. 1603, 8-10-1993; Ord. No. 2059, § 1, 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 2-330. - Appropriations generally. 
    From the effective date of the budget, the amounts stated as proposed expenditures shall become appropriated to the line item objects named. Except as provided in this division, no funds of the city shall be expended nor obligated except pursuant to the annual appropriation ordinance. At the close of each fiscal year, any unencumbered balance of an appropriation shall revert to the fund from which appropriated and become available for reappropriation for the next fiscal year. The city council may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department to another, at any time, by means of a budget amendment. The city manager shall have authority, without city council approval, to transfer appropriation balances from one expenditures account to another within a single department. 
(Code 1973, § 7-3; Ord. No. 1603, 8-10-1993) 
Sec. 2-331. - Emergency appropriations. 
    At any time in any fiscal year, the city council may make appropriations not included in the budget to meet a pressing need for public expenditure, for other than regular or recurring requirements, or to protect the public health or safety. Should the revenues of the city for such fiscal year not be sufficient to meet the expenditures under this special appropriation, it shall be the duty of the city council to identify in the budget amendment the amount of unreserved fund balance required to make the amendment. 
(Code 1973, § 7-4; Ord. No. 1603, 8-10-1993) 
Secs. 2-332-2-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-351. - Lowest and best obtainable prices. 
(a)  As a general policy, the city shall endeavor to secure the lowest and best obtainable price for goods and services. "Lowest and best obtainable price" is that combination of price and quality that best fits the particular needs of the city. 
(b)  Coinciding with state purchasing guidelines, but realizing the importance of a strong local economy, the city requires purchasing locally whenever possible as long as prices remain competitive while quality remains consistent and service is equal. Purchases may be awarded to vendors from inside the city limits when submitted bids from that vendor are within three percent or the greatest percentage allowed by state law of other bids received from vendors outside the city limits and quality and services provided are of similar levels. 
(Code 1973, § 7-6; Ord. No. 1864, 2-8-2005; Ord. No. 2059, § 2, 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 2-352. - Purchases $25,000.00 and over. 
(a)  The city shall comply with state competitive bidding laws before entering into any contract as prescribed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 252. All contracts for expenditures involving more than $25,000.00 must be expressly approved in advance by the city council. The city council shall award bids as provided for by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 252. The city council shall have the right to reject any and all bids. 
(b)  Contracts exempted from the competitive bidding laws shall not be required to be let on competitive bids. 
(Code 1973, § 7-7; Ord. No. 1603, 8-10-1993; Ord. No. 1795, § 1, 4-9-2002; Ord. No. 2059, § 3, 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 2-353. - Purchases under $25,000.00. 
(a)  The city council grants general authority to the city manager to contract for expenditures without further approval of the council for budgeted items not exceeding $25,000.00. The city manager shall have the right to reject any or all proposals in accordance with the policy set forth in this article. 
(b)  The city manager shall provide a written policy to council for its review and adoption that governs the expenditure of funds not otherwise addressed in this Code. 
(c)  The city shall operate under the provisions in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 252 to establish procedures for utilizing local historically underutilized businesses. 
(Code 1973, § 7-9; Ord. No. 1603, 8-10-1993; Ord. No. 1795, § 1, 4-9-2002; Ord. No. 2059, § 5, 1-14-2014) 
Secs. 2-354-2-381. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PUBLIC RECORDS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq. 

Sec. 2-382. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department head means the officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of a department of the city that creates or receives records. 
    Essential record means any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
    Municipal government records means all documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information-recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees, pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business, are hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. The term "municipal government records" does not include: 
(1)  Extra identical copies of documents created only for convenience of reference or research by officers or employees of the local government; 
(2)  Notes, journals, diaries, and similar documents created by an officer or employee of the local government for the officer's or employee's personal convenience; 
(3)  Blank forms; 
(4)  Stocks of publications; 
(5)  Library and museum materials acquired solely for the purposes of reference or display; 
(6)  Copies of documents in any media furnished to members of the public to which they are entitled under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.001 et seq., or other state law; or 
(7)  Any records, correspondence, notes, memoranda, or documents, other than a final written agreement described by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 2009.054(c), associated with a matter conducted under an alternative dispute resolution procedure in which personnel of a state department or institution, local government, special district, or other political subdivision of the state participated as a party, facilitated as an impartial third-party, or facilitated as the administrator of a dispute resolution system or organization. 
    Permanent record means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
    Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
    Records liaison officers means the persons designated as such under this article. 
    Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term "records management" includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographic and electronic and other records storage systems. 
    Records management committee means the committee of that name established in this article. 
    Records management officer means the person designated as such in this article. 
    Records management plan means the plan of that name developed under this article. 
    Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Code 1973, §§ 2-31, 2-32; Ord. No. 2000, §§ 1, 2, 1-10-2012) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.003. 
Sec. 2-383. - City records declared public property. 
    All city records are declared to be the property of the city. No local government official or employee has, by virtue of his position, any personal or property right to such records even though he may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Code 1973, § 2-33; Ord. No. 2000, § 3, 1-10-2012) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.005. 
Sec. 2-384. - Policy. 
    It is declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all local government records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq., and accepted records management practice. 
(Code 1973, § 2-34; Ord. No. 2000, § 4, 1-10-2012) 
State Law reference- Duty of municipal governing body with regard to public records, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.021. 
Sec. 2-385. - Designation of records management officer. 
    The city clerk, and the successive holders of the office, shall serve as the records management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his name with the director and librarian of the state library within 30 days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
(Code 1973, § 2-35; Ord. No. 2000, § 5, 1-10-2012) 
State Law reference- Designation of municipal records management officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.025. 
Sec. 2-386. - Establishment of records management committee; duties. 
    A records management committee consisting of the city manager, city attorney, and director of finance is established. The committee shall: 
(1)  Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program; 
(2)  Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements if needed; 
(3)  Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer; 
(4)  Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control schedules; and 
(5)  Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-36; Ord. No. 2000, § 6, 1-10-2012) 
Sec. 2-387. - Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan. 
(a)  The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the local government that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his duties prescribed by state law and the ordinance effectively. 
(b)  Once approved by the city council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-37; Ord. No. 2000, § 7, 1-10-2012) 
State Law reference- Municipalities required to establish records management program, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.026. 
Sec. 2-388. - Duties of records management officer. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each local government office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to re-establish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and document storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and forms design and control system for the city; 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all local government departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and archives commission to determine if the records management program and the local government records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the city manager and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program; 
(11)  Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article; 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of local government records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  Report annually to the city manager on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city, including summaries of statistical and fiscal data complied pursuant to this section; and 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the city manager non-compliance by department heads or other local government personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq. 
(Code 1973, § 2-38; Ord. No. 2000, § 8, 1-10-2012) 
State Law reference- Duties of municipal records management officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.023. 
Sec. 2-389. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in his care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, scanning, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 2-39; Ord. No. 2000, § 9, 1-10-2012) 
State Law reference- Duties and responsibilities of records custodians, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.022. 
Sec. 2-390. - Designation of records liaison officers. 
(a)  Each department head shall designate a member of his staff to serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer determines that in the best interest of the records management program more than one records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the records management officer. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his department. 
(b)  Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by the department. 
(c)  In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. 
(Code 1973, § 2-40; Ord. No. 2000, § 10, 1-10-2012) 
Sec. 2-391. - Duties and responsibilities of records liaison officers. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules; 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in their departments; and 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(Code 1973, § 2-41; Ord. No. 2000, § 11, 1-10-2012) 
Sec. 2-392. - Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state. 
(a)  The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of local government records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city. 
(c)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head and the members of the records management committee. 
(d)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted by the records management officer to and accepted for filing by the state library and archives commission as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. 
(Code 1973, § 2-42; Ord. No. 2000, § 12, 1-10-2012) 
State Law reference- Records control schedules, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.041 et seq. 
Sec. 2-393. - Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under this article shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or the department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the records management committee. 
(Code 1973, § 2-43; Ord. No. 2000, § 13, 1-10-2012) 
State Law reference- Initial destruction of obsolete records under records control plan and schedule, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.044. 
Sec. 2-394. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
    A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule, and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the state library and archives commission an approved destruction authorization request. 
(Code 1973, § 2-44; Ord. No. 2000, § 14, 1-10-2012) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.045. 
Sec. 2-395. - Records center. 
    A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by this article, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under this article. 
(Code 1973, § 2-45; Ord. No. 2000, § 15, 1-10-2012) 
Sec. 2-396. - Micrographics. 
    Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by order of the city council, all microfilming of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer. The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the microfilming of local government records, including policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the microfilming of local government records established in rules of the state library and archives commission. The plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming and protocols for ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operations is nevertheless subject to periodic review by the records management officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency, and compliance with commission rules. 
(Code 1973, § 2-46; Ord. No. 2000, § 16, 1-10-2012) 
State Law reference- Microfilming of records, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 204.001 et seq.; electronic storage of records, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 205.001 et seq. 
Chapter 4 - ADULT BUSINESSES AND ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of miscellaneous businesses, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.002 et seq.; home rule municipal authority to license any lawful business or occupation that is subject to its police powers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.075; municipal authority to regulate sexually oriented business, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform licensing regulations to ensure sexually oriented businesses are operated by persons and in a manner that prevents casual high-risk sexual activity, prostitution, drug use, other criminal activity, or logistical difficulties and risk of physical endangerment to police officers responsible for policing such businesses. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the federal or state constitutions or to deny access to sexually oriented entertainment. 
(Ord. No. 2002, § 1, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any person, including any spouse of an individual owner, or any other entity required to submit any documentation or receive any approvals for operating sexually oriented business or working within a sexually oriented business within the city. 
    Bath house, sexually oriented, means an enterprise where a portion of its business is offering baths or showers with other persons present who are nude or displaying specified anatomical areas. 
    Body painting studio, sexually oriented, means an establishment where a portion of its business is the application of paint or other substance to or on the human body by any means of application, technique or process when the subject's body displays for the patron's view specified anatomical areas. 
    Business license, sexually oriented, means any license applied for under the sexually oriented business licensing ordinance establishing licensing requirements for sexually oriented business. 
    Business, sexually oriented, means any of the following businesses: sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub; sexually oriented entertainment; sexually oriented motion picture theater; sexually oriented video viewing kiosk, booth or arcade; sexually oriented encounter center; sexually oriented media store; sexually oriented bathhouse; sexually oriented massage business; sexually oriented retail establishment; sexually oriented body painting studio; sexually oriented lingerie or swimwear modeling studio; sexually oriented modeling/photography studio; sexually oriented escort business; or any other such business establishment whose purpose is offering sexually oriented entertainment, media or merchandise. Signs, advertisements or an establishment name including verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to "adult," "XXX," or similar terms shall be considered evidence that the establishment holds itself out to the public as a sexually oriented business. Each such business is considered a separate land use for purposes of these regulations. For the purpose of this chapter, a business is not a sexually oriented business if its inventory, square footage, and product value devoted to sexually oriented merchandise (including media) is ten percent or less and it offers no on-site sexually oriented entertainment. 
    Cabaret or nightclub, sexually oriented, means a building or portion of a building which provides or allows the provision of live sexually oriented entertainment to its customers or which holds itself out to the public as an establishment where sexually oriented entertainment is available, but such definition shall not include any sexually oriented use prohibited by this section. Signs, advertisements or an establishment name including verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to "adult entertainment," "strippers," "showgirls," "exotic dancers," "gentlemen's club," "XXX," or similar terms shall be considered evidence that the establishment holds itself out to the public as a sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub. 
    Chief of police means the police chief for the city, or a designated agent. 
    Child care facility, licensed, means a facility licensed by this state providing supervision for children 13 years of age or younger or for any individual who is deemed mentally challenged. 
    Civic center building means a building or complex of buildings that house municipal offices and service, and which may include cultural, recreational, athletic, convention or entertainment facilities owned or operated by a municipality. 
    Customer means a person who: 
(1)  Enters a business in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; 
(2)  Enters a business and purchases, rents, or otherwise partakes of any material, merchandise, goods, entertainment, or other services offered therein; or 
(3)  Enters a business other than as an employee, vendor, service person, or delivery person. 
    Display publically means the act of exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item or activity in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character distinguished by normal unaided vision from a street, highway, or public sidewalk, or from the property of others or from any portion of the premises where items and materials other than sexually oriented media or merchandise are offered for sale or rent to the public. 
    Educational facility means all public or private kindergarten, primary, secondary and postsecondary educational facilities offering instruction in the branches of learning and study required to be taught by the state education agency; and such federally-funded educational programs for preschool children as the head start program. 
    Employee means any person who renders any service whatsoever for or to the customers of an establishment subject to this chapter or who works in or about an establishment subject to this chapter. 
    Encounter center, sexually oriented, means a business or enterprise that offers physical contact between two or more persons when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activity or touching specified anatomical areas, but not including sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub. 
    Entertainer, sexually oriented, means any person paid by some form to provide entertainment to customers at a sexually oriented business; entertainment may consist of dancing, signing, modeling, acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations with customers in which the entertainer is paid any form of remuneration directly or indirectly for such conversations. 
    Entertainment, sexually oriented, means any of the following activities, when performed by a sexually oriented entertainer at a sexually oriented business: dancing, singing, talking, touching, modeling (including lingerie or photographic), gymnastics, acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations with customers. 
    Escort business, sexually oriented, means a business or person that advertises or solicits in any way to prospective clients for the provision of sexually oriented escorts that will provide sexually oriented entertainment, companionship or conduct or employs, or contracts with a sexually oriented escort, or refers or provides to a client a sexually oriented escort. 
    Escort, sexually oriented, means a person who offers to provide, for some form of remuneration, acts of sexually oriented entertainment or conduct to a client. 
    Floor area, gross, means the total area of the building accessible or visible to a person, including showrooms, theaters including stage area, service areas (but not including restrooms), behind-counter areas, areas used for storage of sexually oriented media or merchandise, and aisles, hallways, and entryways serving such areas. 
    Frequently means two or more times per month. 
    Library, public, means a publicly-owned facility in which literary and artistic materials, such as books, periodicals, newspapers, pamphlets, prints, records, tapes, are kept for reading, reference, or lending. 
    Licensee means anyone issued a license under section 4-25. 
    Lingerie or swimwear modeling studio, sexually oriented, means an establishment or business that provides the service of live models modeling lingerie, bathing suits, or similar wear, to individuals, couples, or small groups. 
    Manager means any person designated by the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to be responsible for the operation of such business at a particular location at a particular time; when the owner, proprietor, or other principal in the business is present, such person may be considered the manager. 
    Massage means the act of touching, stroking, kneading, stretching, causing friction, percussion, and vibration, and includes holding, positioning, causing movement of the soft tissues and applying manual touch and pressure to the body. 
    Massage business, sexually oriented, means any business in which massages are offered as one of the business's services by a person who is not licensed as a massage therapist under state law or any business that provides massage for the purpose of sexual stimulation. 
    Massage therapist means a person licensed as a massage therapist in accordance with the provisions of the state department of health services in accordance with state law. 
    Massage therapy means the profession in which a massage therapist licensed under state law applies massage techniques with the intent of positively affecting the health and well-being of the client. 
    Media means anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, film, videotape or videotape production, or pictorial representation, or any electrical or electronic reproduction of anything that is or may be used as a means of communication. Media includes, but shall not necessarily be limited to, books, newspapers, magazines, movies, videos, sound recordings, CD-ROMs, DVDs, other magnetic media, and undeveloped pictures. 
    Media, sexually oriented, means media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Media store, sexually oriented, means a store with sexually oriented media for sale or rent, and to which any of the following applies. The sale or rental of sexually oriented media, whether alone or in conjunction with the sale or rental of sexually oriented merchandise, constitutes a principal business of the establishment, taking into consideration any of the following: 
(1)  The value realized from the sale or rental of sexually oriented media or merchandise; 
(2)  The floor area devoted to sexually oriented media or sexually oriented merchandise; 
(3)  The amount of inventory constituting sexually oriented media or sexually oriented merchandise; or 
(4)  The business advertised or holds itself out in any forum as a "XXX," "adult," or "sexually oriented" media or merchandise business. 
    Merchandise, sexually oriented, includes any of the following categories of merchandise: lingerie presented in combination with other merchandise contained within this definition; leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices; condoms or sexual lubricants presented in combination with other merchandise contained within this definition; sexually oriented novelties; and sexually oriented media which is separately defined in this section. 
    Modeling/photography studio, sexually oriented, means any place where a person who appears nude or semi-nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nudity is to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. A sexually oriented modeling/photography studio does not include educational classes in conjunction with a private or public college, junior college, or university or that of an individual artist studio established solely for conduct of the artist. 
    Motel, sexually oriented, means a hotel, motel, or similar commercial lodging establishment that: 
(1)  Provides as its business accommodations to the public for any form of consideration for the purpose of viewing sexually oriented media or sexually oriented entertainment. This definition does not include lodging facilities that offer sexually oriented media via cable or satellite services on room televisions as ancillary television programming; 
(2)  Is marketed as or offered as "adult," "XXX," "couples," or "sexually oriented" lodging facility; or 
(3)  Offers a sleeping room for a period of less than ten hours or allows a tenant or occupant to rent the room for a period of time less than ten hours or allows the tenant to have a weekly or monthly rental of the room for the purposes of providing sexually oriented entertainment. 
    Motion picture theater, sexually oriented, means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, sexually oriented media is frequently shown that is characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or that is marketed as or offered as "adult," "XXX," or "sexually oriented." Frequently shown media as characterized herein does not include sexually oriented speech and expressions that take place inside the context of some larger form of expression. This definition does not include any type of facility that would meet the definition of a sexually oriented video viewing kiosk, booth or arcade. 
    Novelties, sexually oriented, means instruments, devices, toys, or paraphernalia either designed as representation of human genital organs or female breasts or designed or marketed primarily for use in sexually oriented stimulation of specified anatomical areas. 
    Nudity or state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
    Operates means to cause to function, maintain or create or to put or keep in operation a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
    Operator. See Manager. 
    Owner means the individual owner of an establishment, or if the legal owner is a corporation, partnership, or limited liability company, the term "owner" shall include all general partners, any limited partner with a financial interest of ten percent or more, all corporate officers and directors, and any shareholder or member with a financial interest of ten percent or more. The term "owner" includes the spouses of any of the above persons. 
    Premises means the physical location at which a business is located; as used in this section, the term "premises" shall include all parts of that physical location, both interior and exterior, which are under the control of the subject business, through ownership, lease or other arrangement. 
    Protected land use means a licensed child care facility, civic center building, educational facility, public library, recreational facility, or religious facility. 
    Public area means a portion of a sexually oriented business that is accessible to the customer, excluding restrooms, while the business is open for business. 
    Recreational facility means a permanent facility devoted to recreational purposes such as parks, play fields, or community recreation buildings. 
    Religious facility means a permanent facility exclusively used on a regular basis for religious assembly such as customarily occurs in a synagogue, temple, mosque, or church or convent or monastery. 
    Retail store, sexually oriented, means a store with sexually oriented merchandise for sale and/or rent, and to which any of the following applies. The sale or rental of sexually oriented merchandise, whether alone or in conjunction with the sale or rental of sexually oriented media, constitutes a principal business of the establishment, taking into consideration any of the following: 
(1)  The value realized from the sale or rental of sexually oriented merchandise or media; 
(2)  The floor area devoted to sexually oriented merchandise or sexually oriented media; 
(3)  The amount of inventory constituting sexually oriented merchandise or sexually oriented media; or 
(4)  The business advertises or holds itself out in any forum as a "XXX," "adult" or "sexually oriented" merchandise business or media business. 
    Sadomasochistic practices means flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed or naked. 
    Semi-nude or in a state of semi-nudity means the showing of the female areola or nipple with less than fully opaque covering. Showing of any other part of the anatomy defined under nude or state of nudity shall constitute being nude or in a state of nudity. 
    Simulated nudity means a state of dress in which any device or covering, exposed to view, is worn that simulates any part of the genitals, pubic region, or areola of the female breast. 
    Specified anatomical areas means areas that include: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft or the human female areola or nipple; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified criminal act means any of the following offenses as defined by the state penal code enumerated below or any other state or federal laws addressing similar or related offenses below: 
(1)  Chapter 21 sexual offenses. 
a.  Public lewdness. 
b.  Indecent exposure. 
c.  Indecency with a child. 
d.  Improper photography or visual recording. 
(2)  Chapter 22 assaultive offenses. 
a.  Sexual assault. 
b.  Aggravated sexual assault. 
(3)  Chapter 25 offenses against the family: Prohibited sexual conduct. 
(4)  Chapter 43 public indecency. 
a.  Prostitution. 
b.  Promotion of prostitution. 
c.  Aggravated promotion of prostitution. 
d.  Compelling prostitution. 
e.  Obscenity. 
f.  Sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to minor. 
g.  Sexual performance by a child. 
h.  Possession of child pornography. 
Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the above offenses. 
    Specified sexual activities means sex acts normal or perverted, actual or simulated, of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy. These activities include, but are not limited to the following: bestiality, erotic or sexual stimulation with objects or mechanical devises, acts of human anilingus, cunnilingus, fellatio, flagellation, masturbation, sadism, sadomasochism, sexual intercourse, sodomy, or any excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth above with any person of the premises. This definition shall include apparent sexual stimulation of another person's genitals whether clothed or unclothed. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal devices which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of the law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
    Video, sexually oriented, refers to any motion pictures, movies, films, videotapes, CD-ROMs, DVDs, computer images, slides, sound recordings, other magnetic media or electrical or electronic reproductions of anything that is or may be used as a means of communication that is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Video viewing arcade, sexually oriented, means a building or any portion of a building wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any other form of consideration, electronically-, electrically-, or mechanically-controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Video viewing kiosk or booth, sexually oriented, means any kiosk, booth, cubicle, stall or compartment that is designed, constructed, or used to hold or seat customers and is used for presenting videos or viewing publications by any photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital, or other means or medium (including, but not limited to, film, video or magnetic tape, laser disc, CD-ROMs, books, DVDs, magazines or periodicals) to show images of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by customers therein. The terms "booth," "arcade booth," "preview booth," and "video arcade booth" shall be synonymous with the term "sexually oriented video viewing kiosk or booth." 
(Ord. No. 2002, § 2, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 4-3. - Location. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,500 feet of: 
(1)  Any protected land use as defined in this chapter; 
(2)  Any recreational facility as defined in this chapter; 
(3)  A lot devoted to residential use; or 
(4)  Another sexually oriented business. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest property line of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted to the nearest property line of the premises of any premises, facility, or land listed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  These location restrictions can be waived only by vote of the city council after a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 5-8-2012) 
Secs. 4-4-4-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 4-25. - License required. 
(a)  A license for a sexually oriented business shall be required for the following sexually oriented business uses, or conversion of an existing business to one which is a sexually oriented business: 
(1)  Sexually oriented media store. 
(2)  Sexually oriented retail store. 
(3)  Sexually oriented motion picture theater. 
(4)  Sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub. 
(b)  No other type of sexually oriented business shall be granted a license to operate within the city. 
(c)  It is unlawful for a person to establish or operate a sexually oriented business: 
(1)  Without having obtained a sexually oriented business license under the provisions of this article; 
(2)  During such time as a sexually oriented business license has expired or has been suspended or revoked; or 
(3)  In violation of any provision of this article. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to manage or provide entertainment within a sexually oriented business: 
(1)  Without having obtained a sexually oriented business manager or entertainer license as provided under this article; 
(2)  During such time as a sexually oriented business manager or entertainer license has expired or has been suspended or revoked; or 
(3)  In violation of any provision of this article. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to perform any work, service or entertainment directly related to the operation of an unlicensed sexually oriented business. 
(f)  It shall be prima facie evidence that a sexually oriented business has not obtained a sexually oriented business license if such business fails to post the license in the manner required herein. 
(g)  It shall be prima facie evidence that any person who performs any business, service or entertainment in a sexually oriented business had knowledge that such business license is not posted in the manner required herein. 
(h)  A license issued under this article shall be issued for only one sexually oriented use or position and to only the person listed on the application. Any change in the type of sexually oriented business use or position shall invalidate the license and require the licensee to obtain a new license for the change in use or position. 
(Ord. No. 2002, § 4, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 4-26. - License application fees. 
(a)  An owner, operator, or lessee of a sexually oriented business, new manager, or entertainers shall be required to secure a license annually. Any sexually oriented business shall be required to secure a license by paying to the city an annual inspection and sexually oriented business license fee as set from time to time by the city council and in the city fee schedule. 
(b)  No application shall be processed without the required application fee paid in full at the time of application submission. Fees are nonrefundable. 
(Ord. No. 2002, § 5, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 4-27. - Procedure. 
(a)  Application filing and content. All applications for a sexually oriented business license shall be made with the city clerk and shall provide the following information: 
(1)  A diagram of the business's interior premises configuration, noting specific use of each space, square footages, walls or partitions, and total floor area of the building, drawn to a measurable scale of one inch equals four feet with all dimensions notated; 
(2)  The name of the sexually oriented business and identification of the type of sexually oriented business proposed (sexually oriented media store, sexually oriented retail store, sexually oriented motion picture theatre, or sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub); 
(3)  If the property owner is other than the applicant, the name of the property owner and statement signed by the property owner stating that applicant has entered into a contract to acquire, lease or otherwise control the site or structure for use as a sexually oriented business; 
(4)  The applicant's name, any aliases, mailing address for receipt of notices, home address, home and office telephone numbers, occupation, date and place of birth, driver's license and social security number, and tax identification number; all information required of the applicant shall also be required by the applicant's spouse; 
(5)  If the applicant is an entity other than an individual, each individual who has a ten percent or greater interest in the entity proposing to own or operate the business must provide the same information as the individual applicant and sign the license application as an applicant; 
(6)  Any conviction for any felony or for any misdemeanors involving prostitution, obscenity or controlled substance, indicating the type of crime and the date and place of conviction; and 
(7)  A statement signed under oath by the applicant and the applicant's spouse that the applicant and applicant's spouse have personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct; that the applicant and spouse grant permission to the city to perform any necessary background checks on persons or businesses listed on the application; and that the applicant and spouse have read all provisions of this Code regulating sexually oriented businesses. 
(b)  Fees. Each application shall be accompanied by payment of the appropriate application fee. License fees shall not be refundable. 
(c)  Review. 
(1)  Within ten working days of receipt, the city clerk shall notify the applicant whether or not the application for the sexually oriented business license is determined complete. In the event the application is determined incomplete, the notification to the applicant shall include a written explanation of the reasons why the application is incomplete. 
(2)  Failure to provide information and documentation required on the application for a sexually oriented business license shall constitute an incomplete application and the application shall not be processed. 
(3)  Upon receipt of a complete application, the city clerk shall immediately transmit a copy of the application to the fire/EMS director, police chief and code enforcement office. Not later than 30 calendar days from the date the application is determined to be complete, the police department, fire department, and code enforcement office shall report the results of their investigation to the city clerk. The reports shall include the following: 
a.  It shall be the duty of the police department to perform background checks on the applicants for the sexually oriented business license to determine whether the information contained in the application is true and correct and whether or not the applicant complies with the criteria for holding a sexually oriented business license. 
b.  It shall be the duty of the fire department to determine whether the structure identified in the application for the sexually oriented business meets the standards of the applicable fire code. 
c.  It shall be the duty of the code enforcement office to determine whether the structure identified in the application for the sexually oriented business meets the building code, and exterior and interior building standards required by sexual oriented businesses. 
(d)  Approval or denial. The city clerk shall approve and issue the sexually oriented business license required hereunder to an applicant within 45 calendar days after receipt of a complete application and the applicant shall be notified in writing of the city clerk's decision within five working days thereof, unless the city clerk finds one or more of the following to be true, in which case the application shall be denied: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to provide information for issuance of the license or gave false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application form; 
(2)  The applicant is under 18 years of age; all applicants shall provide documentation issued by a state or federal agency bearing the applicant's date of birth and photographs as proof that the applicant is not under the age of 18; 
(3)  The applicant or spouse has been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or received an order for deferred adjudication of, any felony within the past five years or any misdemeanor within the past three years where such felony or misdemeanor violation constitutes a specified criminal act as defined by the ordinance; the fact that the applicant or spouse has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the application; 
(4)  The applicant or spouse has been convicted of an offense under this article or its predecessor within the past three years; 
(5)  The applicant or spouse has had a sexually oriented business license, or comparable license, of any type revoked within the past five years or one suspended within the past three years, immediately preceding the date of the application; the fact that the applicant or spouse has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the application; 
(6)  The applicant or spouse has held, within the three years immediately preceding the date of the application, an ownership, operational or a managerial position at a sexually oriented business that has demonstrated an inability to operate in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers; 
(7)  The applicant or spouse owes delinquent city taxes or assessments or other financial obligations to the city and no arrangements satisfactory to the city manager have been made for the payment of such debts or obligations; 
(8)  The applicant's business premises does not comply with or meet the requirements of the applicable governmental licensing, zoning, building, fire, health and property maintenance ordinances or codes, provided that upon a showing that the premises meets the requirements and that the applicant is otherwise qualified, the application shall be eligible for reconsideration; or 
(9)  The license fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(e)  Provisional license. If the city clerk is unable to act on the license application within the required time period following a determination of completeness, he shall notify the applicant in writing and issue a provisional license, which shall expire following approval of the application or denial of the application and final disposition of the appeal proceedings as provided in this article. The provision of this article shall fully apply to a provisional license. 
(f)  Information on license. The approved sexually oriented business license shall include the license number, name of the license holder, the date of issuance and expiration, the address of the sexually oriented business, and a statement that the license is not transferrable. 
(g)  Posting. The approved sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the sexually oriented business's entrance so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2002, § 6, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 4-28. - Manager or entertainer license. 
(a)  All applications for a manager or entertainer license related to a sexually oriented business shall be made with the city clerk. 
(b)  No application for a manager or an entertainer license shall be accepted by the city clerk prior to licensing of the sexually oriented business for which the manager or entertainer license is applicable. 
(c)  All completed applications for a manager or entertainer license related to a sexually oriented business shall provide the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, any aliases, mailing address for receipt of notices, home address, home and office telephone numbers, occupation, date and place of birth and social security number, and tax identification number; 
(2)  The name and address of each sexually oriented business where the applicant intends to work and a valid copy of the current sexually oriented business license for each of the sexually oriented business in which the manager or entertainer proposes to work or perform; and 
(3)  A statement signed under oath by the applicant that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct; that the applicant grants permission to the city to perform any necessary background checks on the applicant; and that the applicant has read all provisions of the city code of ordinances regulating sexually oriented businesses. 
The application must be accompanied by payment of the appropriate license fee. 
(d)  The city clerk shall approve and issue the manager or entertainer license required hereunder to an applicant within 45 calendar days after receipt of a complete application, unless the city clerk finds one or more of the following to be true, in which case the application shall be denied: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to provide information required for issuance of the license or gave false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application form; 
(2)  The applicant is under 18 years of age; all applicants shall provide documentation issued by a state or federal agency bearing the applicants' date of birth and photographs as proof that the applicant is not under the age of 18; 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or received an order for deferred adjudication of, any felony within the past five years or any misdemeanor within the past three years where such felony or misdemeanor violation constitutes a specified criminal act as defined by this article; the fact that the applicant has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant; 
(4)  The applicant has been convicted of an offense under this article or is predecessor within the past three years; 
(5)  The applicant has had a sexually oriented manager or entertainer license, or comparable license, of any type revoked within the past five years or one suspended within the past three years, immediately preceding the date of application; the fact that the applicant has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant; 
(6)  The applicant has held, within the three years immediately preceding the date of application, an ownership, operational or managerial position at a sexually oriented business that has demonstrated an inability to operate in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers; 
(7)  The applicant owes delinquent city taxes or assessments for other financial obligations to the city and no arrangements satisfactory to the city manager have been made for the payment of such debts or obligations; or 
(8)  The license fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(e)  Application processing; manager or entertainer license. 
(1)  Within ten working days of receipt, the city clerk shall notify the applicant whether or not the application for the manager or entertainer license related to a sexually oriented business is determined complete. In the event the application is determined incomplete, the notification to the applicant shall include a written explanation of the reasons why the application is incomplete. 
(2)  Failure to provide information and documentation required on the application for a manager or entertainer license shall constitute an incomplete application and shall not be processed. 
(3)  Within 45 calendar days from the date the application is determined to be complete, the city clerk shall approve or disapprove the application for a manager or entertainer license. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the city clerk's decision within a time period of five working days thereof. 
(4)  If the city clerk is unable to act on the license application within the required time period following a determination of completeness, he shall notify the applicant in writing and issue a provisional license, which shall expire following approval of the application or denial of the application and final disposition of the appeal proceedings as provided in this article. The provisions of this article shall fully apply to a provisional license. 
(f)  Information on license. The approved manager or entertainer license shall include the license number, name of the license holder, including any stage name, licensee's photograph, the date of issuance and expiration, the addresses of the sexually oriented businesses where such license is applicable, and a statement that the license is not transferrable. 
(g)  Posting. A valid copy of the manager's license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business when that manager is on duty. A valid copy of the entertainer's license shall not be posted but shall be available on site within the office of the sexually oriented business for inspection at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2002, § 7, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 4-29. - License terms and renewal. 
(a)  License terms and expiration. 
(1)  All licenses issued under this article shall be issued for a period of one year and are required to be renewed annually. 
(2)  No license issued under this article shall be transferable to another person or entity. 
(3)  All licenses issued under this article shall expire on the last day of the calendar month during which the licenses were issued or renewed during the previous year. 
(b)  License renewal. 
(1)  All applications for license renewal shall be submitted to the city clerk no earlier than 30 calendar days prior to the date of expiration. 
(2)  A license that is expired by more than 30 calendar days shall be subject to the same license review procedures and criteria required of any applicant applying for a new license. 
(3)  If an application for renewal of a license has been submitted and accepted as complete by the city clerk, the licensee may operate under the existing license until issuance or a renewed license. 
(4)  The city clerk shall approve the license renewal within 30 calendar days after receipt of a complete renewal application, unless the city clerk finds one or more of the following to be true (also applicable to the applicant's spouse if a renewal for a sexually oriented business license), in which case the application shall be denied: 
a.  The applicant has failed to provide information required for renewal of the license or gave false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application form; 
b.  During the term of the existing license or its renewal period, the applicant has been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or received an order for deferred adjudication of, any felony or misdemeanor violation that constitutes a specified criminal act as defined by this article; the fact that the applicant has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the application; 
c.  During the term of the existing license or its renewal period, the applicant has been convicted of an offense under this article; 
d.  During the term of the existing license or its renewal period, the applicant had a sexually oriented business license, or comparable license, of any type revoked; the fact that the applicant has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the application; 
e.  During the term of the existing license or its renewal period, the applicant has held an ownership, operational or a managerial position at a sexually oriented business that has demonstrated an inability to operate in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers; 
f.  The applicant owes delinquent city taxes or assessments or other financial obligations to the city and no arrangements satisfactory to the city manager have been made for the payment of such debts or obligations; 
g.  The applicant's business premises does not comply with or meet the requirements of the applicable governmental licensing, zoning, building, fire, health and property maintenance ordinance or codes, provided that upon a showing that the premises meets the requirements and that the applicant is otherwise qualified, the application shall be eligible for reconsideration; or 
h.  The licensee fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(c)  Application processing of license renewal. 
(1)  Within five working days of receipt, the city clerk shall notify the applicant whether or not the license renewal application is determined complete. In the event the application is determined incomplete, the notification to the applicant shall include a written explanation of the reasons why the application is incomplete. 
(2)  Failure to provide information and documentation required on the application shall constitute an incomplete application and shall not be processed. 
(3)  Within 30 calendar days from the date the application is determined to be complete, the city clerk shall approve or disapprove the application for renewal of the license. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the city clerk's decision within a time period of five working days thereof. 
(4)  If the city clerk is unable to act on the license application within the required time period following a determination of completeness, he shall notify the applicant in writing and issue a provisional license, which shall expire following approval of the application or denial of the application and final disposition of the appeal proceedings as provided in this article. The provisions of this article shall fully apply to a provisional license. 
(d)  Information on license. The renewed license shall contain the same information required to be shown on the original license. 
(Ord. No. 2002, § 8, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 4-30. - License suspension. 
(a)  The police chief shall suspend a license issued under this article for the following reasons: 
(1)  Licensee operated the sexually oriented business or performed sexually oriented entertainment in a location not approved for such activity. 
(2)  Licensee violated any requirement of the city zoning regulations related to the regulation of sexually oriented business. 
(3)  Licensee failed to maintain on site a current list of all employees (contract or otherwise) along with their completed employment application and photo readily accessible for inspection within the premises. 
(4)  Licensee refused city or other governmental agency access to the premises and records. 
(5)  Licensee transferred a license issued under this article to another person or entity. 
(6)  Licensee allowed a person under the age of 18 years in or on the premises. 
(7)  Licensee allowed a person to appear in a state of semi-nudity or nudity or in a state of simulated nudity on the premises. 
(8)  Licensee reconfigured the interior of the premises without approval from the city. 
(9)  Licensee operated the business without a licensed manager on duty during the time the business was opened to the public. 
(10)  Licensee was delinquent in payment to the city for ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business. 
(11)  Licensee demonstrated an inability to operate or manage the business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(12)  Licensee violated any of the standards of conduct and operation under this article. 
(13)  Licensee or manager of the business has been charged with any disqualifying offense, or any employee of the business being charged with any disqualifying offense in connection with the business. This suspension period shall coincide with the time during which the charges remain pending. 
(14)  Business has knowingly employed a person who has been convicted of any disqualifying offense in connection with a sexually oriented business, unless the conviction occurred at least three years prior to the date of this employment; provided that if the person was incarcerated in a penal facility in connection with the conviction, then the three-year period shall run from the date of release from incarceration. 
(15)  Licensee, manager or employee has engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises or allowed intoxicated persons on the business premises. 
(16)  Licensee, manager or employee refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises. 
(17)  Licensee, manager or employee permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises. 
(18)  Licensee, manager or employee demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(b)  The police chief may suspend a license issued under this article for a period not to exceed 60 days. 
(c)  A licensee subject to suspension shall have the right to appeal the suspension under the procedures provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2002, § 9, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 4-31. - License revocation. 
(a)  The police chief shall revoke a license issued under this article for the following reasons: 
(1)  The licensee's license has been suspended more than twice during a 12-month period; 
(2)  The licensed business was operated during a period of time when the license was suspended; 
(3)  A licensee omitted or gave false or misleading information on the license application, including, previous license revocation or suspensions, or convictions or deferred adjudication for misdemeanors and felonies constituting a specified criminal act; the fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license; 
(4)  A licensee has been convicted of, or received an order for deferred adjudication for, a felony or misdemeanor constituting a specified criminal act; 
(5)  A licensee or an employee has allowed possession, use, or sale of a controlled substance on the premises; 
(6)  A licensee or an employee has allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(7)  A licensee or an employee has allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as it is defined in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 21.01; or 
(8)  On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person committed specified criminal act in or on the licensee's premises. 
(b)  The police chief shall revoke a license issued under this article for a period of one year. 
(c)  A licensee subject to revocation shall have the right to appeal the revocation under the procedures provided in this article. 
(d)  A licensee that has had a license revoked shall be subject to the same license criteria required of any applicant applying for a new license. 
(e)  All premises used in connection with sexually oriented businesses shall be periodically inspected by the chief of police for compliance with the requirements of this section: 
(1)  Separate toilet facilities for men and women shall be provided on the premises. 
(2)  Persons under the age of 18 shall not be permitted on the premises of the business. 
(3)  Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold or provided on the premises of the business except in compliance with a current valid license or permit issued by the state alcoholic beverage commission. 
(4)  For businesses where no alcoholic beverages are sold or provided, the business shall not operate between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on a Sunday or between 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any other day. For businesses where alcoholic beverages are sold or provided, the business shall not operate at any time when the sale of alcoholic beverages is not prohibited. No customer shall be permitted to enter upon or remain on the business premises at any time other than during the permitted hours of operation. 
(5)  The business shall not have any bedroom, sleeping quarters, residence or living quarters on the premises of the business. 
(6)  The business hours of the premises shall be plainly posted at each entrance to the business. 
(7)  Doors to individual customer service areas, rooms, viewing booths, or cubicles shall not be capable of being locked. 
(8)  Massage therapists shall wear clothing that covers the anus, female breast, and the entire genitals during the performing of massage therapy. 
(Ord. No. 2002, § 10, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 4-32. - Appeal of license denial, suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Appeal. The applicant may appeal an unfavorable decision of the city clerk or police chief by filing a written petition with the city clerk requesting a hearing on the denial, suspension, or revocation of the license within ten calendar days of the date the applicant receives notification of the city clerk or police chief's decision. The city council shall serve as the appeals board. The appeal shall be scheduled within 20 calendar days of the date the petition is received in the office of the city clerk. The city clerk shall give written notice to the applicant of the time and place for the hearing on the applicant's appeal at least ten calendar days prior to the scheduled date of hearing. 
(b)  Provisional license. During the appeal of a license denial, suspension, or revocation, the applicant shall be permitted to operate with a provisional license until the final disposition of the appeal proceedings before the city council. The provisions of this article shall fully apply to a provisional license. 
(c)  Deferring action on proceedings. If the applicant has filed an appeal with the zoning board of adjustments to contest the decision of the building official regarding any standard governing a sexually oriented business, or a variance request by the applicant is pending before the board, the city council may defer action on the license application pending resolution of the appeal or variance request by the board, but shall take up the matter at the first regular meeting of the city council following the board's decision. 
(d)  Decision. The city council shall issue a decision with findings within ten calendar days after any hearing held in accordance with this section. The decision on appeal shall be governed by the same standards as that for the original decision-maker. The minutes of the city council meeting shall show the action taken on the license, and if the city council acts favorably on the appeal of the license, the city council shall direct the city clerk to issue the license. 
(e)  Notification of decision. If the appeal of the license denial, suspension or revocation is denied, the applicant shall be immediately notified by registered or certified mail to the address provided on the application, and the letter of notification shall state the basis for such denial. 
(f)  Judicial review. Upon denial of the appeal of the license denial, suspension, or revocation by the city council, an applicant may seek judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 2002, § 11, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 4-33. - Inspection of premises. 
    Any sexually oriented business shall be deemed to have consented to periodic entry into and inspection of the business premises by appropriate city officials and inspection of only those business records necessary for the purpose of determining whether such business and persons are in compliance with this Code. This entry and inspection shall take place at any time the business is occupied or open for business. 
(Ord. No. 2002, § 12, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 4-34. - Standard of conduct and operation. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business, or any owner, manager, server, entertainer or employee thereof, or any customer or any sexually oriented business, while on or about the premises of the business, to fail to adhere to the standards of conduct and operation: 
(b)  Standards applicable to all sexually oriented businesses. The following standards apply to all sexually oriented business: 
(1)  Establishment license. All sexually oriented businesses shall post the license issued under this article in a conspicuous, easily viewable location, at eye level, at the main cash register for the business and lighted in a manner for ease of inspection. 
(2)  Manager on duty. All sexually oriented businesses shall have a licensed manager on duty at all times the business is open to the public for any purpose and the manager's name shall be posted in a conspicuous, easily viewable location, at eye level, at the main cash register for the business and lighted in a manner for ease of inspection. 
(3)  Employee records. All sexually oriented businesses shall maintain a current list of all employees (contract or otherwise) along with their completed employment application and photo readily accessible for inspection within the premises. 
(4)  Licenses available for managers and entertainers. Each manager issued a license under this article shall, at all times when on the premises of the licensed business, have said license in his possession. The license for each entertainer shall be retained for ready inspection on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
(5)  Age restriction. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted on the premises of any sexually oriented business. 
(6)  Interior observation. The interior of all sexually oriented businesses shall be configured in such a manner that offers and unobstructed view from the manager's station of every area of the premises, excluding restrooms. 
(7)  Restrooms. No restroom may contain any video equipment. 
(8)  Security cameras. Parking areas surrounding the sexually oriented businesses shall be continually monitored and the recordings from security cameras shall be continually monitored and the recordings from security cameras shall be maintained for a period of at least 30 days. 
(9)  Exterior observation. The premises of all sexually oriented businesses shall be designed as to ensure that the interior of the premises is not observable from the exterior of the building. 
(10)  Exterior display. No sexually oriented business shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of sexually oriented entertainers engaged in sexually oriented entertainment or any depiction relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any exterior source by display, decoration, sign, show window or other openings. 
(11)  Specified criminal acts and specified sexual activities prohibited. No owner, manager, employee, independent contractor, server, entertainer or customer shall engage in any specified criminal act or any specified sexual activity on the premises of the business. 
(12)  Semi-nude or nude or simulated nudity. No person, including sexually oriented entertainers, shall be semi-nude or in a state of semi-nudity, or nude or in a state of nudity, or in a state of simulated nudity, while on the premises of a sexually oriented business licensed under this article. 
(13)  Posting of age restriction. A sign shall be posted at each entrance to a sexually oriented business stating, "It is unlawful for a person under 18 years old to enter this location." 
(c)  Standards for sexually oriented media stores or retail stores. Sexually oriented media stores or retail stores shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Separate room. If a business offers for sale or rent other media or merchandise, sexually oriented media or merchandise shall be kept in a separate room physically and visually separate from the remainder of the store by an opaque wall reaching at least eight feet high or to the ceiling, whichever is less. 
(2)  Age limit. No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted into a room containing sexually oriented media or sexually oriented merchandise. 
(3)  Access. If a business offers for sale or rent other media or merchandise, access to the room containing sexually oriented media or sexually oriented merchandise shall be through a solid door, accessed by an electronic control device controlled and monitored by a clerk through direct visual control and posted with a sign clearly stating that no one under the age of 18 shall enter the room. 
(4)  Location. If a business offers for sale or rent other media or merchandise, the entrance to the room containing the sexually oriented media or sexually oriented merchandise shall be located so that it is as far as reasonably practicable from media or merchandise likely to be of interest to children. 
(5)  Room size. Any room wherein sexually oriented media or merchandise is offered for sale or rent shall be in an area containing at least 600 square feet and having no walls, dividers, curtains, screens, shades or other similar devices to obscure any part of the room from being monitored by the manager, unless it is to separate the sexually oriented merchandise or media from non-sexually-oriented merchandise or media. 
(6)  On-site entertainment prohibited. At no time shall the store provide any type of sexually oriented onsite entertainment or show any type of sexually oriented electronic imagery on the premises. 
(7)  Displays. No displays of sexually oriented media, merchandise or imager shall be visible from outside the room containing sexually oriented media or merchandise or from the exterior of the business. 
(8)  Lighting. Any business that offers for sale or rent sexually oriented media or sexually oriented merchandise shall be well lit at a lighting level of at least 30 footcandles measured three feet from the floor. 
(9)  Monitoring. Activities in any room having sexually oriented media or sexually oriented merchandise shall be monitored at all times by a store clerk through a video system located at the clerk's counter. 
(d)  Standards for sexually oriented motion picture theaters. Sexually oriented motion picture theaters shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Presentation area. All screenings of motion pictures, videos or other media shall occur in a room open to all customers of the establishment and containing at least 1,000 square feet of floor area. No walls, dividers, curtains, screens, shades or other similar devices shall be used to obscure any part of the screening room. 
(2)  Lighting. The lighting level in the area occupied by customers shall be at least five foot-candles as measured at the floor. 
(3)  Seating. Seating shall consist of individual, theater-style chairs (maximum seat width 20 inches), with solid arms separating the chairs. No couches, benches, portable chairs, beds, loose cushions or mattresses, or other forms of seating shall be provided. Separate spaces for wheelchairs shall be provided in accordance with the applicable provisions of the building code and the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(4)  Sexually oriented merchandise or media. No sexually oriented motion picture theatre shall sell or rent sexually oriented merchandise or media. 
(e)  Standards for a sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub. Sexually oriented cabaret and nightclubs shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Room. All customer-related activities and entertainment shall take place in a room of at least 600 square feet and in a room that has an unobstructed view by all persons from any part of such room. 
(2)  Stage. All sexually oriented entertainment shall take place on stage elevated at least 18 inches above the surrounding floor area, with a minimum area of 90 square feet, and with a horizontal separation of at least 60 inches between the edge of the stage and the nearest space to which customers have access. The horizontal separation shall be physically enforced by a partial wall, rail, or other physical barrier measuring a minimum of four feet in height. 
(3)  Access. The manager or sexually oriented entertainer shall prohibit any person other than a licensed entertainer to occupy the stage area. 
(4)  Tip. All tips for sexually oriented entertainment shall be collected in containers that are accessible to customers. 
(5)  Lighting. The lighting level in the area occupied by customers shall be at least 15 foot-candles as measured three feet from the floor. 
(6)  Seating. Seating shall consist of chairs or open booths. No couches, beds, loose cushions or mattresses, or other forms of seating shall be provided. 
(7)  Sexually oriented merchandise or media. No sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub or motion picture theatre shall sell or rent sexually oriented merchandise or media. 
(8)  Security. At all times the business is open and for an hour after closing, there shall be on site a licensed peace officer employed by the business owner who holds a valid and current license (in good standing) issued by the state commission on law enforcement officer standards and education. The peace officer's duty shall be to assist in maintaining order and to report criminal activity or behavior. 
(Ord. No. 2002, § 13, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 4-35. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The city may enforce this article by any methods not inconsistent with state law and city Charter. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this article commits a Class C misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any person operating a sexually oriented business without a license or with an expired license, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(d)  Any person working as a sexually oriented entertainer or manager of a sexually oriented business without a license or with an expired license, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(e)  Any person violating any other provision of this article, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2002, § 14, 5-8-2012) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq.; alcoholic beverage permit and license fees authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 11.38, 61.36; location restrictions for sale of beer and wine authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.31 et seq.; local option provisions, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 251.71 et seq. 

Sec. 6-1. - License tax. 
    There is levied a license or permit tax or fee of one-half of the state fee on any occupation or undertaking as set out in V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 11.38, whether herein specifically enumerated or not. 
(Code 1973, § 3-1; Ord. No. 283, art. I, § 1, art. III, § 1, 12-31-1935) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local Public Health Reorganization Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 121.001 et seq.; treatment of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.001 et seq.; dangerous dogs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.001 et seq.; Rabies Control Act of 1981, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.001 et seq.; animal health, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 801.001 et seq.; cruelty to livestock animals, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.09; livestock, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 141.001 et seq.; registration of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.031; protection of birds, nests, and eggs, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 64.002 et seq.; vaccination of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.021; restraint of dogs and cats; impoundment, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.033; quarantine of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.042 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means live, vertebrate creatures, domestic or wild. 
    Animal control officer means any person designated by the city who is qualified to perform the duties required by this chapter or state law. 
    Cat means a domestic feline of either sex, including one neutered or sterilized. 
    Dog means a domestic canine of either sex, including one neutered or sterilized. 
    Domestic animal includes all species of animals commonly and universally accepted as being domesticated. 
    Fowl includes chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, peacocks, pheasants and any other member of the gallinaceous bird species or family, including, but being not limited to, other domesticated or wild animals. 
    Harboring means the act of keeping and caring for an animal or of providing a premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter or care for a period of three days. 
    Owner means any person who has the right of property in an animal or who harbors an animal or allows an animal to remain about his premises for a period of three days. 
    Pet animal includes dogs and cats. 
    Rabies vaccination means the vaccination of a dog, cat or other domestic animal with an antirabies vaccine approved by the state department of health and the United States Department of Agriculture and administered by a veterinarian licensed by this state. 
    Residence, as related to the keeping of dogs and cats, includes any building designed for or used as a dwelling, whether temporary or permanent. 
    Restraint means the securing of an animal by a leash or lead or by physical confinement within the real property limits of its owners. 
    Running at large means an animal not under the physical control of the owner or his authorized representative. An animal within an automobile or other vehicle of its owner shall not be deemed "running at large." The term "running at large" includes any animal staked, tied or hobbled in such a manner as to allow such animal to go or get upon private property without authorization, adjacent public sidewalk, street, alley or other public way. 
    Stock pen includes any lot or pen in which more than two head of livestock are kept. 
    Stray animal means any animal for which there is no identifiable owner or harborer. 
    Vicious animal means any animal that commits an unprovoked attack upon a person on public or private property or in a public place. 
    Wild animal includes all species of animals which exist in a natural unconfined state and are usually not domesticated. 
(Code 1973, §§ 4-1, 4-20; Ord. No. 1335, 11-9-1982; Ord. No. 1868, 2-8-2005) 
Sec. 8-2. - Chief of police to enforce. 
    The chief of police or his designee is designated as the local health authority for purposes of enforcing rabies regulations and as the animal control officer within the city limits for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 4-26; Ord. No. 1335, 11-9-1982) 
State Law reference- Animal control officer defined, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 829.001. 
Sec. 8-3. - Interference with the animal control officer. 
    It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, or prevent the animal control officer or his designee in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 4-27; Ord. No. 1335, 11-9-1982) 
Sec. 8-4. - Animals running at large. 
(a)  Nuisance. It is unlawful for any owner to harbor any dog, cat, or other pet animal that by any sound or cry or other activity shall disturb the peace, comfort or property of the inhabitants of the neighborhood, and such disturbance is declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  Confinement during estrus. Any unspayed female dog or cat in the stage of estrus (heat) shall be confined during such period of time in a house, building or secure enclosure and the area of enclosure shall be so constructed that no other dog or cat may gain access to the confined animal. Owners who do not comply shall be ordered to remove the animal in heat to a boarding kennel or veterinary hospital. All expenses incurred as a result of the confinement shall be paid by the owner. Failure to comply with the removal order of the animal control officer shall be a violation of this chapter and the dog or cat will then be impounded as prescribed in this chapter. 
(c)  Injured animals. Animals injured on public property may be impounded and given adequate veterinary medical treatment pending notification of the owner. If the injured animal is treated or impounded, the owner of such animal shall be liable for all expenses of the treatment or the impoundment. 
(d)  Restraint of pets and domestic animals. Pets and domestic animals shall be prohibited from running at large. No owner of a pet or domestic animal shall fail to keep such animal under restraint at all times. 
(Code 1973, § 4-23; Ord. No. 1335, 11-9-1982; Ord. No. 1450, 1-13-1987) 
State Law reference- Authority of municipality to impound stray dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.033; authority of municipalities to require restraint of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.033. 
Sec. 8-5. - Vicious animals. 
(a)  Harboring prohibited; authority to impound. No person shall own or harbor a vicious animal within the city. Such an animal shall be impounded as a public nuisance. If impoundment of the animal running at large cannot be made with safety to the animal control officer or other persons, the animal may be destroyed without notice to the owner or harborer. 
(b)  Affidavit before municipal judge; procedure. Whenever affidavit shall be made before the judge of the municipal court that any dog has bitten, attempted to bite, or attacked any person in a vicious manner in the city, and it shall appear that the person so bitten, attempted to be bitten, attacked or attempted to be attacked, in a vicious manner as provided in this chapter, was not at the time trespassing upon the property of the owner and not otherwise at fault, then the judge of the municipal court shall upon proof thereof find the owner guilty of violating this section. In addition, if it is proven that the dog has bitten any person, the judge may direct the owner of the dog to present the dog to a veterinarian or other public health authorities for rabies observation. If such dog owner fails or refuses to do so within 24 hours after receiving the order, the failure or refusal shall constitute a separate violation of this section. 
(c)  Guard dogs. It is unlawful to place or maintain any dog that has been specifically trained to attack in any area for the protection of persons or property unless the dog is physically confined to a specific area, or is under complete and absolute control. 
(Code 1973, § 4-24; Ord. No. 1335, 11-9-1982) 
Sec. 8-6. - Impounded animals. 
(a)  Impoundment. Animals owned or harbored in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance or law of this state shall be taken into custody by an animal control officer or other designated official and impounded. Stray animals shall be similarly impounded. 
(b)  Animal shelter. A suitable animal shelter shall be provided for the purpose of boarding and caring for any animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter. The facility will conform to requirements of the state department of health. 
(c)  Removal of animals from animal shelter. It is unlawful for any person to remove any impounded animal from the animal shelter without the consent of the animal control officer or designated official or agency. 
(d)  Removal of biting dogs and cats from confinement. The impoundment of dogs and cats that have inflicted human bites shall be for a period of ten days for observation and shall not be terminated until consent from the proper officer or agency is secured. Confinement shall be at the owner's expense. 
(e)  Disposition of impounded unvaccinated dogs and cats. The owner of a dog or cat that has not been properly vaccinated for rabies may reclaim the dog or cat within three days of pickup by paying to the city a pickup fee and a fee for food and housing per day or part of day thereafter, as set from time to time by the council in the manual of fees and service charges of the city plus having the dog or cat vaccinated against rabies at the owner's expense. This does not prohibit charges being billed for harboring a nonvaccinated animal. Any animal impounded under this provision for over three days may be euthanized by the city. 
(f)  Disposition of impounded vaccinated dogs and cats. Rabies vaccinated dogs and cats impounded under this section shall be held at the animal shelter for a period of not less than three days after notice to owner, if the owner is known, unless reclaimed by the owner. Dogs and cats whose owner is unknown and cannot be reasonably determined shall be held for a period of not less than three days. The animal control officer will attempt to notify the animal owner of such impoundment as per information on the metal tag attached to its collar or harness. The owner may reclaim the animal upon payment to the city of a pickup fee and a fee for food and housing per day or part of day thereafter as provided in the city fee schedule. Any animal impounded four days or more may be euthanized by the city. Euthanization does not relieve the animal owner of liability for costs associated with impoundment or in any way affect proceedings and penalties for violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 4-25; Ord. No. 1335, 11-9-1982) 
State Law reference- Treatment of impounded animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.002; animal shelters, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 823.001 et seq.; minimum standards for quarantine and impoundment facilities, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.051; authority of municipality to impound stray dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.033. 
Secs. 8-7-8-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIVESTOCK AND FOWL 

Sec. 8-31. - Stock at large. 
    It is unlawful for any person knowingly to permit any horse, jack, jennet, cattle, sheep, goat, or other livestock owned or controlled by such person to run at large within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 4-2; Ord. No. 1868, 2-8-2005) 
Sec. 8-32. - Livestock lots or pens permitted. 
    It is unlawful for any person to establish or maintain any horse lot, mule lot or stock pen within a distance of 300 feet of any private residence unit in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 4-3; Ord. No. 1868, 2-8-2005) 
Sec. 8-33. - Swine prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for anyone to keep live swine within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 4-4; Ord. No. 1868, 2-8-2005) 
Sec. 8-34. - Keeping of fowl restricted. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to keep, possess or maintain in the city any fowl, or any pens, enclosures or other structure in which any such fowl are kept or possessed, within 50 feet of any church, school, day care center, hospital, nursing home, or place of business, and 25 feet from a residence, other than the residence of the keeper, possessor or owner of such fowl. 
(b)  The distance in feet is to be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of any pen, enclosure or other such structure in which fowl are kept to the nearest point of such actual residence, or place of human habitation, church, school, day care center, hospital, nursing home or business. 
(c)  Such enclosure or pen shall be located a minimum of five feet from the property line of the keeper, possessor or owner of such fowl. 
(d)  It is unlawful to keep, locate, possess or maintain upon any property or enclosure more than 20 fowl per parcel of land one acre or less in size, or 20 fowl per each additional acre, of any combination of chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks or other fowl. 
(e)  All fowl within the city limits shall be kept in an enclosure or pen constructed of material designed to keep fowl from escaping from the enclosure or pen. It is unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, maintain or permit any person to keep, harbor, possess, maintain or permit the presence on any lot or parcel of land within the city more than one of any fowl of any kind, sex or description for each ten square feet of ground area available for such purpose. 
(f)  Whenever and wherever fowl are kept, located and maintained within the city limits, the premises upon which the fowl are located shall be kept in such a manner as to prevent or eliminate the existence of any infectious type disease, or conditions conducive to causing same, or any odor offensive to persons. 
(g)  Fowl or livestock that are part of a supervised youth project, such as FFA, 4-H or others, may be considered for an exception to the provisions listed in this article on the authority of the animal control officer and under conditions approved by the animal control officer and police chief. 
(Code 1973, §§ 4-5, 4-6; Ord. No. 1868, 2-8-2005) 
Sec. 8-35. - Nuisances. 
    Any fowl or livestock shall be declared a public nuisance, and the keeping of such animals deemed unlawful, if: 
(1)  The animals are allowed or permitted to run at large; 
(2)  By loud, unusual, or untimely crowing, cackling, honking, gobbling, or other sound, the animals cause the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or the occupants of the adjacent premises to be disturbed or render the enjoyment of life and property uncomfortable or interfere with public peace and comfort; 
(3)  The owner or person in control of the animals endangers the public health or annoys neighbors by allowing the accumulation of droppings and putrescible materials that cause foul or offensive odors; or 
(4)  The owner or person in control of the animals allows any condition to exist that causes a substantial or unreasonable interference with the use and enjoyment of another's property. 
(Code 1973, § 4-7; Ord. No. 1868, 2-8-2005) 
Secs. 8-36-8-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS AND CATS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of local governments to require registration of dogs and cats and collect fees therefor, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.031; authority of municipality to impound stray dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.033; authority of municipalities to require restraint of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.033. 

Sec. 8-59. - Vaccination. 
(a)  Required. Every owner of a dog or cat four months of age or older shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies and annually thereafter. Any person moving into the city from a location outside of the city shall comply with this article within 30 days after having moved into the city. 
(b)  Rabies vaccination withheld in dog bite cases. If the dog or cat has inflicted a bite on any person or another animal within the last ten days, the owner of the dog or cat shall report such fact to the veterinarian, and no rabies vaccine shall be administered until after the ten-day observation period. 
(c)  Certificate of vaccination. Upon vaccination, the veterinarian shall execute and furnish to the owner of the dog or cat as evidence thereof, a certificate of vaccination. The veterinarian shall retain a duplicate copy. Such certificate shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the vaccinated dog or cat. 
(2)  The date of vaccination. 
(3)  The type of rabies vaccine used. 
(4)  The year and number of the rabies tag. 
(5)  The breed, age, color and sex of the vaccinated dog or cat. 
(d)  Rabies tags. Concurrent with the issuance and delivery of the certificate of vaccination referred to in subsection (c) of this section, the owner of the dog shall cause to be attached to the collar or harness of the vaccinated dog a metal tag, serially numbered to correspond with the vaccination certificate number and bearing the year of issuance and the name of the veterinarian or his business name. Such tag shall be worn by the dog at all times. 
(e)  Duplicate tags. In the event of loss or destruction of the original tag provided in subsection (d) of this section, the owner of the dog shall obtain a duplicate tag. 
(f)  Proof. It is unlawful for any person who owns or harbors a vaccinated dog or cat to fail or refuse to exhibit his copy of the certificate of vaccination upon demand to any person charged with the enforcement of this article. 
(g)  Harboring unvaccinated animals. It is unlawful for any person to harbor any dog or cat which has not been vaccinated against rabies, as provided herein, or which cannot be identified as having a current vaccination certificate. 
(Code 1973, § 4-21; Ord. No. 1335, 11-9-1982) 
State Law reference- Minimum standards for rabies control, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.012; authority of municipalities to adopt local rabies control regulations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.015. 
Sec. 8-60. - Reporting bites from animals susceptible to rabies; related procedure. 
(a)  Duty to report. Any person having knowledge that a dog or cat has bitten a human shall immediately report the incident to the animal control officer, or city police department. 
(b)  Confinement of dogs and cats. Any dog or cat that has bitten a person shall be put under quarantine for observation for a period of ten days from the date of the bite. Such quarantine shall consist of strict confinement in a cage or other secure enclosure that prevents any contact between the quarantined animal and any other animal. The quarantine shall be at a veterinary hospital provided such facility is approved by the state department of health, or at the city animal shelter if designated as an approved facility. Such confinement shall be at the expense of the owner of the animal. Stray dogs or cats whose owner cannot be ascertained shall be confined in the city animal shelter and will be disposed of by the city following the quarantine period. The owner of any dog or cat that has been reported to have inflicted a bite on any person shall on demand produce the dog or cat for impoundment, as prescribed in this section. Refusal to produce the dog or cat constitutes a violation of this section, and each day of such refusal shall constitute a separate and individual violation. 
(c)  Removal of dogs and cats from confinement. It is unlawful for any person to remove from any place of confinement any dog or cat which has been confined as authorized, without the consent of the impounding agency. 
(Code 1973, § 4-22; Ord. No. 1335, 11-9-1982; Ord. No. 1390, 12-11-1984) 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- See chapter 52, Zoning, for provisions regarding building permits. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate housing and other structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001 et seq.; building and rehabilitation codes, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.211 et seq.; verification of builder registration required for issuance of local building permit, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.906; regulation of municipal public buildings and grounds generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 281.001 et seq., 301.001 et seq.; plumbing inspector, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.011; plumbing regulations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.012; dangerous buildings, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.002. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Building and technical codes adopted by reference. 
(a)  The following building and technical codes are adopted by the city subject to those provisions amended or excepted in this chapter, if any: 
(1)  ICC International Building Code, 2000 Edition. 
(2)  ICC International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2000 Edition. 
(3)  ICC International Plumbing Code, 2000 Edition. 
(4)  ICC International Mechanical Code, 2000 Edition. 
(5)  ICC International Fuel Gas Code, 2000 Edition. 
(6)  NFPA National Electrical Code, 2002 Edition. 
(b)  In this section, ICC refers to the International Code Council and NFPA refers to the National Fire Protection Association, publishers of the codes adopted in this section. 
(c)  Subsequent editions or amendments to the adopted publications and state amendments and errata shall not become effective unless specifically adopted by the city council. 
(d)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk and kept on file in the office of the clerk where they shall be available for public inspection. 
Editor's note- See chapter 18, Fire Prevention and Protection, for provisions relative to the city's fire code. 
Sec. 10-2. - Amendments and exceptions to the adopted building code. 
    The ICC International Building Code adopted in this chapter is amended in the following respects: 
(1)  Section 107.1, Chapter 1, Administration of the International Building Code, is amended by adding: 
"In addition to a construction building permit, a temporary housing permit may be authorized for the use, on premises, of a recreational vehicle or manufactured home as a residential unit, provided such use of temporary housing, in residential zoned districts, shall be limited to single family housing for the real property owners only, be located on the permitted property, or on property owned or leased by the permittee adjacent to the permitted property, and be valid for the term of the construction building permit period not to exceed six months, and may be renewed once for a second six-month period. Such temporary housing use shall completely cease upon completion of construction or on the expiration of the time limit stated in the permit whichever occurs first." 
(2)  Section 113, Violation of the International Building Code, is deleted and amended to provide that: 
"Any person who shall violate any provision of this building code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any one of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish or remove any structure in violation thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-6. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the Code is committed or continued." 
(Code 1973, §§ 5-1, 5-2; Ord. No. 924, §§ 1, 2, 14, 7-10-1967; Ord. No. 932, § 1, 8-10-1967; Ord. No. 949, § 1, 12-10-1968; Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 5-12-1971; Ord. No. 1086, 10-11-1973; Ord. No. 1171, § 1, 11-25-1976; Ord. No. 1272, § 1, 8-12-1980; Ord. No. 1420, §§ 1, 2, 12-10-1985; Ord. No. 1612, 11-9-1993; Ord. No. 1667, 1-9-1996; Ord. No. 1749, 11-9-1999; Ord. No. 1798, 5-14-2002) 
Sec. 10-3. - Codes remedial in nature. 
    The city's technical codes are remedial in nature, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment, including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems (herein service systems). 
Sec. 10-4. - Quality control. 
    Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this Code except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
Sec. 10-5. - Liability of city. 
    The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan under the requirements of this Code shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the city nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, that may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
Sec. 10-6. - Conflict of regulations. 
    If sections of the technical codes, this Code, and/or state or federal law or regulation specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. If there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
Sec. 10-7. - Referenced standards. 
    Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
Sec. 10-8. - Requirements not covered by code. 
    Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this of the other technical codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
Sec. 10-9. - Alternate materials and methods. 
    The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
Secs. 10-10-10-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADDITIONAL LOCAL REQUIREMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-37. - Barbed wire fences. 
    It is unlawful for any person to make or erect, or cause to be made or erected, within the city any barbed wire fence, or any fence of similar material, around or upon any lot owned by him or in his charge. 
(Code 1973, § 5-9; Ord. No. 1102, § 1) 
Secs. 10-38-10-62. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRICAL 

Sec. 10-63. - When electrical permit is not required. 
    Notwithstanding any requirement for electrical permits provided in any of the building and technical codes adopted by the city in this chapter, no permit is required for: 
(1)  The installation of electric wiring, devices or equipment installed for or by the electric department of the city, or for or by a public utility corporation operating under a franchise from the city to transmit and sell electric energy, provided that such wiring, devices or equipment are for the use of the electric department or the corporation in its operation as a public utility as provided for in its franchise. 
(2)  The replacement of any electrical fixtures or appliances that requires no change in the electric wiring for such fixture or appliance. 
(3)  The installation of wiring, devices or equipment for communications or any signaling systems operating at 50 volts or less. 
(Code 1973, § 5-27; Ord. No. 1719, 5-12-1998) 
Sec. 10-64. - Electrical work that may be performed by persons not registered as contractors. 
    The following acts, work and conduct shall be expressly permitted in the city without necessity of registration as a contractor under this chapter: 
(1)  Electrical work done by a property owner on property owned and occupied or to be occupied as the property owners homestead; provided, however, that all such work or service shall be subject to permit, inspection and approval in accordance with the terms of this chapter and the codes adopted hereunder. 
(2)  Installation of service entrance only to a manufactured home performed by occupant-homeowner, subject to permit, inspection and approval. 
(3)  Electrical work done by persons engaged by any public service company in the construction and maintenance of their public utility systems. 
(Code 1973, § 5-37; Ord. No. 1719, 5-12-1998) 
Sec. 10-65. - Tampering with public electrical service equipment. 
    It is unlawful for any person to cut, move or attach to any wire, switch or other property belonging to or controlled by any public service corporation or municipal electric department, or cause the same to be done, unless by permission from such corporation or municipal electric department so owning such wire, switch or other property. 
(Code 1973, § 5-30; Ord. No. 1719, 5-12-1998) 
Sec. 10-66. - Liability for damage. 
    This division shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person installing, operating or controlling any electric wiring or electrical apparatus for damages to anyone thereby, or for full and faithful performance of the contract, nor shall the city be held as assuming any liability by reason of the inspection authorized herein or certificate or permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this division. This division shall also not be construed to relieve the electrician of his responsibility for any defective work that may have been concealed or escaped the notice of the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1973, § 5-31; Ord. No. 1719, 5-12-1998) 
Sec. 10-67. - Meters and circuits. 
(a)  The city electric department shall designate the location of the meter. Dwelling meter loops shall be at an outside point which will be readily accessible to meter readers and testers at all times. Meter loops for other than residence occupancy shall be at a point readily accessible to meter readers and testers during all business hours and shall be outside the building except by special permission from the city electric superintendent. 
(b)  Where possible all meter loops shall be so placed and maintained that no meter dial will be more than 61/2 nor less than 51/2 feet above the permanent standing surface below the meter dial. The meter loop location shall provide free space for testing and servicing of not less than 24 inches in front of each meter and not less than 24 inches in width and in no case of less width than the total width of all meters and metering equipment at each location. No meter loop shall be placed in a washroom, toilet room, storage closet or any similar location, or over plumbing fixtures, machinery or other interfering obstructions. 
(c)  Where two or more meter outlets are grouped or are on the same building, each meter outlet shall be neatly and permanently marked to show the location it serves. Where one or more meter outlets are added to a group or on a building, the person making the addition shall identify the old and the added outlets. 
(d)  Electricians shall install the complete meter loop ready to attach the service with the exception of larger customers where the city electric department may install the necessary current or potential transformers. 
(e)  Required service disconnection means shall be readily accessible and located outdoors immediately after the meter, on all services rated at 200 amps or less. 
(Code 1973, § 5-51; Ord. No. 1719, 5-12-1998; Ord. No. 1798, 5-14-2002) 
Secs. 10-68-10-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FUEL GAS 

Sec. 10-91. - Shut off and disconnection for violations and unsafe conditions. 
(a)  At the direction of the gas inspector, the company distributing gas in the city shall refuse to furnish gas or gas service to any house, building or structure in the city, and shall shut off and disconnect its gas supply or gas connection at any time and in any manner when it may appear to the gas inspector that the installation of any house piping, appliances, fixtures or apparatus, or the construction or maintenance of same, is unsafe or in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The gas inspector is authorized and empowered to shut off the gas supply when such conditions appear to exist and shall notify the gas company and consumer of his action, and no person shall again turn on the gas supply except with the permission of the gas inspector; however, nothing herein shall be construed so as to relieve the gas consumer from the obligation of making all gas installations and connections in compliance with the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1973, § 5-83; Ord. No. 1133, § 14, 7-5-1927) 
Sec. 10-92. - Approval of gas inspector required for gas turn-on; issuance of certificate of approval. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any gas company, its agents or employees to turn natural gas into the pipes in any building or on any premises situated in the city until it has been furnished a certificate from the gas inspector as herein provided for. 
(b)  Should the gas inspector find that the gas fixtures and fittings on the premises and in the building have been installed in the manner provided for herein, he shall issue a certificate of approval, the same to be in triplicate, and officially signed by him giving authority for the turning on of natural gas into the pipes in such building and on such premises. One certificate shall be furnished to the gas company supplying natural gas, one to the owner of the premises and building and one to be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1973, §§ 5-84, 5-85; Ord. No. 1133, § 13, 7-5-27) 
Secs. 10-93-10-112. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - UNSAFE BUILDING ABATEMENT CODE 

Sec. 10-113. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building means any structure or part thereof erected for the support, shelter, enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. 
    Building official means the designated authority charged with the administration of the building inspection department, or his duly authorized representative. 
    Code enforcement official means the designated authority charged with enforcement of this division, or his duly authorized representative. 
    Dwelling means any building which contains one or more dwelling units used, intended, or designed to be built, used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied for living purposes. 
    Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
    Habitable room means a space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating, or cooking. Bathrooms, closets, storage or utility rooms, and similar rooms are not considered habitable rooms. 
    Nuisance includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence; 
(2)  Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to others, whether a structure, in a building, on the premises of a building, or lot. This includes any abandoned excavations, wells, shafts, basements or cellars, abandoned refrigerators, appliances, building materials, trash or debris, or structurally unsound structures; 
(3)  That which is dangerous to life or detrimental to health; or 
(4)  Any condition which causes a substantial or unreasonable interference with the use and enjoyment of one's property. 
    Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, or any part thereof. 
    Unsafe building means any building or structure that has any of the following conditions: 
(1)  The building, structure, or portion thereof is liable to fully or partially collapse. 
(2)  The structure or any part thereof was constructed or maintained in violation of any provision of an applicable city building code, or any other applicable ordinance, law, or code of the city, county, or state. 
(3)  Any means of egress or portion thereof that is of inadequate size or arrangement, dilapidated, in a state of disrepair, or inoperable such that means of egress could be rendered unsafe in case of fire or panic. 
(4)  The foundation or any structural members are 25 percent or more damaged, deteriorated, improperly anchored, or stressed, or ineffective in supporting the imposed loads or maintaining proper clearances from finish grade as required by the minimum standards for housing. 
(5)  Any walls or other vertical structural members which list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through its center of gravity falls outside the middle third of its base. 
(6)  The nonsupportive, protective coverings of walls, roofs, ceilings, or floors are 50 percent or more damaged or deteriorated, or ineffective in protecting the structure or inhabitants from weather, vermin, insects, decay, or other causes of structural damage or disease. 
(7)  The structure or any part thereof has been damaged by fire, water, earthquake, wind, vandalism, or other cause to such an extent that it has become either a nuisance or dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(8)  Any structure or part thereof that is in such a condition as to constitute a nuisance. 
(9)  The structure has inadequate lighting, ventilation, or sanitation facilities, as required by state or local authorities for certain occupancies. 
(10)  The structure or any part thereof is designed for, or being used or occupied in the commission of a crime. 
(11)  The structure or any part thereof is a fire hazard, or is substandard, dilapidated, or otherwise unfit for human habitation, and is a hazard to public health, safety, or welfare. 
(12)  Any unsecured unoccupied building. 
(13)  Any residential lot, dwelling or dwelling unit not in full compliance with the city's minimum standards for housing. 
    Unsecured unoccupied building means any structure which currently has no legitimate occupant or tenant and which has missing, unlocked, or inoperable doors, windows, or other unsecured openings into the building through which unauthorized entry can be made. 
(Code 1973, § 5-90.04; Ord. No. 1618, 4-12-1994) 
Sec. 10-114. - Minimum standards for housing; responsibility of owner. 
    No person shall occupy or permit to occupy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating which is not in compliance with any of the following minimum requirements. 
(1)  Property standards. 
a.  All residential lots shall be free of holes, excavations, sharp protrusions, or other objects or conditions reasonably capable of causing injury to a person. 
b.  All wells, cesspools, or cisterns shall be securely covered or closed. 
c.  Proper drainage shall be provided to prevent standing water or flooding on the land. 
d.  All dead trees or tree limbs that are reasonably capable of causing injury shall be removed. 
e.  All water and sewer lines or conduits shall be properly maintained in a clean and sanitary working condition and free of leaks as required by state and local plumbing standards. 
f.  Property shall be kept clear of any open storage of vehicle parts, used tires, ice boxes, refrigerators, water heaters, stoves, ovens, glass, building material, rubbish, rubble, garbage, and similar material. 
g.  In addition, property shall be kept clear of any junked vehicle(s) as defined by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 683. 
(2)  Structural standards. 
a.  In all apartments, apartment houses, dwellings, and dwelling units there shall be provided safe, unobstructed, and adequate means of egress leading to a safe and open area at ground level. Every bedroom shall have at least one window or opening which can easily be opened and facing directly to the outside. The total of openable window or opening area in every bedroom leading outside shall be not less than 5.7 square feet. 
b.  All dwellings and dwelling units shall have appropriate and adequate protection from deterioration, and exposure to the elements, which shall include, but not be limited to, paint, water-proofing, and properly installed siding, wall coverings, roofing, ceilings, flooring, and flashing, without holes, cracks, rot, insect damage, leaks, or any other condition which could cause damage to the structure or parts. 
c.  Railings and flooring for stairs, steps, balconies, porches, and elsewhere shall be maintained and free of holes, rot, cracks, and decay so as to be a safe means of egress in panic or emergency. 
d.  Attics, basements, cellars, and crawl spaces shall be adequately ventilated and properly drained as specified in the city building code. Floor and wall framing members subject to rot or insect damage of any dwelling shall maintain a clearance to ground of not less than 16 inches, except for girders which shall maintain a clearance to ground of not less than ten inches. 
e.  Fireplaces, flues, heat exchangers, chimneys, and other exhaust venting shall be in proper working order and maintain proper clearances from combustible material. 
f.  Broken or missing windows, holes, breaks, and loose surface materials on floors, walls, and ceilings shall be properly repaired or replaced with like materials. 
g.  All exterior doors, windows, skylights and associated locks and hardware shall be weathertight and kept in good working order. 
h.  Ceiling height in any room of any dwelling shall be not less than seven feet from finish floor level. 
(3)  Utility standards. 
a.  Each occupied dwelling unit shall have all required plumbing fixtures properly maintained and connected to the public water and sewer as provided in the city's building and technical codes. 
b.  Each occupied dwelling unit within 300 feet of available electric utility supply shall have all required electrical outlets and equipment connected to such electric supply. 
c.  Heating equipment which is capable of maintaining a constant temperature of at least 68 degrees Fahrenheit throughout any dwelling, or a utility connection for such equipment in each habitable room, shall be installed and maintained. Unvented fuel heaters are prohibited except for heaters listed for unvented use. Unvented fuel heaters are prohibited in any bedroom. 
(4)  Health standards. 
a.  All premises, indoors and out of doors, shall be kept free of rodents and vermin. 
b.  All dwelling units which do not have a central air conditioning system shall have screens on all exterior openable windows, and shall have a screen door with a self-closing device on all exterior doors except for the main entrance door. 
c.  Accessory buildings, vacant structures, and dwellings, or portions thereof, shall be kept free from rubbish and garbage. 
d.  Every toilet room, bathroom, and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(5)  Sanitary facilities. 
a.  Every dwelling unit shall contain at least one kitchen sink, one tub or shower, one lavatory, and one water closet, all in good working condition and properly connected to the public water and sewer system. All fixtures and piping shall be properly installed and kept free from defects, leaks and obstructions. 
b.  All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling unit and be accessible to the occupants of the same. The water closet and the tub or shower shall be located in a room affording privacy to the user and shall have a minimum total floor area of 25 square feet. 
c.  Every dwelling unit shall have connected to the kitchen sink, lavatory, and tub or shower an adequate supply of both cold water and hot water connected to the public water system. 
d.  Every dwelling shall have a water heater properly installed and maintained and capable of heating incoming water to a temperature of 120 degrees Fahrenheit and capable of storing not less than 30 gallons of heated water. 
e.  Every dwelling unit shall have garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers as specified by chapter 38. 
(6)  Fire protection. 
a.  No person shall occupy any dwelling unit which is not in compliance with the city fire prevention code. 
b.  Every dwelling unit shall have at least one approved, listed, properly installed and maintained smoke detector in good working condition. 
c.  All cooking, lighting, and heating equipment shall be installed and maintained in accordance with building, electrical, mechanical, gas, and fire prevention codes of the city. Portable cooking and lighting equipment employing flame is prohibited indoors. 
(7)  Light and ventilation. 
a.  Every habitable room shall have at least one window which is easily opened and facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total, openable window area shall be 5.7 square feet or eight percent of the total room floor area. Yearround mechanically ventilated air conditioning systems may be substituted for windows in rooms other than rooms used for sleeping. 
b.  Bathrooms shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements when not equipped with approved exhaust ventilators. 
(8)  Electric lights and outlets. 
a.  Where there is electric service available to the dwelling, every habitable room shall have at least two separate and remote convenience outlets. In addition, bedrooms shall have at least one wall switch controlled ceiling or wall type light fixture. Kitchens shall have at least three separate and remote small appliance outlets and at least one wall switch controlled ceiling or wall type light fixture. Every hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, room containing furnace, and room containing electrical service panel or equipment shall contain at least one electrical light fixture to adequately illuminate equipment and facilities. In bathrooms, the light fixture shall be controlled by a wall switch. Every bathroom and laundry room shall contain at least one convenience outlet. 
b.  All fixtures, receptacles, equipment, and wiring shall be installed and maintained in a state of good repair, safe, and capable of being used, and shall be connected to the available electrical utility source. 
c.  Where the determination is made, upon examination of the existing electrical service supply, that such electrical service supply is obsolete or is being used in such a manner as would constitute a hazard to the occupants or would otherwise constitute a hazard to life or property, a correction shall be in order and the city electrical code shall apply. 
(9)  Space requirements. 
a.  Each dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of habitable floor area for the first occupant and at least 90 square feet of additional habitable floor area for each additional occupant. 
b.  In each dwelling unit of two or more rooms, each room occupied for sleeping purposes shall contain at least 64 square feet of floor area for one occupant and an additional 50 square feet of floor area for each additional occupant. 
c.  Children under 12 months of age shall not be considered occupants, and one-half of the area requirements shall apply to children under 12 years of age for purposes of additional occupants in subsection (9)a of this section and general occupants in subsection (9)b of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 5-90.06; Ord. No. 1618, 4-12-1994; Ord. No. 2141, § 1, 4-10-2018) 
Sec. 10-115. - Inspection. 
    For the purpose of ascertaining whether violations of this division exist, the code enforcement official, or any other person authorized by the building and standards commission, is authorized at a reasonable time, without a search warrant, to inspect: 
(1)  The exterior of a structure and premises which contain no structure; and 
(2)  The interior of a structure, if unsecured and abandoned, or if the permission of the owner, occupant, or person in control is given. 
(Code 1973, § 5-91.18; Ord. No. 1618, 4-12-1994) 
Sec. 10-115A. - Inspection prior to reconnection. 
    It is unlawful for any city employee or agent to turn on city utility services to any premises in the city if that premises has had utilities/services disconnected for two or more business days until the city inspector/code enforcement officer has completed an inspection and has determined the property meets the minimum housing standard as adopted by the City of Yoakum. 
(Ord. No. 2119, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
Sec. 10-116. - Disconnecting public utilities. 
    The code enforcement official may request that public utilities be disconnected: 
(1)  In order that demolition or removal may be accomplished without delay in those cases where the structure is vacant and has been ordered demolished or removed; or 
(2)  If a condition exists, relating to the utility, which constitutes a threat to health or safety, and if after written notice to the owner, providing a reasonable period of time to correct the condition, the owner fails or refuses to do so within such period. 
(Code 1973, § 5-91.20; Ord. No. 1618, 4-12-1994) 
Sec. 10-117. - Assessment. 
(a)  Expenses and costs incurred by the city under this division shall be charged to the owner of the unsafe structure or premises on which the costs were incurred. Charges may include but are not limited to the expenses of inspection or testing by third parties, photography, newspaper publication costs, title search fees, attorney fees, costs incurred in identifying, locating, or contacting the owner, mortgagee, and lienholders, labor and equipment costs for preparation of the premises, work to secure, repair, vacate, remove, demolish, cleanup and removal of debris, landfill and waste disposal costs. An administrative fee of $100.00 or ten percent of the expenses and costs, whichever is greater, shall be added to the costs. 
(b)  The city council shall certify the expenses incurred in implementing provisions of this division for billing to the owner of the property. The bill becomes an account receivable upon completion and shall be due within 30 days. 
(c)  If, after 30 days from billing, payment in full has not been made, the city shall assess the expenses on, and have a lien against, the property on which the expenses occurred, unless it is a homestead as protected by the state constitution. 
(d)  Notice of the lien shall be provided to the property owner and the county clerk in a form approved by the city attorney. 
(e)  The city's lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens and all previously recorded bona fide mortgage liens attached to the real property to which the city's lien attaches. Such lien shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent per annum until paid. 
(f)  The lien shall be extinguished if the property owner or another person having interest in the legal title to property reimburses the city for the total amount due. 
(g)  This remedy shall be available to the city in addition to any penal or other remedy provided by law or equity which the city, state or any other person may have to remedy an unsafe property condition. 
(h)  The city may also direct the city attorney to bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the amount due plus all associated costs and fees. The city attorney is authorized to make use of whatever legal or equitable remedies available to collect the monies due. 
(Code 1973, § 5-91.22; Ord. No. 1618, 4-12-1994) 
Sec. 10-118. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupants of an unsafe condition to fail or refuse to comply with any order of the code enforcement official or the commission panel. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or interfere with the implementation of any action required or permitted by the code enforcement official or commission panel. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any posted notice including any unsafe structure placard without written permission of the code enforcement official, or for any person to enter the structure except for the purpose of making the required inspections, repairs or demolishing the same. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property to move or relocate any prebuilt building older than ten years for any use except for accessory storage uses. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property to move or relocate any manufactured home older than ten years within the city. Previously owned manufactured homes are subject to inspection by the code enforcement official prior to placement to insure conformance with the minimum standards for housing (see section 10-114 of the City of Yoakum Code of Ordinances). 
(Ord. No. 2075, § 1, 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 2146, § 1, 7-10-2018) 
Sec. 10-119. - Penalties. 
    Any person, agent, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined any sum up to $2,000.00. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1973, § 5-91.26; Ord. No. 1618, 4-12-1994; Ord. No. 2075, § 1, 12-9-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2075, § 1, adopted December 9, 2014, renumbered § 10-118 as § 10-119. 
Secs. 10-120-10-142. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-143. - Violations; penalties and other remedies. 
(a)  General fine; continuing violations. Any person violating this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of up to $2,000.00. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Fine for prohibited pollutant discharges. Any violation relating to point source effluent limitations or the discharge of a pollutant, other than from a nonpoint source, into a sewer system, including a sanitary or stormwater sewer system, owned or controlled by the city is, upon conviction, punishable by a fine not to exceed $5,000.00 per day. 
(c)  Civil action. The city may also direct the city attorney to bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Enforcement of provisions related to nuisance structures and unsafe structures. 
(1)  Expenses incurred by city in curing violations charged to property owner. Expenses and costs incurred by the city in proceedings arising from violation of the adopted existing buildings and property maintenance codes shall be charged to the owner of the unsafe structure or premises on which the costs were incurred. Charges may include, but are not limited to, the expenses of inspection or testing by third parties, photography, newspaper publication costs, title search fees, attorney fees, costs incurred in identifying, locating, or contacting the owner, mortgagee, and lienholders, labor and equipment costs for preparation of the premises, work to secure, repair, vacate, remove, demolish, cleanup and removal of debris, landfill and waste disposal costs. An administrative fee of $100.00 or ten percent of the expenses and costs, whichever is greater, shall be added to the costs. 
(2)  Certificate of expenses. The city council or building and standards commission shall certify the expenses incurred in implementing provisions regarding unsafe structures for billing to the owner of the property. The bill becomes an account receivable upon completion and shall be due within 30 days. 
(3)  Failure of owner to pay expenses; lien for expenses. If after 30 days from billing, payment in full has not been made, the city shall assess the expenses on, and have a lien against, the property on which the expenses occurred, unless it is a homestead as protected by the state constitution. Notice of the lien shall be provided to the property owner and the county clerk in a form approved by the city attorney. 
(4)  City's lien is privileged; interest; payment of lien. The city's lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens and all previously recorded bona fide mortgage liens attached to the real property to which the city's lien attaches. Such lien shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent per annum until paid. The lien shall be extinguished if the property owner or another person having interest in the legal title to property reimburses the city for the total amount due. 
(5)  Procedure is cumulative to all other remedies available to city. This remedy shall be available to the city in addition to any penal or other remedy provided by law or equity which the city, state or any other person may have to remedy an unsafe property condition. 
(6)  Alternative civil action for collection. The city may also direct the city attorney to bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the amount due plus all associated costs and fees. The city attorney is authorized to make use of whatever legal or equitable remedies available to collect the monies due. 
(Code 1973, §§ 5-91.22, 5-91.26; Ord. No. 1618, 4-12-1994) 
Sec. 10-144. - Double permit fees for construction initiated without required permit. 
(a)  Persons not securing a permit as required by the codes adopted by the city prior to beginning work shall pay as a penalty, in addition to all other applicable penalties, double the applicable permit fee. Permit fees shall be in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(b)  The payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of the code in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein, including, without limitation, penalties as provided in section 1-15 for violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 5-2.1; Ord. No. 1420, § 3, 12-10-1985; Ord. No. 1798, 5-14-2002) 
Sec. 10-145. - Electrical inspector. 
(a)  Position created. The electrical inspector position is created and may be one and the same as the building codes combination inspector. 
(b)  Appointment; qualifications. The electrical inspector shall be a city employee under the direction and supervision of the director of public works and utilities. The city manager shall approve employment, suspension and termination of the electrical inspector. The electrical inspector shall be well versed in the rules and requirements of the city's electrical and other related codes. 
(c)  Conflict of interest. The electrical inspector shall not engage in the business of master electrician, either directly or indirectly, within the city. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the electrical inspector, and his assistants when so designated by the city manager, shall be as follows: 
(1)  To have entire supervision over the electrical inspection of all electrical work within the city. 
(2)  Upon application on proper forms for the installation of electrical wiring, devices and equipment, and upon payment of the required fees, to make inspections of all new electrical installations and make reinspections of any existing electrical installations at such time as he may deem necessary for the purpose of safeguarding of life and property within the city. 
(3)  Have the right to enter any building during reasonable hours in the discharge of his official duties for the purpose of making any inspection or test of any electrical wiring, device and equipment therein. Where such installations are found dangerous to life or property or to the work of the fire department or otherwise not in conformity with the ordinances of the city, he is empowered to disconnect such parts of installations or to order disconnection of electric service to any building after giving notice in writing to the parties concerned, and such defective electrical wiring shall not be again connected until made safe as directed by the electrical inspector. 
(4)  To decide all disputed questions pertaining to the installation of all electric wiring, devices and equipment, which shall be interpreted by the electrical inspector by taking into consideration the National Electrical Code, and in the light of the standards generally recognized by the trade concerning the safe and proper installation of electrical wiring, devices and equipment. 
(e)  Interference with by others. It is unlawful for any person to interfere with the electrical inspector or his assistants in the discharge of their duties or to prevent or in any manner attempt to prevent them from carrying out the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, §§ 5-21-5-24; Ord. No. 1719, 5-12-1998) 
Sec. 10-146. - Gas inspector. 
(a)  Position created; duties generally. The office of gas inspector is created. The city fire marshal or other person designated by the city manager shall perform the duties of such gas inspector. He shall have charge, supervision and control of all matters, rules and regulations pertaining to the installation of natural gas in the city. 
(b)  Duty to inspect; no city liability arises by inspection. It shall be the duty of the gas inspector to go upon any premises in which the use of natural gas is to be installed and to examine all pipings, fittings, and connections placed in the buildings and on the premises, either by the gas company or by any gas fitter, and to see that all rules and regulations have been complied with; but the city shall in no event ever be liable to any person for the manner in which such work of supervision, inspection or reinspection is performed by such gas inspector, or the authorized agents thereof, or for failure to perform such service. 
(c)  Right of entry for inspection. The gas inspector is given full authority to enter any building, structure, house or premises, whether public or private, at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspection. 
(Code 1973, §§ 5-81, 5-82; Ord. No. 1133, § 13, 7-5-1927) 
Sec. 10-147. - Inspection authority. 
    For the purpose of ascertaining whether violations of this chapter exist, the code enforcement official, or any other person authorized by the building and standards commission, is authorized at a reasonable time, without a search warrant, to inspect the exterior of a structure, premises which contain no structure, the interior of an unsecured and abandoned structure, the interior of an occupied structure with permission of the owner, occupant, or person in control of the structure. 
(Code 1973, § 5-91.18; Ord. No. 1618, 4-12-1994) 
Sec. 10-148. - Disconnecting public utilities. 
    The code enforcement official may request that public utilities be disconnected: 
(1)  So that demolition or removal may be accomplished without delay in those cases where the structure is vacant and has been ordered demolished or removed; or 
(2)  If a condition exists relating to the utility that constitutes a threat to health or safety, and if after written notice to the owner, providing a reasonable period of time to correct the condition, the owner fails or refuses to do so within such period. 
(Code 1973, § 5-91.20; Ord. No. 1618, 4-12-1994) 
Secs. 10-149-10-179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING AND STANDARDS COMMISSION 

Sec. 10-180. - Authority shared with city council. 
    The city council may act as the building and standards commission and exercise all authority granted to the building and standards commission under this division including, without limitation, holding public hearings regarding alleged violations of the city's building and technical codes. 
(Code 1973, § 5-91.00(a); Ord. No. 1618, 4-12-1994) 
Sec. 10-181. - Membership; vacancies; rules; meetings. 
(a)  Regular member panels. The building and standards commission shall consist of one or more five-member panels to be appointed for terms of two years. As near as practical, members shall be qualified in one or more of the fields of fire prevention, building construction, sanitation, health, and public safety. 
(b)  Alternate members. The city council may appoint eight or more alternate members to serve in the absence of one or more regular members when requested to do so by the city manager. The alternate members serve for the same term and are subject to removal in the same manner as regular members. A vacancy is filled in the same manner as a vacancy is filled among the regular members. 
(c)  Removal; filling vacancies. The city council may remove a commission member for cause on a written charge. Before a decision regarding removal is made, the city council must hold a public hearing on the matter if requested by the commission member subject to the removal action. A vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term. 
(d)  Rules of order; appointment of officers. A majority of the entire commission shall establish rules of order and the appointment of at least a chairperson, vice-chairperson, and secretary and duties thereof. The rules of order shall be in compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(e)  Meetings; oaths; authority to compel attendance of witnesses. Meetings of the commission shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at other times as determined by the commission. All meetings held by the commission shall be open to the public. Each chairperson of a panel, or in his absence, the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(f)  Minutes and other records. The commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member on each question or the fact that a member is absent or fails to vote. The commission shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions. The minutes and records shall be filed immediately in the office of the commission as public records. 
(Code 1973, §§ 5-91.00(b)-(e), 5-91.02(b), (e), (f); Ord. No. 1618, 4-12-1994) 
Sec. 10-182. - Powers and duties generally. 
    The commission is authorized to hold public hearings to determine compliance with, or alleged violations of, city building and technical codes, including minimum property maintenance requirements. The commission shall also hear appeals from persons aggrieved by orders or decisions of city officials made in enforcement of this chapter. The commission may further make recommendations to the city council as to any needed modifications, amendments, and changes in this chapter, and shall carry out such other duties as may be required from time to time by the city council or state law. 
(Code 1973, § 5-91.00(a), (f); Ord. No. 1618, 4-12-1994) 
Sec. 10-183. - Hearing authority and procedure. 
(a)  Minimum number of members in review panel. All cases heard by the commission may be heard by any panel, but at least four members of any panel must hear a case. 
(b)  Concurring vote of four members required. The concurring vote of four members of the commission is necessary to take any action under this article and any other ordinance under its jurisdiction adopted by the city. 
(c)  Code enforcement official must appear at hearing. The code enforcement official shall present all cases initiated by the city to be heard by the commission. 
(d)  Evidence, testimony and defense. There shall be provided ample opportunity at the public hearing for the presentation of evidence or testimony by respondents, persons opposing charges, and the code enforcement official relating to alleged violations of this chapter. 
(e)  Time and method of giving notice of hearing. Notice of all proceedings before the commission must be given: 
(1)  By certified mail, return receipt requested, to the record owners of the property affected, and each holder of a recorded lien against the affected property, as shown by the records in the office of the county clerk of the county in which the affected property is located if the address of the lienholder can be ascertained from any applicable instruments on file in the office of the county clerk; 
(2)  To all unknown owners, by posting a copy of the notice on the front door of each improvement situated on the affected property, or as close to the front door as practical; and 
(3)  By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city on one occasion. 
The notice shall be mailed, published, and posted on or before the tenth day before the date of the hearing before the commission and must state the date, time, and place of the hearing. 
(f)  Filing copy of notice in official real property records. The commission may file notice of a proceeding before a commission panel in the official public records of real property in the county in which the affected property is located. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner of the affected property if that information can be determined from a reasonable search of the instruments on file at the office of the county clerk, a legal description of the affected property, and a description of the proceeding. The filing of the notice is binding on subsequent grantees, lienholders, or other transferees of an interest in property who acquire such interest after the filing of the notice and constitutes notice of the proceeding on any subsequent recipient of any interest who acquires such interest after the filing of the notice. 
(g)  Final determination by commission. The commission may: 
(1)  Declare a structure or premises substandard, dangerous, or otherwise in violation of this chapter. 
(2)  Order an unsafe condition be abated, vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished within a fixed period. 
(3)  Order, in appropriate cases, the immediate abatement, vacation, securing, repairing, removal, or demolition of the unsafe condition, the entry onto private property to secure such abatement if it is determined that conditions exist on the property that constitutes a violation of this article or any other ordinance within its jurisdiction, and order action to be taken as necessary to remedy, alleviate, or remove any unsafe structure found to exist. 
(4)  Issue orders or directives to any peace officer of the state, including a sheriff or constable or the chief of police of the city, to enforce and carry out the lawful orders or directives of the panel. 
(5)  Determine the amount and duration of the civil penalty the city may recover as provided in this article. 
(h)  Notice of final determination. The commission shall: 
(1)  Promptly send by first class mail, certified return receipt requested, a copy of any final decision and order to all persons to whom notice is required to be sent under this section; and 
(2)  Publish an abbreviated copy of the order one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, within ten calendar days after the date of the mailing of the copy as required in this section, including street address or the legal description of the property, the date of hearing, a brief statement indicating the results of the order, and instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. A copy shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(i)  Effect of final determination; civil penalties. A determination made under this article is binding and constitutes prima facie evidence of the penalty in any court of competent jurisdiction in a civil suit brought by the city for final judgment in accordance with the established penalty. To enforce any civil penalty under this article, the city clerk must file with the district clerk of the county in which the city is located a certified copy of the order of the commission panel establishing the amount and duration of the penalty. No other proof is required for a district court to enter final judgment on the penalty. If no appeals are taken from the decision of the commission panel within the required period, the decision of the commission panel is, in all things, final and binding. 
(j)  Rehearing and reconsideration; stay of proceedings. Any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of record jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision or order of a commission panel may request a single rehearing of the case by a second, existing, duly appointed commission panel, or if no such panel exists, the same may request reconsideration from the first panel. The request must be in writing, addressed to the commission, specifying the grounds for the request, and received by the commission or postmarked on or before the tenth day after the mailing of the notice required under this article. The rehearing or reconsideration panel shall consider the grounds for the request for rehearing or reconsideration and may approve or deny the request. Only the approval of the request for rehearing or reconsideration stays all other proceedings. 
(k)  Appeal. After a final decision of the commission under this article, any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of record remaining jointly or severally aggrieved by the final decision of the commission may appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1973, §§ 5-91.02(a), (c), (d), 5-91.04, 5-91.06, 5-91.08-5-91.10, 5-91.14; Ord. No. 1618, 4-12-1994) 
Sec. 10-184. - Parties against whom judgment is issued; standing to challenge judgment. 
    An abstract of judgment shall be issued against all parties found to be owners of the subject property or in possession of that property. A lienholder does not have standing to bring a proceeding under this article on the ground that the lienholder was not notified of the proceedings before the commission panel or was unaware of the condition of the property, unless the lienholder had first appeared before the commission panel and entered an appearance in opposition to the proceedings. 
(Code 1973, § 5-91.12; Ord. No. 1618, 4-12-1994) 
Sec. 10-185. - Alternative authority for city to proceed in municipal court. 
    This article does not affect the ability of the city to proceed under the jurisdiction of the municipal court. 
(Code 1973, § 5-91.16; Ord. No. 1618, 4-12-1994) 
Secs. 10-186-10-208. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS 

Sec. 10-209. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Builder means one that builds, who contracts for and supervises the construction of buildings. 
    Building industry representative means one who sells building supplies. 
    Code official means the city's building, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical code enforcement officer or one charged with enforcement of codes or ordinances. 
    Contractor means one that provides materials and services at a specified price for the construction of buildings. 
    Design professional means a registered professional engineer or architect. 
    Health or medical professional means the city's appointed health officer, medical doctor, dentist, or physician's assistant. 
    Legal professional means an attorney. 
(Code 1973, § 5-122; Ord. No. 1674, §§ I, 2, 5-14-1996) 
Sec. 10-210. - Established. 
    The city has established a construction board of adjustments and appeals, which consists of seven members and two alternates. The board shall be appointed by the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 5-123; Ord. No. 1674, § II, 5-14-1996) 
Sec. 10-211. - Membership, officers, meetings and rules of procedure. 
(a)  Regular members. The board shall consist of seven members composed of, to the extent possible, individuals with knowledge and experience regarding the city building code, plumbing code, electrical code, mechanical code, and backflow prevention and cross-connection control. The membership should also include, to the extent possible, design professionals, contractors, builders, legal professionals, and health or medical professionals. 
(b)  Alternate members. In addition to the regular members, there should be two alternate members, one member at large from the building industry and one member at large from the public. 
(c)  Conflict of interest. No board member shall act in a case in which he has a personal or financial interest. 
(d)  Terms. The terms of office of the board members shall be staggered so that no more than one-third of the board is appointed or replaced in any 12-month period. The two alternates, if appointed, shall serve one-year terms. 
(e)  Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. 
(f)  Removal from office for failure to attend meetings. Continued absence of any member from required meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the applicable governing body, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
(g)  Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of this article, the affirmative votes of the majority present, but not less than three affirmative votes, shall be required. In modifying a decision of the code official, not less than four affirmative votes, but not less than a majority of the board, shall be required. In the event that regular members are unable to attend a meeting, the alternate members, if appointed, shall vote. 
(h)  Officers. The board members shall elect from its membership a chairperson, vice-chairperson, and secretary. The election shall be held at the first meeting following the annual term appointments. The secretary of the board shall make a detailed record of all of its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member, and any failure of a member to vote. 
(i)  Procedural rules and regulations. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(j)  Meetings. The board shall meet on call of the chairperson. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(k)  Powers and duties generally. The board shall have the authority to hear appeals of decisions and interpretations of the code official and consider variances of the technical building, plumbing, electric, and mechanical codes, including backflow prevention and cross-connection control regulations in the manner provided in this article and by state law. 
(Code 1973, §§ 5-124, 5-125, 5-127(a); Ord. No. 1674, §§ III, IV, 5-14-1996) 
Sec. 10-212. - Matters that may be appealed to the board. 
    The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the code official to the construction board of adjustments and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The code official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)  The provisions of the applicable code or ordinance do not apply to the specific case. 
(3)  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of the applicable code or ordinance, or any of the regulations thereunder, have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(Code 1973, § 5-126(a); Ord. No. 1674, § V, 5-14-1996) 
Sec. 10-213. - Notice of appeal to board. 
(a)  Form and time for filing. Notice of appeal to the board shall be in writing, addressed to the board and filed within 30 calendar days after the decision is rendered by the code official. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the board. 
(b)  Time for appeal may be shortened for unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the code official, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the code official may, in his order, limit the time for such appeals to a shorter period. 
(Code 1973, § 5-126(d); Ord. No. 1674, § V, 5-14-1996) 
Sec. 10-214. - Authority of board to grant variances. 
(a)  Required findings. The construction board of adjustments and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the applicable code or ordinance to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or the technical codes or public interest, and also finds that: 
(1)  Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others; 
(2)  The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant; 
(3)  Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the applicable code or ordinance to other buildings, structures or service system; 
(4)  The variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system; and 
(5)  The grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the applicable code or ordinance and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare, and shall be in conformance with state and federal requirements. 
(b)  Conditional variances. In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed, or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the applicable code or ordinance. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of the applicable code or ordinance. 
(Code 1973, § 5-126(b), (c); Ord. No. 1674, § V, 5-14-1996) 
Sec. 10-215. - Final decisions. 
(a)  To be entered without delay. The board shall in every case reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. 
(b)  Reasons for decision to be included. Each decision of the board shall include the reasons for the decision. 
(c)  Duty of city official to comply with decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the code official or varies the application of any provision of this article, the code official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. 
(d)  Decision to be filed in the office of the code official. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the code official and shall be open to public inspection. 
(e)  Notice to parties and public. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the code official for two weeks after filing. 
(f)  Decisions final subject to remedies at law or in equity. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Code 1973, § 5-127(b); Ord. No. 1674, § VI, 5-14-1996) 
Sec. 10-216. - Role of city council regarding questions of interpretation and enforcement. 
(a)  It is the intent of this chapter that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the administrative official, and that such questions shall be presented to the board of adjustments only on appeal from the decision of the city inspector, and that recourse from the decisions of the board of adjustments shall be to the courts as provided by state law. 
(b)  It is further the intent of this chapter that the duties of the city council in connection with this chapter shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as provided in this article. Under this chapter the city council shall have only the duties of considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the repeal of this chapter, as provided by law, and establishing fees as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 12, 1-10-1989) 
Secs. 10-217-10-232. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXAMINATION AND LICENSING OF ELECTRICIANS 

Sec. 10-233. - Examining and supervising board of electricians created; membership. 
    There is created a board for the examination of electricians within the city, to be known as the examining and supervising board of electricians. The board shall consist of five members. One member shall be the fire marshal of the city, one member shall be the electrical superintendent, two members shall be master electricians licensed and bonded with the city, and one shall be a citizen at large member. The members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval by the city council. The members of such board shall continue to act as the examining and supervising board of electricians until their successors have been appointed and such appointments approved by the city council. If for any reason a vacancy is created on the board, the mayor shall appoint a new member. Such appointment shall not become effective until approved by the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 5-33; Ord. No. 1719, 5-12-1998) 
Sec. 10-234. - Compensation. 
    Members of the examining and supervising board of electricians shall receive no compensation for their services on the board other than the fees which may be allowed them by the city council for conducting examinations of applicants for licenses. 
(Code 1973, § 5-34; Ord. No. 1719, 5-12-1998) 
Sec. 10-235. - Conducting examinations, waiving. 
(a)  The board created above may fix dates at reasonable times for having applications for examinations for licenses, and may pass upon all persons engaged in the electrical business as master electricians, journeyman electricians and maintenance electricians. 
(b)  A nonrefundable fee shall be assessed on all applicants' license. The fee for a master's examination or a journeyman and maintenance examination shall be as set from time to time by the city council, in the manual of fees and service charges of the city. 
(c)  The examining and supervising board of electricians may waive the requirements of an examination upon presentation to the board of evidence of experience and education which clearly shows the applicant's qualification for the type of license for which applied. The board shall have the complete control in establishing qualifications required for the type of license for which applied. Such licenses may be renewable, nonrenewable, or designated for specific projects. 
(Code 1973, § 5-35; Ord. No. 1719, 5-12-1998) 
Sec. 10-236. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Whenever an applicant successfully meets the requirements prescribed by the board, the board shall issue a license to such person and shall record the issuance of such license in a book to be kept for such purpose. No license shall be issued to a master electrician until the required bond is filed and license fee paid. An electrician's license shall not be issued to any previous holder of one which has been revoked, except upon a new application, approved by the examining board. 
(b)  For the purpose of this article, a valid electrician's license issued by the state meets all of the requirements of a city-issued electrician's license herein, and is accepted in lieu of such city-issued license, and entitles such license holder to do work within the scope of the electrical license in accordance with all electrical codes and regulations of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 5-38; Ord. No. 1719, 5-12-1998; Ord. No. 1869, § 1, 3-8-2005) 
Sec. 10-237. - License period, renewal authorized. 
    All renewable licenses expire on each December 31. Such licenses must be renewed each year prior to expiration. Holders of licenses which have expired must apply for new licensing in the same manner as new license applicants. 
(Code 1973, § 5-40; Ord. No. 1719, 5-12-1998) 
Sec. 10-238. - License not transferable, illegal use of licensee's name. 
    No license shall be transferable and no holder thereof shall allow his name to be used by any other party, either for the purpose of doing work or obtaining a permit under penalty of forfeiture of his license and punishment as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1973, § 5-41; Ord. No. 1719, 5-12-1998) 
Sec. 10-239. - Scope of master electrician's license. 
    A master electrician's license shall entitle the holder thereof to engage in the business of installing wiring and electrical apparatus inside or on any building for use in connection with electric light, heat or power within the city, and installing wiring and electrical apparatus inside or on any building for use in connection with electric light, heat or power outside the city if the property is served by the municipal electric system. 
(Code 1973, § 5-42; Ord. No. 1719, 5-12-1998) 
Sec. 10-240. - Suspension and revocation of license. 
    The electrical inspector shall have the right and authority to suspend the license of any electrician, upon the violation of any portion of this chapter, and the electrical inspector shall, upon suspension, file with the city clerk a statement setting forth the reasons for such suspension, a copy of such report to be filed with the clerk, to be delivered to the electrician. Any electrician aggrieved by such suspension, may file a written appeal to city council within ten days of receipt of suspension notice. Presentation and consideration of the appeal shall be presented to city council at their next regular scheduled meeting. The city council may affirm or rescind such suspension or revoke the license and order the forfeiture of a master electrician bond. In the event that the master electrician whose license has been suspended fails or refuses to appeal to the city council within ten days from the date of such suspension the city clerk shall place before the city council the report of the electrical inspector at the next regular meeting for action by the city council to revoke the suspension or to revoke the license and forfeit the bond as herein provided. 
(Code 1973, § 5-43; Ord. No. 1719, 5-12-1998) 
Chapter 12 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of miscellaneous businesses, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.002 et seq.; home rule municipal authority to license any lawful business or occupation that is subject to its police powers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.075; municipal authority to regulate sexually oriented business, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.001 et seq.; uniformity required in the issuance of local permits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 245.001 et seq.; occupations generally, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1.001 et seq.; Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 431.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES 

Sec. 12-19. - Levy generally. 
    There is levied and shall be collected and apportioned to the general current expense fund an annual occupation tax on every person engaged in any calling, profession, trade or occupation, who is taxed by the state, an occupation tax of one-half of the amount that is levied by the state on such callings, professions, trades or occupations, except those which, under the laws of the state, are exempt from city occupation taxes. 
(Code 1973, § 13-1; Ord. No. 1012, § 2, 6-8-1971) 
State Law reference- Authority for levy of occupation taxes by municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 302.101. 
Sec. 12-20. - Due dates. 
    Occupational license taxes shall be due and payable from October 1 to January 31, unless otherwise provided by the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 13-2; Ord. No. 1012, § 3, 6-8-1971) 
Secs. 12-21-12-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT VENDORS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to license, tax, suppress or otherwise regulate hawkers and peddlers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.031; cancellation of certain home solicited consumer transactions, V.T.C.A., Business and Commerce Code § 601.001 et seq.; certain peddlers regarded as retailers for purposes of sales and use taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 151.024. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-44. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commodities, goods or merchandise means personal property of any nature whatsoever. 
    Itinerant vendors. 
(1)  The term "itinerant vendors" means any individual, firm, organization or corporation, as well as their representatives, agents and employees, who engages in a business in the city of selling, or offering for sale, any goods or merchandise, or exhibiting the same for sale or for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof, who displays, exhibits, sells or offers for sale such goods, merchandise or services upon or from a truck or other vehicle within the city, or who temporarily hires, rents, leases or occupies any room or space in any building, structure or other enclosure, or any vacant lot in the city upon which such business is to be operated or conducted. 
(2)  The term "itinerant vendors" shall not include individuals connected with a noncommercial or nonprofit purpose or cause. 
    Noncommercial or nonprofit purpose or cause means a purpose or cause not created, existing or espoused for the generation of a profit or the remuneration of individuals, including, but not limited to, the religious or charitable solicitation of contribution, seeking political support or contributions, the promotion of civic causes, the promotion of conservation of resources or animals, or advocating a philosophy or religion. 
    Peddler means any individual, firm, organization or corporation, as well as their representatives, agents and employees, who engages in the business in the city of selling, offering for sale or exhibition for sale of any commodity or service, from house to house, or from place to place and not from one established spot. Delivery of the commodity or service is made or to be made at the time of sale. Collection of the sales price at time of sale or later is immaterial. The term "peddler" shall not include individuals connected with a noncommercial or nonprofit purpose or cause. 
    Services means the performance of labor for the benefit of another, or at another's command. 
    Solicitor or canvasser means any individual, firm, organization or corporation, as well as their representatives, agents and employees, who engages in the business in the city of taking orders for future delivery of commodities or services, or solicits subscriptions, orders contributions or any kind of support, for remuneration or gain, from house to house, or from place to place. The term "solicitor" or "canvasser" shall not include individuals connected with a noncommercial or nonprofit purpose or cause. 
    Temporary business means the business use of any real property in the city for which definite written arrangements with the owner have not been made for occupancy of the premises for a term in excess of 90 days. Definite arrangements would include, without being limited to, a lease agreement or other document conveying an enforceable right of occupancy. 
(Code 1973, § 13-50) 
Sec. 12-45. - Exemptions. 
(a)  A vendor who sells or exhibits for sale commodities, goods, merchandise or services to persons engaged in the business of buying, selling and dealing in the same within the city is exempt from the coverage of this article. 
(b)  Citizens conducting nonprofit, fundraising activities, who represent a bona fide local civic, religious, humanitarian or youth organizations located inside the city limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction, are exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Farmers who raise and produce what they offer for sale are exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 13-51; Ord. No. 1474, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1987, § 1, 6-14-2011) 
Sec. 12-46. - Garage sales. 
    Garage sale operators are not required to register pursuant to this article. However, garage sales in the city shall be limited to two such sales per year, per location or individual. No sale shall be conducted for more than three days. 
(Code 1973, § 13-51; Ord. No. 1474, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1987, § 1, 6-14-2011) 
Sec. 12-47. - Prohibited acts. 
    It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, canvasser or itinerant vendor to: 
(1)  Conduct a business or related activities in the city without a valid registration certificate, as required by this article. 
(2)  Conduct a business or related activities in the city without a valid identification card, as required by this article. 
(3)  Conduct a business or related activities without visibly displaying the identification card issued to that individual. 
(4)  Alter a registration certificate or identification card issued by the city. 
(5)  Conduct a business or related activities within the city after the expiration of the registration certificate issued by the city. 
(6)  Conduct a business or related activities within the city different than described in the registration statement required by this article. 
(7)  Provide false, inaccurate or misleading information in the registration statement. 
(8)  Use a vehicle in the conduct of a business or related activities not identified in the registration statement. 
(9)  Conduct a business from a location within the city not listed in the registration statement. 
(10)  Conduct a business selling, offering for sale, exhibiting for sale, or taking of orders for delivery of any commodities, goods, merchandise or services not listed and described in the registration statement. 
(11)  Sell, assign or transfer, or any attempted sale, assignment or transfer, of a registration certificate or identification card. 
(12)  Conduct a business on any public sidewalk, public street right-of-way, or other public property within the city, without written authorization from the city clerk. 
(13)  Conduct a business during hours others than those permitted by this article. 
(14)  Enter a business or solicit, peddle to or canvass any residence prominently displaying a "No Solicitation," or "No Peddler" sign. 
(15)  Conduct a business or related activities in the city without a local residential or commercial address. For purposes of this subsection, a post office box is not a local residential or commercial address. This subsection shall not be deemed to include any individuals, firms, organization or corporation, as well as their representatives, agents and employees, who conduct established route sales within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 13-52; Ord. No. 1474, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1550, § 1, 4-9-1991) 
Sec. 12-48. - Inspection of businesses. 
    A representative of the city shall have the authority to request admission to inspect, at a reasonable time, without advance notice, a business operating under a registration certificate issued pursuant to this article, to determine whether the permit holder's business and related activities are as represented in the registration statement. If such admission is denied, then the city's representative shall have the authority to obtain a warrant, in accordance with applicable law, for the purpose of allowing the inspection. 
(Code 1973, § 13-57; Ord. No. 1474, 10-13-1987) 
Sec. 12-49. - Sales tax reports. 
    Copies of all sales tax reports submitted to the state comptroller by persons registered under this article shall be forwarded to the city clerk. 
(Code 1973, § 13-59; Ord. No. 1474, 10-13-1987) 
Sec. 12-50. - Hours. 
    Business conducted in accordance with this article shall be carried out during Central Standard Time from 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., and during daylight savings time from 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
(Code 1973, § 13-59.1; Ord. No. 1474, 10-13-1987) 
Secs. 12-51-12-73. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION CERTIFICATES AND IDENTIFICATION CARDS 

Sec. 12-74. - Registration certificates. 
(a)  Application and registration statement. Prior to commencement of business and related activities, a registration statement shall be completed on a form provided by the city clerk for that purpose, including the following: 
(1)  Name of applicant (person who completes the registration statement). 
(2)  Height, weight, sex and hair color of applicant. 
(3)  A recent photograph of the applicant, no larger than two inches by two inches. 
(4)  Social security number of applicant. 
(5)  Permanent home address and local address, if different. 
(6)  Applicant's driver's license number and state of issuance or, if the applicant has no driver's license, other identification shall be provided. 
(7)  Name of individual, firm, company, or organization represented, if any, and the permanent address and local address of any individual, firm, company or organization represented. 
(8)  The last three communities in which business was conducted by the individual, firm, company or organization represented shall be listed, with the period (beginning and ending month and year) business was conducted in each community listed. 
(9)  If the applicant or individual, firm, company or organization represented is a corporation incorporated under the laws of this state, a certified copy of the charter or articles of incorporation. 
(10)  If the applicant or individual, firm, company or organization represented is a corporation incorporated under the laws of a state other than this state, a certified copy of its certificate of authority to do business in this state. 
(11)  Description, vehicle license number and state of registration of each vehicle, if any, that will be operated under the registration certificate being applied for. 
(12)  The name, height, weight, sex, hair color, social security number, permanent home address, and driver's license number and state of issuance for each individual who will be involved in business under the registration certificate or, if an individual has no driver's license, other official identification acceptable to the city. 
(13)  A recent photograph of each individual who is listed by the applicant, no larger than two inches by two inches. 
(14)  A description of the business and related activities to be conducted. 
(15)  Character and description of commodities, goods, merchandise or services to be offered for sale. 
(16)  Locations from which business and other activities will be conducted. 
(17)  For the applicant and each individual whose name is listed by the applicant, whether he has ever been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(18)  For the applicant and each individual whose name is listed by the applicant, a list and explanation of the nature of each prior felony or misdemeanor conviction, other than convictions for misdemeanor traffic laws offenses, including the state where the conviction occurred and the year of such conviction. 
(19)  A copy of the individual's, firm's or company's sales tax permit, as issued by the state comptroller. 
(b)  Investigation of applicant's information; issuance of certificate. When all prerequisites of this division have been complied with, the city clerk shall initiate appropriate action to process the application. The city clerk shall make an appropriate investigation of an applicant, any person listed by the applicant, and any information provided. The city clerk shall issue a registration certificate to the applicant, authorizing the sale, offer for sale, taking of orders for sale, and exhibition of commodities, goods, merchandise and services, within six working days after the applicant has fully complied with all applicable provisions of this article, subject to denial of registration certificate. 
(c)  Term; renewal. The registration certificate shall state the effective term and the beginning and ending dates, not to exceed 180 days. Upon expiration, the registration certificate may be renewed upon full compliance with the requirements of this division. 
(d)  Sale, assignment or transfer prohibited. A registration certificate issued hereunder shall be personal to the applicant and any identification card holder and shall not be sold, assigned or transferred to any other person, firm, corporation or association. Any attempted sale, assignment or transfer of a registration certificate or identification card shall be grounds for revocation of the registration certificate. 
(Code 1973, §§ 13-53, 13-54; Ord. No. 1474, 10-13-1987) 
Sec. 12-75. - Identification cards. 
(a)  Issuance; contents; disclaimer. In conjunction with issuance of a registration certificate, the city clerk shall issue identification cards for each individual whose name is listed in the registration statement. The identification card shall be laminated in clear plastic, have a metal clothing clip, contain the photograph of the holder, state the term of the permit, state the nature of the business and related activities. The identification card shall also state the holder's name, driver's license number and state of issuance, height, weight, sex and hair color. The card shall contain a conspicuous disclaimer of any endorsement by the city: "The City of Yoakum, Texas, does not endorse these activities." 
(b)  Sale, assignment, transfer prohibited; grounds for revocation. An identification card issued in accordance with this division shall be personal to the card holder and shall not be sold, assigned or transferred to any other person. Any attempted sale, assignment or transfer of an identification card shall be grounds for revocation of the registration certificate and the identification cards issued thereunder. 
(c)  Display. While conducting business covered by the registration certificate, each identification card holder shall visibly display the identification card for identification by clipping the identification card to the clothing of the holder, so that the identification card is in plain view. 
(Code 1973, §§ 13-55, 13-56; Ord. No. 1474, 10-13-1987) 
Sec. 12-76. - Fees. 
    Fees for registration certificates and replacement of lost or destroyed certificates shall be in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1973, § 13-53; Ord. No. 1474, 10-13-1987) 
Sec. 12-77. - Denial of issuance. 
(a)  Generally. The issuance of a registration certificate may be denied on the basis of: 
(1)  Any violation of this division or other city ordinances or laws relating to the business or related activities to be conducted under the registration certificate applied for has been committed by any individuals who would operate under such registration certificate; 
(2)  False, inaccurate or misleading information is contained in the registration statement; 
(3)  Outstanding and delinquent city taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed or imposed against the applicant; or 
(4)  Failure of the applicant to fully comply with applicable provisions of this article. 
(b)  Conviction of felony, crime involving moral turpitude. In addition, the issuance of a registration certificate may be denied due to prior conviction of a felony or crime involving moral turpitude which shall also be grounds for denial of issuance to that individual of an identification card, removal of the individual's name from the registration statement on file with the city and denial to the individual of the right to conduct business covered by such certificate. 
(c)  Written notice of denial. Denial of a registration certificate or denial of an identification card to any individual shall be by written notice, specifically pointing out the reasons for the denial and what action will be required before a registration certificate can be issued, provided to the applicant by mailing a copy by regular mail to the applicant's local address, if provided, otherwise to the permanent business or home address listed on the registration statement, and by affixing a copy of the written notice to the registration statement on file with the city. 
(Code 1973, § 13-58; Ord. No. 1474, 10-13-1987) 
Sec. 12-78. - Revocation. 
    The city may revoke a registration certificate or identification card on the basis of: 
(1)  Any violation of this division or any violation of other city ordinances or laws relating to the business or related activities covered by the registration certificate is committed by any individuals operating under the registration certificate during the original term or renewal thereof; 
(2)  False, inaccurate or misleading information is contained in the registration statement; or 
(3)  Conviction of the applicant or card holder of a felony or crime involving moral turpitude. 
(Code 1973, § 13-59.2; Ord. No. 1474, 10-13-1987) 
Sec. 12-79. - Appeal of denial of issuance or revocation to city council. 
    The applicant, registrant or card holder may appeal a denial of issuance or revocation of a registration certificate or identification card by the clerk to the city council by notifying the city clerk in writing not later than ten days from the date of the notice of the clerk's action. Upon receipt of a written request for appeal, the clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda for the next regular meeting of the city council. 
Secs. 12-80-12-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MOBILE (READILY MOVABLE) VENDORS 

Sec. 12-86. - Mobile (readily movable) food truck and food trailers requirements. 
(a)  All mobile (readily movable) food truck and food trailers must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Comply with all city zoning ordinances and laws; 
(2)  Comply with all building setback requirements; 
(3)  Comply with all local and state health regulations and fire code regulations; 
(4)  Obtain and display prominently in the business the following items: 
a.  Current sales tax permit; and 
b.  An itinerant merchant's license on a yearly basis. 
(b)  Additionally, the mobile food truck and food trailers must be: 
(1)  Located a minimum of 50 feet from any existing residential building, including any residential building owned by the itinerant license holder; and 
(2)  Located a minimum of no closer than 300 feet from any public or private school property between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays. 
(c)  Mobile food truck and food trailers (readily movable) must provide: 
(1)  Employee bathrooms located within 300 feet of the readily movable food truck or food trailer; 
(2)  Customer bathrooms located within 150 feet of the readily movable food truck or food trailer if the vendor has seating for eight or more customers; 
(3)  Sufficient parking to meet the local building code and all applicable local ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2121, §§ 2-4, 3-14-2017) 
Sec. 12-87. - Itinerant merchant status. 
    If a readily movable food truck or food trailer vendor builds a structure or enclosure attached, near, or adjacent to the food truck or food trailer, and operates for more than 90 days after the addition, the vendor is no longer considered an itinerant merchant and must thereafter comply with all ordinances and laws regulating restaurants in the City of Yoakum. 
(Ord. No. 2121, § 5, 3-14-2017) 
Secs. 12-88-12-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SHOWS, PERFORMANCES AND EXHIBITIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of home rule municipalities to regulate the location and conduct of theaters, movie theaters, bowling alleys and other places of public amusement, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.074; sports, amusements and entertainment generally, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2001.001 et seq. 

Sec. 12-102. - Applicability; exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to street fairs or other local entertainment conducted for purely charitable purposes and not for the private profit of the individuals presenting such entertainment. 
(Code 1973, § 13-66; Ord. No. 920, § 7, 12-12-1966) 
Sec. 12-103. - Permit required. 
    It is unlawful to hold, sponsor or run a show, theatrical exhibition, dramatic presentation, carnival, circus or other exhibition within the city unless a permit to hold the same is first obtained in compliance with this article. It is further unlawful for any carnival, show or circus to operate in whole or in part after a permit issued under this article expires or is revoked or suspended by the city. All persons participating or aiding or abetting in such operation in violation of this section shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1973, §§ 13-60, 13-61; Ord. No. 920, § 5, 12-12-1966) 
Sec. 12-104. - Procedure for permit issuance. 
(a)  Approval and issuance by city manager. A permit shall be issued by the order of the city manager on his approval of a written application stating in detail the different component parts of the show, carnival or circus, including all concessions and attractions connected therewith, and proposed locations of performances or exhibitions. If the proposed show, carnival or circus appears to be composed entirely of lawful amusements and lawful enterprises, the city manager may approve same and issue a permit for such operation. 
(b)  Fees. The applicant for a show, carnival or circus permit shall pay a permit fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(c)  Term. Permits issued under this section for the operation of the show, carnival or circus shall be for a period not exceeding 15 days. Any operation beyond the 15-day period shall require an additional permit and payment of an additional fee. 
(Code 1973, §§ 13-62, 13-63; Ord. No. 920, §§ 2, 3, 12-12-1966) 
Sec. 12-105. - Denial of issuance and revocation; appeal. 
(a)  If a show, carnival or circus seeking a permit consists in whole or in part of any unlawful enterprise, including, but not limited to, games of chance operated for money prizes, gambling, lewd or obscene entertainment, the permit shall be refused. 
(b)  After issuance of a permit, if such carnival, show or circus permits operation of any unlawful acts among the various units of the show, carnival or circus, its permit may be revoked by the city manager and fees paid shall be forfeited. 
(c)  The applicant or permit holder may appeal to the city council a denial of issuance or revocation of a permit under this article by the city manager by notifying the city manager or city clerk in writing not later than ten days from the date of the notice of the city manager's action. Upon receipt of a written request for appeal, the clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda for the next regular meeting of the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 13-64; Ord. No. 920, § 4, 12-12-1966) 
Sec. 12-106. - Bond. 
(a)  Prior to issuance of a permit under this article, the applicant shall deposit with the city clerk the sum of $1,000.00 in cash or an approved indemnity bond, payable to the city, to guarantee that all just debts incurred by such organization and all damages done by it while operating in the city shall be paid. 
(b)  If at the end of 30 days after the permitted event has ended, the organization has paid for all utility service from the city, has paid for all damages done to any property or utility lines of the city and no writ of garnishment has been served on the city clerk with reference to such deposit of bond by any creditor of the organization, the deposit for bond shall then be returned to such organization. 
(c)  In case of a claim for debt or for damages, such legal action shall control the city clerk with regard to such deposit and return of deposit or bond shall not be made until such legal action against the city clerk has been settled. 
(Code 1973, § 13-65; Ord. No. 920, § 8, 12-12-1966) 
Sec. 12-107. - Location restrictions. 
    It is unlawful for any show, theatrical exhibition, dramatic presentation, carnival, circus or other exhibition for the amusement and entertainment of the public, using a tent or other temporary structure, to locate the tent or structure within 500 feet of any residence, dwelling house or business house in the city, unless written consent thereto of all of the residents within such 500 feet shall first be procured and filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1973, § 13-67; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 5-4-1955) 
Secs. 12-108-12-127. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GAME ROOMS AND AMUSEMENT REDEMPTION MACHINES 

Sec. 12-128. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amusement redemption machine means any electronic, electromechanical, or mechanical contrivance that for a consideration affords the player an opportunity to obtain anything of value, the award of which is determined solely or partially by chance, even though accompanied by some skill, whether or not the prize is automatically paid by the contrivance, including, but not limited to, gambling device versions of bingo, keno, blackjack, lottery, sweepstakes, roulette, video poker, tic-tac-toe, eight liner or similar electronic, electromechanical, or mechanical games, or facsimiles thereof, that operate by chance or partially so. 
    City official means a code enforcement official or building official of the city or any peace officer of this state. 
    Game room means a building, facility or other place that is open to the public and that contains one or more operational amusement redemption machines. 
    Game room owner means a person who has any ownership interest in a game room or an owner, director, or officer of a business entity that has any ownership interest in a game room. 
    Operational machine means a machine that is ready to be played and accessible to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2003, § 1, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 12-129. - Licensing. 
(a)  Payment of fee and issuance of license. An owner, operator, or lessee of an amusement redemption machine game room shall be required to secure a license annually. An amusement redemption machine game room shall be required to secure a license by paying to the city an annual inspection and amusement redemption machine game room license fee as set from time to time by the city council and in the city fee schedule. Applications shall not be approved until a completed application has been submitted and found to meet all application requirements. 
(b)  Application. An applicant for a license or permit shall file with the city clerk a written application on a form provided for that purpose, which shall be signed by the applicant, who shall be the owner, operator, or lessee of the amusement redemption machine game room. Should an applicant maintain an amusement redemption machine game room at more than one location, a separate application must be filed for each location. The following information is required in the application: 
(1)  Location, by address, of the proposed operation. 
(2)  A copy of the certificate of formation if the business is registered with the secretary of state, or the applicant's d/b/a, if applicable. 
(3)  Name, address, telephone number and driver's license number of the following persons, if applicable: 
a.  Applicant if a natural person; 
b.  All persons who own 25 percent or more interest in the amusement redemption machine game room; 
c.  All corporate officers, if any, of the business; 
d.  If a partnership, each of the general and limited partners; 
e.  The property owner; and 
f.  The manager of the property or business. 
(4)  The previous occupations of the applicant and, if applicable, all corporate officers and partners of the applicant within the preceding five years. 
(5)  Whether a previous license or permit of applicant, or, if applicable, corporate or partner of applicant, has been revoked within two years of filing of the application. 
(6)  Number of amusement redemption machines in the amusement redemption machine game room. 
(7)  An authorization to conduct a background check for all individuals disclosed on the application. The license will be denied if any individual has any convictions, guilty pleas, or deferred adjudications related to gambling or organized crime. 
(8)  A sworn statement that: 
a.  All the facts contained in the application are true and correct; 
b.  The location and operation of the amusement redemption machine game room will not violate any applicable deed restrictions; 
c.  The amusement redemption machine game room will be operated in accordance with all laws and city ordinances, including V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.01 et seq.; and 
d.  Name, address and telephone number of an emergency contact person who can be reached after hours. 
(c)  Expiration and renewal. 
(1)  Expiration. An annual amusement redemption machine game room license issued by the city shall automatically expire on December 31 following its issuance, except as otherwise stated herein. Such license shall automatically expire if the licensee sells the property or the business, transfers equity to accomplish same, or otherwise disposes of such devices. An amusement redemption machine game room license is not assignable or transferable. The city shall not refund any portion of a license fee after the license is issued, nor shall it prorate or reduce in amount any fee due to the city. 
(2)  Late penalty. Upon the expiration of a license, the licensee shall obtain a renewal if the licensee wishes to continue operating an amusement redemption machine game room. Failure to obtain the renewal within 30 days after expiration will require such person to pay an additional late fee in an amount equal to 20 percent of the fee actually due or 20 percent of the previous year's fee, whichever is greater, in order to obtain reinstatement of his license. Nothing herein authorizes the licensee to operate after the expiration of a license and before a renewal is effective. 
(d)  Posting of license. The license shall be conspicuously posted inside the building. 
(e)  Restrictions, regulations, controls, and limitations. The following restrictions, regulations, controls, and limitations shall apply to all amusement redemption machine game rooms: 
(1)  Condition of premises. All building and fire code standards must be met. A certificate of occupancy shall be requested before license is issued. Game room must be located in an area zoned for that activity. 
(2)  Methods of conduction of business. Amusement redemption machines are not allowed outdoors. 
(3)  Hours of operation. Amusement redemption machine game rooms may only be operated between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and midnight. 
(4)  Parking requirements. One space for each two machines, plus one space per employee, per shift. 
(5)  Alcoholic beverages. No amusement redemption machine game room may be located on premises where alcoholic beverages are sold or served, with the exception of any congressionally chartered, nonprofit organization. 
(6)  Supervision. The owner, operator, or manager of the premises must be present to supervise the operation of the machines. The machines shall not be left unattended. 
(7)  Visibility. Machines must be situated within the premises as to be in full and open public view, which entails being visible to all patrons of the establishment. 
(8)  Age restriction. A game room operator must be a person who is at least 18 years of age. 
(9)  Limitation of machines. Total number of machines in one establishment shall be limited to 50. 
(10)  Permitting of machines. All machines must be permitted according to the permitting requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003, § 2, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 12-130. - Amusement redemption machine permitting. 
(a)  Permit application. An owner, operator, or lessee of an amusement redemption machine game room shall be required to obtain a permit for each amusement redemption machine. As part of the application, the owner, operator, or lessee must submit, at their own expense, each amusement redemption machine, including hardware and software source code, to an independent gaming compliance and testing laboratory approved in advance by the city to ensure that the machine does not generate the resultant outcome independent of the skillful actions of the player. Any game that is determined to be beyond the ability of a player to predict or control the outcome will not be permitted or allowed to operate within the incorporated limits of the city. 
(b)  Permit. Following approval by the independent gaming compliance and testing laboratory, the city shall issue a permit that will be permanently affixed to the approved machine. The permit shall include the name of the machine and the machine's serial number. 
(c)  Sealing or seizure. A person commits an offense if he owns an operational machine without a permit or with a tampered permit. In addition to other criminal or civil remedies outlined in this article, the city shall have the authority to seal or seize any coin-operated machine located in any game room for which a permit is not displayed. If any amusement redemption machine is found with evidence of permit tampering of any kind, including a permit issued to a different machine or a change in the game's hardware or software after the date of the permit issuance, the city shall have the authority to seal or seize all amusement redemption machines in the game room for retesting at the owner's expense or to revoke the owner's license to operate a game room. 
(d)  Nuisance declared. Because such businesses in the city are a potential for being an attractive nuisance to minors and the questioned legality of such activities, the city council finds such businesses constitute a nuisance to the health, safety and welfare of the city. Accordingly, subsequent to the passage of this article, no license will be issued for any such establishment within a 1,000 feet radius of a church, residence, school, daycare, hospital or another business entity operating under a license issued under this article. Any businesses existing as of the time of the passage of this article shall be permitted to continue, however, if they should cease operations, or violate any of the provisions of this article or any other applicable city, state or federal law, their license shall be subject to revocation and such may not be renewed unless they meet all provisions of any applicable law including the above spacing requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2003, § 3, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 12-131. - Unrestricted access by city official. 
    An owner, manager or employee of a game room or other person exercising control over a game room, a portion of a game room or an operational amusement redemption machine shall provide a city official with immediate unrestricted access during business hours to all areas of the game room and to all operational amusement redemption machines located in the game room. 
(Ord. No. 2003, § 4, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 12-132. - Inspection by city officials. 
(a)  Any city official may inspect a game room or an operational amusement redemption machine located within the incorporated city limits to determine whether the game room or the operational amusement redemption machines complies with the city code of ordinances and state law. 
(b)  An owner, manager or employee of a game room or other person who does not allow a city official to inspect a game room or operational amusement redemption machine commits an offense. 
(Ord. No. 2003, § 5, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 12-133. - Transparent, uncovered windows required. 
(a)  Every game room shall have transparent unobstructed windows or open space on at least one side so that the area is open to view by the general public passing by on a public street or using a corridor, lobby or other room to which the public has access and is admitted without charge. The owner, manager or employee of a game room shall not permit any obstruction of such public view by the use of drawn shades, blinds, partitions, tinting or other structures or obstructions. 
(b)  The requirements of subsection (a) of this section may be waived or modified by the building official if the game room owner can demonstrate: 
(1)  The game room is located in a structure deemed a historic landmark, or the structure is within a historic district, and deemed to have architectural or historic significance; and 
(2)  Compliance with the unobstructed view requirement shall require alterations to the structure that will have a substantially detrimental effect on its historic or architectural features. 
(Ord. No. 2003, § 6, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 12-134. - Hours of operations, ingress and egress. 
(a)  All game rooms shall have their hours of operation clearly marked on every entrance. 
(b)  All game rooms shall have doors providing ingress and egress from the game room unlocked during the hours of operation. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to keep, conduct or operate any game room for profit or to allow or permit any game room to remain open for business or open to the public before the hour of 10:00 a.m. or after the hour of 12:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 2003, § 7, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 12-135. - Offense; penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or fail to comply therewith shall be deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not to exceed the maximum amount allowable by law. This offense is declared to be a strict liability offense and the culpable mental state required by state law is specifically negated and clearly dispensed with. Each day that the violation occurs shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2003, § 8, 5-8-2012) 
Chapter 14 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Disaster Act of 1975, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001 et seq.; local emergency management, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.101 et seq.; statewide mutual and system, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.111; disaster mitigation, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.121 et seq.; citizen duties and claims of compensation resulting from disasters, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.151 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Conflicting provisions. 
    This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule, or regulation. 
(Code 1973, § 6-8; Ord. No. 1316, § 8, 3-9-1982) 
Sec. 14-2. - Nonliability for damage. 
(a)  This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of the activity. 
(b)  Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who, voluntarily and without compensation, grants to the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack, shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Code 1973, § 6-9; Ord. No. 1316, § 9, 3-9-1982) 
Sec. 14-3. - Unauthorized warning and all-clear signals prohibited; penalties. 
    It is unlawful to operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal or the termination of a warning. 
(Code 1973, § 6-6; Ord. No. 1316, § 6, 3-9-1982) 
Sec. 14-4. - National incident management system and incident command system (NIMS/ICS). 
    The city council adopts the most recent edition of the National Incident Management System and Incident Command System (NIMS/ICS), as amended from time to time, as required by HSPD-5. 
(Code 1973, § 6-13; Ord. No. 1878, 9-13-2005) 
Secs. 14-5-14-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL ORGANIZATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal emergency management programs, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.103; emergency management directors, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.1015. 

Sec. 14-27. - Emergency management director. 
(a)  Office established; mayor appointed to fill office. The city has created the office of city emergency management director, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. He may delegate authority for execution but responsibility shall remain with the director. 
(b)  Powers, duties and responsibilities. The powers, duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  Surveying actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property with the city and identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(2)  As part of his responsibility for hazard mitigation, supervising the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city, and recommending for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan. 
(3)  Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services that could be used during a disaster, as well as a continuing study of the need for amendments and improvements in the emergency management plan. 
(4)  The issuance of reasonable rules, regulations or directives which are necessary for the protection of life and property in the city. Such rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall receive widespread publicity, unless publicity would be of aid and comfort to the enemy. 
(5)  Authority to declare a local state of disaster subject to confirmation by the city council at its next regular meeting. 
(6)  Appointing an emergency management coordinator, if the director deems it necessary or advisable, to serve at the pleasure of the director. 
(7)  Issuance of necessary proclamations as to the existence of a disaster and the immediate operational effectiveness of the city emergency management plan. 
(8)  Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(9)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(10)  Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations. 
(11)  After a declaration of emergency, marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city to aid in carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(12)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(13)  Supervision of, and final authorization for, the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(14)  Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(15)  Other powers, duties and responsibilities as specified in the Texas Disaster Act of 1974, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 418.001 et seq. 
(Code 1973, §§ 6-1-6-3; Ord. No. 1316, §§ 1, 2, 4, 3-19-1982) 
State Law reference- Emergency management directors, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.101. 
Sec. 14-28. - Joint emergency management council; authority; powers. 
    The city council is authorized to join with the county judges of the counties of DeWitt and Lavaca, and the mayors of the other cities in the counties, in the formation of an emergency management council for the counties of DeWitt and Lavaca, and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management, insofar as the program may affect the city. 
(Code 1973, § 6-4) 
State Law reference- All political subdivisions included within the jurisdiction by local interjurisdictional agency, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.101; county required to maintain emergency management program, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.102; interjurisdictional emergency management programs, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.104; liaison officers, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.105. 
Sec. 14-29. - Operational organization; composition; functions; duties. 
    The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as all organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. Such plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign tasks, duties and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this article. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management of this state and the federal government. 
(Code 1973, § 6-5; Ord. No. 1316, § 5, 3-9-1982) 
Sec. 14-30. - Oath of office. 
    Each employee, or any individual that is assigned a function or responsibility, shall solemnly swear or affirm to support and defend the state and federal law and city ordinances. 
(Code 1973, § 6-12; Ord. No. 1316, § 12, 3-9-1982) 
Sec. 14-31. - Expenditure of funds, city council approval required. 
    No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise, without prior and specific approval of the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 6-10; Ord. No. 1316, § 10, 3-9-1982) 
Sec. 14-32. - Priority of orders, etc. 
    At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Code 1973, § 6-7; Ord. No. 1316, § 7, 3-9-1982) 
Sec. 14-33. - Obstructing members; disobeying rules; impersonating member; fine. 
    It is unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do an act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so had been granted to such person by the proper official. 
(Code 1973, § 6-11; Ord. No. 1316, § 11, 3-9-1982) 
Chapter 16 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Clean Air Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 382.001 et seq.; outdoor burning, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 382.018; pollution prevention, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.501 et seq.; Flood Control and Insurance Act, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.311 et seq.; authorizing municipalities to take all necessary and reasonable actions to comply with the requirements and criteria of the National Flood Insurance Program, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.315; Geothermal Resources Act, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 141.001 et seq.; water quality control, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 26.001. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD PREVENTION AND CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
    Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
    Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year (also called the base flood). 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. The term "existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the administrator, where the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as Zones A, M, or E. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the federal emergency management agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). See Flood elevation study. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding ). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance), and other applications of police power. The term "floodplain management regulations" describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway. See Regulatory floodway. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term "functionally dependant use" includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home. 
(1)  The term "manufactured home" means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. 
(2)  The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle that is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections, designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Special flood hazard area. See Area of special flood hazard. 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, 16 USC 3501 et seq.), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basements, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure to such extent that the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the improvement. 
(2)  The term "substantial improvement" includes structures, which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. 
(3)  The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
b.  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Code 1973, § 81/2-5; Ord. No. 1976, § 5, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 16-20. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Code 1973, § 81/2-2; Ord. No. 1976, § 2, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 16-21. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 1973, § 81/2-3; Ord. No. 1976, § 3, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 16-22. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities. 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development, which may increase flood damage. 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Code 1973, § 81/2-4; Ord. No. 1976, § 4, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 16-23. - Lands to which this article applies. 
    This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 81/2-6; Ord. No. 1976, § 6, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 16-24. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), Community Number 480434, for Lavaca County, Texas and Incorporated Areas, dated November 26, 2010, and DeWitt County, Texas and Incorporated Areas, dated January 6, 2011, and any revisions thereto are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 81/2-7; Ord. No. 1976, § 7, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 16-25. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 81/2-8; Ord. No. 1976, § 8, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 16-26. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1973, § 81/2-9; Ord. No. 1976, § 9, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 16-27. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1973, § 81/2-10; Ord. No. 1976, § 10, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 16-28. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and deemed neither to limit or repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1973, § 81/2-11; Ord. No. 1976, § 11, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 16-29. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Code 1973, § 81/2-12; Ord. No. 1976, § 12, 11-9-2010) 
Secs. 16-30-16-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 16-47. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The code enforcement officer is appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance, National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Code 1973, § 81/2-13; Ord. No. 1976, § 13, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 16-48. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agencies prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer this article. 
(Code 1973, § 81/2-14; Ord. No. 1976, § 14, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 16-49. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
(a)  No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent city council from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 1973, § 81/2-22; Ord. No. 1976, § 22, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 16-50. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures. 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed. 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 16-71(2). 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 16-48(1). 
(b)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others. 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development. 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems. 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site. 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable. 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(Code 1973, § 81/2-15; Ord. No. 1976, § 15, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 16-51. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article. 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon showing a good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(k)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(l)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that the criteria of this section are met and the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Code 1973, § 81/2-16; Ord. No. 1976, § 16, 11-9-2010) 
Secs. 16-52-16-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION STANDARDS 

Sec. 16-70. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Code 1973, § 81/2-17; Ord. No. 1976, § 17, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 16-71. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided, the following requirements are applicable: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review structural designs, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  All manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, must be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not otherwise subject to the provisions of this section shall be elevated so that either the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation or the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(Code 1973, § 81/2-18; Ord. No. 1976, § 18, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 16-72. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with the requirements of this article. All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of this article. 
(b)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to this article. 
(c)  All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Code 1973, § 81/2-19; Ord. No. 1976, § 19, 11-9-2010) 
Chapter 18 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal fire protection generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.001 et seq.; municipal authority to adopt and enforce fire regulations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.003; fire control and prevention generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 344.001 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.001 et seq.; fire escapes, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 791.002; city fire loss lists, V.T.C.A., Insurance Code § 2003.051; arson, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.02; prescribed burning standards, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 153.047. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Arson award. 
    The city offers a reward of $250.00 for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person found guilty of committing the crime of arson within the city. This reward is a standing offer and shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 8-1; Ord. No. 1799, § 1, 5-14-2002) 
Secs. 18-2-18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-21. - International Fire Code. 
(a)  Adopted. The city has adopted the 2000 International Fire Code, which is incorporated in this section, with the exceptions provided in this section. 
(b)  Penalties for violations. Penalties for violating any provision of the fire code adopted in this section shall be as provided in section 1-15. 
(c)  Terms defined. Wherever the term "municipality" is used in the adopted fire code, it shall be held to mean this city. Wherever the term "code official" is used in the adopted fire code, it shall be held to mean the fire marshal of this city. Wherever the term "fire marshal" is used in the adopted fire code, it shall be held to mean the city fire chief as a city employee under the direction and supervision of the city manager. 
(d)  Amendment. Section 108.1 (board of appeals established) of the adopted fire code is amended to provide: "Whenever the fire marshal shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire marshal to the construction board of adjustments and appeals." 
(e)  Enforcement by fire marshal. The fire code adopted in this section shall be enforced by the city fire marshal. 
(Code 1973, §§ 8-4-8-7; Ord. No. 1799, §§ 4-7, 5-14-2002) 
Secs. 18-22-18-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADDITIONAL LOCAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 18-46. - Open fires. 
    No open fires for the burning of trash or rubbish within the city are permitted at any time. The term "open fire" includes any fire other than in a stove or furnace which will completely enclose the fire and that is equipped with a flue sufficient to prevent sparks from being blown. 
(Code 1973, § 10-14; Ord. No. 562, 12-8-1949; Ord. No. 767, 2-1-1960) 
Sec. 18-47. - Fireworks. 
    No person shall cast, throw or fire any squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo, grenade, cap or cartridge, or other combustible fireworks of any kind in the city. No person shall exhibit or have in his possession with intent to give away or sell or offer for sale any squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo, grenade or other combustible fireworks of any kind in the city. No fireworks shall be stored within the city. 
(Code 1973, §§ 8-2, 8-3; Ord. No. 1799, §§ 2, 3, 5-14-2002) 
State Law reference- Regulation of fireworks and fireworks displays, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.001 et seq.; authority for local ordinances regulating fireworks, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.004; fireworks safety and education program, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.253. 
Chapter 20 - HEALTH AND PUBLIC WELFARE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Health and the safety of food, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 431.001 et seq.; municipal regulatory authority concerning food service employees not preempted by state regulation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 438.031 et seq.; municipality which is member of public health district not prohibited from regulating or administering permit system concerning food service establishments, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 437.004(d); municipal public safety generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.001 et seq.; practices related to health and safety, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1951.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TOBACCO SMOKING/ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Smoking tobacco in certain locations prohibited, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 48.01; Texas Clean Air Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 382.001 et seq.; authority of municipalities to enact and enforce ordinances regarding air pollution, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 382.113. 

Sec. 20-19. - Smoking prohibited in public buildings. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to perform the following acts in any public building in the city or within 12 feet of any entrance to any public building: to smoke or light, or carry while lighted, any cigarette, electronic cigarette and/or e-cigarette, cigar, pipe or any tobacco smoking device: 
(1)  It is unlawful for any owner or operator of any public building to allow the operation of that building, including food establishments, unless a no smoking sign or international no smoking symbol is posted at a location clearly visible to a person entering the building. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any owner or operator of any building to place or allow to be placed any ashtrays, smoking paraphernalia or signs that indicate smoking is permitted in any public building or within 12 feet from an entrance to any public building. 
(b)  In this section, the term "public building" means any building other than a building used as a private residence, or the outdoor seating facilities of any city owned property. If portions of a building are used as a private residence and another portion of the building is used for business purposes or commercial activities, then the term "public building," as used herein, shall apply to the portions of the building used for business purposes or commercial purposes, but not the portion used solely as a residence. 
(c)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section if the establishment in which a prohibited activity occurred was a bar at the time of the alleged offense. For purposes of this section, a bar is an establishment that derives more than 65 percent of its revenue from the sale of drinks containing alcohol. 
(Code 1973, § 5-141; Ord. No. 1922, § 1, 5-12-2007; Ord. No. 2110, 5-10-2016) 
Sec. 20-20. - Definitions. 
    Smoke or smoking as used herein shall mean and includes the carrying, possessing or holding of a pipe, cigarette, tobacco product, electronic cigarette or e-cigarette or liquid nicotine of any kind which is burning or emitting a vapor. 
    Electronic cigarette and/or e-cigarette as used herein shall mean any electronic device composed of a mouthpiece, heating element, battery and electronic circuits that provides, or is manufactured or intended to provide, a vapor of liquid nicotine and/or other substances mixed with propylene glycol and/or other substances delivered or deliverable to the user that he/she can inhale in simulation of smoking. This term shall include every version and type of such devices whether they are manufactured or marketed as electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes, electronic cigars, e-cigars, electronic pipes, e-pipes or under any other product name or description. 
(Ord. No. 2110, 5-10-2016) 
Secs. 20-21-20-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 20-51. - Definition of director; charges for inspection; state rules adopted. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Director means the director of the Victoria City-County Health Department, or an authorized representative of such director. 
(b)  Charges for inspection shall be as set from time to time by the director. 
(c)  For the purpose of establishing uniform rules and regulations, the city adopts sections 161 through 171 and sections 173 through 175 of chapter 229 of 25 Texas Administrative Code, which are promulgated by the Texas Board of Health, as amended; and such existing rules as adopted and enforced by the director to carry out the regulations within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1973, §§ 9-1, 9-3; Ord. No. 1398, 2-12-1985; Ord. No. 1531, §§ 1-3, 7-10-1990) 
Sec. 20-52. - Compliance with article required. 
    No food establishment shall be operated within the city unless it conforms to the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 9-5; Ord. No. 1398, 2-12-1985) 
Sec. 20-53. - Permit-Required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment in the city who does not possess an unrevoked permit from the director. Such permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place. A person conducting an itinerant restaurant shall not be required to secure a permit. 
(Code 1973, § 9-6; Ord. No. 1398, 2-12-1985) 
Sec. 20-54. - Same-Who may obtain. 
    Only persons who comply with the requirements of this article shall be entitled to receive and retain a permit to own or operate a food establishment or itinerant restaurant in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 9-7; Ord. No. 1398, 2-12-1985) 
Sec. 20-55. - Same-Duration; fees. 
(a)  Food establishment permits shall be secured for the calendar year or each part thereof in which operations are to be conducted. 
(b)  The fees for food establishment permits are as prescribed in this article. Such fees are to help defray a part of the expenses necessary and incident to the enforcement of this article and are payable to the city clerk after approval is given the food establishment by the director. Upon proof of payment of such fee such permit shall be issued by the director. 
(c)  The fees for the respective food handling licenses shall be charged and collected by the city as set from time to time by the council in the Manual of Fees and Services Charges of the city. 
(Code 1973, §§ 9-8, 9-15; Ord. No. 1398, 2-12-1985) 
Sec. 20-56. - Same-Suspension, revocation. 
(a)  When on inspection by the director he determines the owner or operator of a food establishment of this city to be in violation of the requirements of this article and a reinspection is made where required after the lapse of at least 24 hours and it is determined that such owner or operator remains in violation of the requirements of this article, and fails or refuses to voluntarily cease operation until such requirements are met, notice of institution of procedures to suspend or revoke such permit shall be given such owner or operator by the director. Such procedure shall be instituted by the director by filing a copy of his inspection report accompanied by his recommendation for either revocation or suspension of such permit with the city council. 
(b)  The city council may suspend or revoke the permit of such food establishment owner or operator after hearing has been held by such body on such report and recommendation of the director. 
(c)  Such hearing shall be held not less than five nor more than 15 days after such proceedings are instituted. The owner or operator of such food establishment shall be notified by such body of the time and place of such hearing at least three days prior to the date set for such hearing. 
(d)  In the event the director determines that a food establishment is creating an immediate threat to human life or health by remaining open, the director may suspend the food establishment permit of the owner or operator of such establishment and order that such establishment be closed on an emergency basis for a maximum period of 15 days and provide a post-suspension hearing in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1973, § 9-9; Ord. No. 1398, 2-12-1985) 
Sec. 20-57. - Same-Reinstatement. 
    Any food establishment owner or operator, the permit of whose establishment has been suspended or revoked, may at any time make application to the director for reinstatement of the permit. Within one day after the receipt of such application stating that the violated provision or provisions of this article have been complied with, the director shall make an inspection, and thereafter as many additional inspections as is necessary to ensure himself that the requirements of this article are not being violated, and shall reinstate such permit immediately when such violated provision or provisions of this article have been complied with. 
(Code 1973, § 9-10; Ord. No. 1398, 2-12-1985) 
Sec. 20-58. - Examination, sampling and condemnation of food. 
    Samples of food and other substances may be taken and examined by the director as often as may be necessary for the detection of unwholesomeness, misbranding or adulteration. The director may condemn or forbid the sale of, or cause to be removed or destroyed, any food which such examination proves to be unwholesome or adulterated. 
(Code 1973, § 9-11; Ord. No. 1398, 2-12-1985) 
Sec. 20-59. - Inspections. 
    At least once every six months the director shall inspect every food establishment within the city. In case the director discovers the violation of any item of sanitation, the owner or operator of the establishment in which the violation was discovered shall be liable to the suspension of permit and the penalties provided in section 9-16. The director shall notify the owner or operator of any such establishment in which such violation is discovered by leaving a copy of the inspection report at such establishment stating the nature of violation. The director shall make a second inspection after the lapse of such time as he deems necessary for the defect to be remedied, provided such second inspection shall not be made before the lapse of 24 hours after the first inspection when violation was found. 
(Code 1973, § 9-12; Ord. No. 1398, 2-12-1985) 
Sec. 20-60. - Access to premises and records. 
    Any person operating a food establishment shall, upon request of the director, permit access to all parts of the establishment and shall permit copying of any or all records of food purchased. 
(Code 1973, § 9-13; Ord. No. 1398, 2-12-1985) 
Sec. 20-61. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof unless, otherwise provided in a special section of this article, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00 and each day of violation of this article shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1973, § 9-16; Ord. No. 1398, 2-12-1985) 
Chapter 22 - HUMAN RELATIONS AND SOCIAL SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Fair Housing Act, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 301.001 et seq.; rights and responsibilities of persons with disabilities, V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 121.001 et seq.; health and human services, V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 131.001 et seq.; rights of the elderly, V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 102.003; fair campaign practices, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 258.004. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING 

Sec. 22-19. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is declared to be the policy of the city to bring about through fair, orderly and lawful procedures, the opportunity of each person to obtain housing without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status. It is further declared that such policy is established upon a recognition of the inalienable rights of each individual to obtain housing without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status, and further that the denial of such rights through considerations based on these protected classes is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an unjust denial or deprivation of such inalienable rights which is within the power and the proper responsibility of government to prevent. 
(Code 1973, § 61/2-21; Ord. No. 1870, § 1, 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 22-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Director means the city manager or authorized assistant. 
    Discriminatory housing practice means an act which is unlawful under this article. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more persons and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereof of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
    Family means a single individual or a group of individuals living together under one common roof. 
    Major life activities means functions such as, but not limited to, caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working. 
    Physical or mental handicap means any physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities. 
    Physical or mental impairment includes: 
(1)  Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or 
(2)  Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities. 
    Senior adult means a person 55 years of age or older. 
    To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Code 1973, § 61/2-22; Ord. No. 1870, § 2, 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 22-21. - Interpretation and effect. 
    This article shall in no way be interpreted as creating a judicial right or remedy which is the same or substantially equivalent to the remedies provided under Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, commonly known as the Fair Housing Act, codified as 42 USC 3601 et seq., or the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act, codified at 15 USC 1691 et seq. All aggrieved parties shall retain the rights granted to them under such acts. In construing this article, it is the intent of the city council that the courts shall be guided by federal court interpretations of the federal law cited in this section. 
(Code 1973, § 61/2-23; Ord. No. 1870, § 3, 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 22-22. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
    Except as exempted, it is unlawful: 
(1)  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status. 
(2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of a sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status. 
(3)  To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(4)  To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status, that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  To induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status. 
(Code 1973, § 61/2-24; Ord. No. 1870, § 4, 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 22-23. - Discrimination in housing financing. 
    It is unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company, or other person whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status of such person or such persons associated therewith or because of the race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwellings for which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Code 1973, § 61/2-25; Ord. No. 1870, § 5, 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 22-24. - Discrimination in providing brokerage service. 
    It is unlawful for any person to deny another person access to membership in, or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling and renting dwellings or to discriminate against another person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status. 
(Code 1973, § 61/2-26; Ord. No. 1870, § 6, 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 22-25. - Unlawful intimidation. 
    It is unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize any individual, group or business because such individual, group, or business has complied with the provisions of this article or has exercised in good faith rights under this article, or has enjoyed the benefits of this article, or because such individual, group, or business has made a charge in good faith, testified in good faith, or assisted in good faith in any manner in any investigation, or in any proceeding hereunder or has made any report to the director. 
(Code 1973, § 61/2-27; Ord. No. 1870, § 7, 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 22-26. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall apply to: 
(1)  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that: 
a.  Such private individual owner does not own more than three single-family houses at any one time; 
b.  If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of the sale or was not the most recent resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; 
c.  Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on such person's behalf, under any express voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one time; 
d.  The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and 
e.  The sale or rental is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement or written notice in violation of this article; but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(2)  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(b)  For the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
(1)  He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; 
(2)  He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(3)  He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or a nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members, or from giving preference to its members. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such housing accommodation. 
(f)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any dwelling designed and operated exclusively for senior adults and their spouses, unless the sale, rental, lease or occupancy is further restricted on account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap or familial status. 
(g)  Nothing in this article shall bar a person who owns, operates or controls rental dwellings, whether located on the same property or on one or more contiguous parcels of property, from reserving any grouping of dwellings for the rental or lease to tenants with a minor child or children; provided, however, in the event that the reserved area is completely leased or rented, the person owning, operating or controlling the rental dwelling may not refuse to rent or lease any other available dwelling to the prospective tenant on the basis of the tenant's status as parent or any other of the protected classifications set forth in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 61/2-28; Ord. No. 1870, § 8, 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 22-27. - Violations. 
    No person shall violate any provision of this article, or knowingly obstruct or prevent compliance with this article. 
(Code 1973, § 61/2-29; Ord. No. 1870, § 9, 5-10-2005) 
Sec. 22-28. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Generally. The director shall have the responsibility of administering and implementing this article. The director may delegate the authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other designated city employees. 
(b)  Complaints. 
(1)  Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereinafter referred to as the charging party) may file a complaint with the director. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The director shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge to any person upon request. 
(2)  The director shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and the secretary of housing and urban development pursuant to the provisions of the Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, commonly known as the Fair Housing Act of 1968, codified at 42 USC 3601 et seq., and shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same manner as complaints filed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(3)  All complaints shall be filed within 180 days following the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the director shall provide notice of the complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the person named therein (hereinafter referred to as the respondent) who allegedly committed or were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The respondent may file an answer to the complaint within 15 days of receipt of the written complaint. 
(4)  All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(5)  If at any time the director shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person has committed a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed or is about to be filed, the director may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and in his own name and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(c)  Investigation and conciliation. 
(1)  Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the director shall cause to be made a prompt and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint; provided, however, that before any charge becomes accepted for investigative purposes, the director or an investigator shall have personally reviewed with the charging party the allegations contained therein and shall have determined that the charge comes within the provisions of this article. In the event such review results in the determination that a particular charge does not come within the provisions of this article, the charging party shall be given a clear and concise explanation of the reasons why it does not. The respondent shall be provided with a notice of determination. 
(2)  If the director determines that there is not probable cause to believe that a particular alleged discriminatory housing practice has been committed, the director shall take no further action with respect to that alleged offense. 
(3)  During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of compliant, the director shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and to obtain adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with provisions of this article. Nothing stated or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the director, the council, the investigator, the conciliator, the charging party, or the respondent, or be used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding without the written consent of all persons concerned. 
(4)  Upon completion of an investigation where the director has made a determination that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, if the director is unable to secure from the respondent an acceptable conciliation agreement, then the director must refer the case to the city attorney for prosecution in municipal court. The city attorney shall, after such referral, make a determination as to whether to proceed with prosecution of such complaint in municipal court. 
(5)  Upon determination by the city attorney to proceed with prosecution in municipal court, the respondent may appeal the determination to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days of notice of determination. The city council shall consider the grounds for the appeal and may approve or deny the request. 
(6)  If review by the city council determines that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, the city council shall attempt informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and assurance of future voluntary compliance with provisions of this article. If informal endeavors fail, the city council shall instruct the city attorney to proceed with prosecution in municipal court. 
(d)  Penalty. If a discrimination housing practice is found to have in fact occurred and the case has been referred to municipal court, upon conviction the respondent shall be assessed a penalty per violation as provided for in section 1-15. 
(Code 1973, § 61/2-30; Ord. No. 1870, § 10, 5-10-2005) 
Chapter 24 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal police forces generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.001 et seq.; municipal authority relating to jails, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 361.001 et seq.; municipal contracts with county or private entity for jail facilities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 361.061 et seq. 

Chapter 26 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority for regulation of nuisances and disorderly conduct, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 217.001 et seq.; persons not to permit abandoned property to become public health nuisance, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.013; municipality authority to require the owner of a lot in the municipality to keep the lot free from weeds, rubbish, brush, and other environmental nuisances, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq.; abatement of junked vehicle declared to be a public nuisance, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.001 et seq.; enhanced penalty for violation ordinances governing fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001(b); abatement of common and public nuisances, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 125.001 et seq.; municipal authority regarding substandard buildings, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Brush means all trees or shrubbery under seven feet in height and less than three inches in diameter which are not maintained, cared for, or cultivated. 
    Debris means dirt, concrete, rocks, brick or other building materials not being used for on-site improvements pursuant to a duly issued building permit. 
    Junk means all worn-out, worthless, and discarded matter. 
    Lot means land within the property lines and all areas of public right-of-way adjacent to and extending beyond the property line of the lot: 
(1)  To the curbline of adjacent streets, where a curbline has been established; or 
(2)  Where the curbline is not established, to pavement edge, or where pavement is not established, to the active road bed; and 
(3)  To the center of adjacent alleys. 
    Objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter means organic or mineral matter or any composition or residue thereof. 
    Owner means any person owning any interest in a lot as indicated by the appraisal district records. 
    Rubbish means garbage, trash and other discarded articles and materials. 
    Stagnant water means water which stands upon premises in such a manner, and over such a period of time, that it is likely to become a breeding place for mosquitoes. 
    Trash means worthless or useless small things other than garbage, debris, brush and yard waste. 
    Weeds means a plant of no value or uncultivated vegetation that may become a harborage for pests. 
(Code 1973, § 10-25; Ord. No. 1763, 10-10-2000) 
Sec. 26-2. - Prohibited nuisances; applicability of provisions. 
(a)  The existence of brush; debris; junk; objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter; rubbish; stagnant water; trash; or weeds upon a lot in violation of this chapter is declared to constitute a public nuisance subject to the abatement procedures prescribed in this chapter. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any owner of any lot or parcel of land or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, to permit weeds or grass to grow to a height greater than 12 inches upon the premises. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any owner of any lot or parcel of land or portion thereof, to allow weeds, grass and trash to create a hazardous or unsafe condition that may interfere with passage on sidewalks, walkways, streets or public right-of-ways adjacent to the lot or property. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any owner of any lot or parcel of land, or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, to permit any junk, brush, trash, debris, rubbish, or any other objectionable, unsightly, or unsanitary matter of whatever nature to accumulate or be present upon any such lot or parcel of land. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any owner of any lot or parcel of land or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, to permit the open storage of any inoperative or unused ice box, refrigerator, stove, or similar items upon any such lot or parcel of land. 
(f)  It is unlawful for any owner of a lot to allow stagnant water to accumulate upon the surface of such lot. 
(g)  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to: 
(1)  The area in excess of 50 feet from any lot line adjacent to public property or private property containing a habitable dwelling; 
(2)  Cultivated, agricultural or pasture land; or 
(3)  Land or facility use approved, permitted or licensed by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 10-26; Ord. No. 1763, 10-10-2000) 
Secs. 26-3-26-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ABATEMENT 

Sec. 26-23. - Duty to abate. 
    It shall be the duty of any owner of any lot or parcel of land or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, to cut, or cause to be cut, or remove such brush, weeds, grass, debris, rubbish, trash, junk, stagnant water, ice boxes, refrigerators, stoves, and any and all other objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter of whatever nature as often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1973, § 10-27; Ord. No. 1763, 10-10-2000) 
Sec. 26-24. - Abatement. 
(a)  The city may notify the owner of any lot in writing of the existence of a violation of section 26-2 upon such lot. Such notice shall require the abatement of such violation within seven days of such notice. The notice may be given personally to the owner in writing, or by letter mailed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located. 
(b)  If personal service cannot be obtained, notice can be given by publication once in any newspaper in the city, or by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates, or by posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates if the property contains no buildings. 
(c)  In a notice under this section, the city may inform the owner by regular mail and a posting on the property that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this section occurs within the one-year period, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the city without additional notice may do the work or make the improvements required. 
(d)  As additional authority to abate dangerous weeds, according to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.008, the city may abate, without notice, weeds that have grown higher than 48 inches, that are an immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any person. 
(Code 1973, § 10-28; Ord. No. 1763, 10-10-2000) 
Sec. 26-25. - Appeal; notice; hearing. 
(a)  Any persons aggrieved by any decision of the city inspector concerning interpretation or administration of this article may appeal such decision to the building and standards commission within seven days after personal notice, or notice by publication, or placard placement. 
(b)  The request must be in writing, addressed to the commission, specifying the grounds for the request, and received by the commission or postmarked on or before the seventh day after the prescribed notice is given. Such valid appeal stays all proceedings of abatement. 
(c)  The commission shall set a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the persons aggrieved and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing, the aggrieved persons may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(Code 1973, § 10-29; Ord. No. 1763, 10-10-2000) 
Sec. 26-26. - Collection of cost. 
    The city may direct the city attorney to bring civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the amount due plus all associated costs and fees, including administrative fees. The city attorney is authorized to make use of whatever legal or equitable remedies are available to collect the monies due. The city may also direct the city attorney to bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 10-30; Ord. No. 1763, 10-10-2000; Ord. No. 1861, § 1, 12-14-2004) 
Sec. 26-27. - Corporate liability. 
    In case the owner or occupant of any lot or premises shall be a corporation, and shall violate any such provision, the president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer of such corporation, or any manager, agent or employee of such corporation shall be also severally liable for the penalties herein provided. 
(Code 1973, § 10-31; Ord. No. 1763, 10-10-2000) 
Chapter 28 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Concurrent jurisdiction of municipal court concerning certain violations of state statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003(b); municipal authority for regulation of firearms and explosives, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 229.001; municipal regulation of discharge of firearms, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 229.002; municipal authority for regulation of nuisances and disorderly conduct, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 217.001 et seq.; juvenile curfews in general law municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.905; review of juvenile curfew orders or ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 370.002; municipal policy regarding enforcement of drug laws, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 370.003; municipality may not enact or enforce a law making conduct covered under state penal code an offense subject to criminal penalty, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.08. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Police department authorized to enforce federal, state and local law. 
    The city police department is authorized and required to enforce all laws, statutes and ordinances as prescribed by federal, state or local requirements within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 14-42; Ord. No. 1613, § 2, 11-9-1993) 
Sec. 28-2. - Authority of city council to supersede prohibitions. 
    To the extent permitted by state law, any prohibition enumerated in this Code may be superseded by written authority of the city, or superseded in the exercise of official duty by any employee, agent, contractor or authorized personnel within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 14-46; Ord. No. 1613, § 6, 11-9-1993) 
Sec. 28-3. - Discharge of weapons within city prohibited; exceptions; penalty. 
    It is unlawful to discharge or fire any firearm, gun, pistol, air gun, or BB gun projecting lead or any missiles within the city, excepting in a regularly established and licensed shooting gallery; provided that this section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty; nor to any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or property. 
(Code 1973, § 14-1; Ord. No. 1197, §§ 1, 2, 8-9-1977) 
Sec. 28-4. - Illegally placing advertising on poles. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place or allow to be placed any advertising cards or posters or other like material on any of the poles within the city or on any poles belonging to the city outside the city. 
(Code 1973, § 22-11; Ord. No. 769, § 11001, 11-9-1959) 
Secs. 28-5-28-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-27. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Controlled substance shall have the meaning ascribed to it by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 481.002(5), or any amendments thereto. 
    Controlled substance analogue shall have the meaning ascribed to it by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 481.002(6), or any amendment thereto. 
    Dangerous drug shall have the meaning ascribed to it by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 483.001(2), or any amendment thereto. 
    Prohibited substance means a controlled substance, controlled substance analogue, dangerous drug, volatile chemical, or any combination thereof. Such prohibited substances are included by whatever official, common, usual, chemical, trade, street language, or slang name they may be designated. 
    Volatile chemical means abusable volatile chemical, as defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 485.001(1). 
(Code 1973, § 14-41; Ord. No. 1613, § 1, 11-9-1993; Ord. No. 1619, § 1, 4-12-1994) 
Sec. 28-28. - What constitutes offense. 
    A person commits an offense if, with intent to acquire a prohibited substance, he requests, commands or attempts to induce another to sell, donate or otherwise transfer or deliver a prohibited substance to the person. 
(Code 1973, § 14-43; Ord. No. 1613, § 3, 11-9-1993) 
Sec. 28-29. - Conviction. 
    A person may not be convicted on the uncorroborated testimony of the person allegedly solicited and unless the solicitation is made under circumstances strongly corroborative of both the solicitation itself and the actor's intent that the other person act on the solicitation. 
(Code 1973, § 14-44; Ord. No. 1613, § 4, 11-9-1993) 
Sec. 28-30. - Defense. 
    It is no defense to prosecution under this article that no monetary or other consideration was tendered to the person solicited or that the person solicited was unable or unwilling to transfer or deliver a prohibited substance. It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution under this article that a solicitation is made in furtherance of a transaction that would not constitute a violation of any applicable law or that the solicitation is made by a peace officer or federal law enforcement officer in the lawful discharge of his duties or by a law enforcement agent acting in the lawful discharge of an official duty. 
(Code 1973, § 14-45; Ord. No. 1613, § 5, 11-9-1993) 
Sec. 28-31. - Penalty. 
    Violation of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction as provided in section 1-15. However, any conduct proscribed hereunder which also constitutes an offense under state law shall not be prosecuted under this article, but shall be prosecuted pursuant to and punishable as provided by the applicable state law. An offense under this article is not a lesser included offense under V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code chs. 481, 483 and 485. 
(Code 1973, § 14-47; Ord. No. 1613, § 7, 11-9-1993) 
Secs. 28-32-28-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SALVIA AND SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS 

Sec. 28-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Illegal smoking material means any substance, however marketed, which can reasonably be converted for smoking purposes whether it is presented as incense, tobacco, herbs, spices or any blend thereof if it includes any of the chemicals or a comparable chemical as listed as synthetic cannabinoids. Included in this definition, without limitation, are products containing some or all of the above substances marketed under the name "K-2," "K-2 Summit," "K-2 Sex," "Genie," "Dacents," "Zohai," "Sage," "Spice," "KO Knock-out 2," "Mojo," "Pandora Potpourri," "Smoke", "Spice Gold," "Spice Diamond," "Yucatan Fire," "Red Dragon," "Skunk," "Solar Flare," "Pep Spice," "Fire n' Ice," and "Salvia Divinorum," or other alternative names. 
    Illegal smoking material paraphernalia means any paraphernalia, equipment or utensil that is used or intended to be used in smoking, ingesting or inhaling illegal smoking materials and shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl; 
(2)  Water pipes; 
(3)  Carburetion tubes or devices; 
(4)  Smoking or carburetion masks; 
(5)  Chamber pipes; 
(6)  Carburetor pipes; 
(7)  Electric pipes; 
(8)  Chillums; 
(9)  Bong; or 
(10)  Ice pipes or chillers. 
    Synthetic cannabinoids means substances listed in penalty group 2-A in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 481.1031, and includes, without limitation: 
(1)  Products, by whatever trade name, that are treated, sprayed, or saturated with one or more of the chemicals lists in subsection (2) of this definition; and 
(2)  Any synthetic equivalent of the substance contained in the cannabis plant, or in the resinous extractives of the genus cannabis, or a synthetic substance, derivative, or its isomers with similar chemical structure or pharmacological activity such as: 
a.  Salvia divinorum or salvinorin A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; 
b.  2(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl-6, 6 dimethyl-3(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrabenzocchromen-1-ol (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol); 
c.  1-pentyl-3(1-naphthoyl)indole; some trade or other names; (also known as JWH-018); 
d.  1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole; some trade or other names; (also known as JWH-030); 
e.  1-pentyl-3-4(4-methoxynaphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-081); 
f.  Phenol, CP 47, 497 and homologues, or 2- (1R,3S) hydroxycyclohexyl-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol, where side chain n = 5, and homologues where side chain n = 4, 6 or 7; or 
g.  Any similar structural analogs. 
(Code 1973, § 14-61; Ord. No. 1977, § 1, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 28-52. - Synthetic cannabinoids, illegal smoking products and paraphernalia prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful to use, purchase, sell, exchange, dispense, distribute, manufacture, or deliver synthetic cannabinoids, illegal smoking materials and illegal smoking material paraphernalia, and the possession of such materials in the city limited is prohibited. For purposes of this section, any form of delivery, including simple gift transfer, constitutes delivery and a violation of this section. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to use, possess, purchase, sell, offer to sell, give away, barter, exchange, dispense, deliver, distribute, or manufacture any synthetic cannabinoid or illegal smoking material to any person as defined in this article within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any owner or operator of any public building or business to sell, offer to sell, deliver to or to give any synthetic cannabinoid, illegal smoking material, or illegal smoking material paraphernalia to any person. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to have in his possession any illegal smoking paraphernalia with the intent to use it, to smoke, ingest, inhale or otherwise consume any synthetic cannabinoid or illegal smoking material. It is a violation of this section if a person is found in possession of illegal smoking paraphernalia and appropriate forensic testing is done on the paraphernalia showing traces of synthetic cannabinoid, or illegal smoking material are present on the illegal smoking paraphernalia. 
(Code 1973, § 14-62; Ord. No. 1977, § 1, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 28-53. - Affirmative defenses to prosecution. 
    It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that a synthetic cannabinoid, an illegal smoking product, or illegal smoking paraphernalia was: 
(1)  In the possession of a peace officer, or a person acting under the authority of a peace officer, acting in the performance of official duties. 
(2)  In the possession of or being used by a governmental entity for a health, research, education, or similar program. 
(3)  In the possession of or used by a person at the written direction or under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to prescribe controlled substances within this state. 
(Code 1973, § 14-63; Ord. No. 1977, § 1, 11-9-2010) 
Secs. 28-54-28-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MINORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 28-80-28-101. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to establish a juvenile curfew, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.905; requirement that juvenile curfew ordinances be reviewed and readopted every three years, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 370.002. 

Sec. 28-102. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial establishment means any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
    Curfew hours mean: 
(1)  11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of that next day; 
(2)  12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday; and 
(3)  9:00 a.m. until 3:00 p.m. on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday on days that the school in which the minor is enrolled is in session, unless the minor has school permission to be off-campus. 
    Direct route means the shortest path of travel through a public place to reach a final destination without any detour or stop along the way. 
    Emergency means, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
    Holding location means a place designated by the chief of police to whom a minor taken into custody for a violation of this section will be delivered to wait pickup by a parent or juvenile authorities. 
    Minor means any person under 17 years of age. 
    Parent means a person who is: 
(1)  A natural or adoptive parent of another person; 
(2)  A court-appointed guardian of another person; or 
(3)  At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or court-appointed guardian to have the care and custody of another person. 
    Public place means any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, plaza, building, or other place used by or open to the public, including, but not limited to, parking lots adjacent to commercial establishments. 
    Remain means to: 
(1)  Linger or stay unnecessarily; 
(2)  Walk, run, idle, wander, stroll, or aimlessly drive or ride about in or upon any public place; or 
(3)  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises. 
(Code 1973, § 14-21; Ord. No. 1578, § 1, 9-8-1992; Ord. No. 1929, § 3, 10-9-2007; Ord. No. 2116, 10-11-2016) 
Sec. 28-103. - Offenses. 
    A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. A parent of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, a minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(Code 1973, § 14-22; Ord. No. 1578, § 2, 9-8-1992; Ord. No. 2116, 10-11-2016) 
Sec. 28-104. - Defenses. 
    It is a defense to prosecution under this division that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent and was using a direct route; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in a lawful employment activity, including, but not limited to, newspaper delivery, and was using a direct route; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police officer about the minor's presence; 
(7)  Attending an official school, civic or religious activity or returning home by a direct route from an official school, civic or religious activity; 
(8)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the federal constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; 
(9)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with state law; or 
(10)  Acting at the direction of a peace officer. 
(Code 1973, § 14-23; Ord. No. 1578, § 3, 9-8-1992; Ord. No. 2116, 10-11-2016) 
Sec. 28-105. - Enforcement. 
(a)  A police officer, upon finding a minor in violation of this division, shall: 
(1)  Ascertain the name and address of the minor; 
(2)  Ascertain the name and address of the minor's parents; 
(3)  Issue to the minor a written warning that the minor is in violation of this division; 
(4)  Order the minor to go promptly home by a direct route; and 
(5)  Submit a copy of the warning to the city police department which shall send a letter by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the parent of the minor advising of the fact that the minor was found in violation of this article, soliciting cooperation in the future, and including a warning that any subsequent violation may result in prosecution of the minor or the parent under this section. 
(b)  A police officer, upon finding a minor in violation of this division, who has previously received a written warning for violating this article, shall: 
(1)  Ascertain the name and address of the minor; 
(2)  Ascertain the name and address of the minor's parents; 
(3)  Issue to the minor a municipal court misdemeanor citation; 
(4)  Order the minor to go promptly home by a direct route; and 
(5)  Submit a copy of the citation to the city police department which shall send a letter by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the parent of the minor advising of the fact that the minor was found in violation of this article on a second occasion and received a municipal court misdemeanor citation. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) of this section, a police officer, upon finding a minor in violation of this division, may take the minor into custody and deliver the minor to a holding location if the minor has received both a written warning and a municipal court misdemeanor citation for a violation of this division or reasonable grounds exist to believe the minor has engaged in delinquent conduct or conduct indicating a need for supervision in accordance with V.T.C.A., Family Code § 51.03. 
(d)  When a minor is taken into custody under this section, the police department shall immediately notify a parent to pick up the minor at the holding location. After a parent arrives at a holding location and provides the information required by the chief of police to file an incident report, the minor shall be released into custody of the parent and the police officer may, in his discretion, issue to the parent a municipal court misdemeanor citation for a violation of this division. 
(Code 1973, § 14-24; Ord. No. 1578, § 4, 9-8-1992; Ord. No. 2116, 10-11-2016) 
Sec. 28-106. - Penalties. 
    Any minor who violates this division three or more times within a 24-month period is subject to appropriate action by a juvenile court in accordance with V.T.C.A., Family Code chs. 51 and 52. A minor or a parent of a minor who violates this division is, upon conviction, punishable as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1973, § 14-25; Ord. No. 1578, § 5, 9-8-1992; Ord. No. 2116, 10-11-2016) 
Chapter 30 - OIL AND GAS WELLS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Injection wells, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 27.001 et seq.; plugging leaking wells, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 89.043; movement of oversize or overweight oil well servicing and drilling machinery, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 623.141 et seq.; oil and gas generally, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 81.001 et seq.; mines and mining, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 131.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    A.P.I. means American Petroleum Institute. 
    Applicant means any person who applies for a permit under this chapter. 
    Drilling operation means the making of a hole in the earth for the purpose of discovery, exploration, or production of oil, gas, or minerals. 
    Operator means every person, and the agents, servants, and employees of the person, engaged in operations for the drilling, reworking, servicing, or plugging and abandonment of any well subject to the provisions of this chapter and the production or transportation of any product therefrom. 
    Permit means a permit granted pursuant to the provisions thereof. 
    Permittee means any person holding a permit granted under this chapter. 
    Well means any excavation or bore downward from the surface intended to extend 200 feet or more into the subsurface, made by any means or manner for the purpose of exploring for, discovering, producing, or injecting hydrocarbons or other mineral. 
(b)  All words used but not defined in this chapter that have accepted meanings in the oil and gas industry shall have the same meaning in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art I, § 3, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-2. - Administrative enforcement authority. 
    Administrative enforcement of this chapter shall be by a city oil and gas inspector who shall be appointed by the city manager. It shall be the duty of the city oil and gas inspector to enforce the provisions hereof and to that end he is hereby vested with police authority. In the event there is no person filling an office at any time, the city manager shall fulfill the duties or designate some other city officer or employee to do so. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art V, § 1, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-3. - Effect of chapter on other property and drilling rights. 
    Neither this chapter nor any permit issued hereunder shall be interpreted as granting any right or license to the permittee to enter upon or use any land nor shall it limit or prevent the free right of the owners of the land to contract for any payment of any kind of damages or for rights or privileges with respect thereto. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the drilling of any well where the operator has no legal authority to do so. No well shall be drilled at any location where there are of record valid and legally enforceable restrictions or covenants prohibiting the drilling of the well. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art III, § 8, 6-10-1980) 
Secs. 30-4-30-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DRILLING PERMITS 

Sec. 30-25. - Required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, acting either for himself or as agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant of another person, to commence to drill, or to operate any well or to assist in the drilling, completing or operating of any well for oil or gas within the city unless a permit for the well shall have been first obtained as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art III, § 1, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-26. - Application. 
(a)  Filing; content generally. An application for a drilling permit shall be filed in duplicate, with all required exhibits attached thereto, in the office of the city clerk for each well to be drilled. Such application shall be signed and the accuracy of the contents thereof shall be sworn to before a notary public by the applicant or some representative of the applicant having legal authority to enter into contracts binding upon the applicant, and shall include the following: 
(1)  Applicant's identifying information. Name and address of the applicant; and, if a corporation, the name and address of the person upon whom process may be served for the corporation; and, if a partnership, the names and addresses of all the general partners. 
(2)  Local agents. The name, address, and telephone number of a person, other than applicant, designated as local agent of the applicant to receive for the applicant all process, citation, notices, and demands hereunder. If appropriate, more than one telephone number shall be furnished. 
(3)  Proposed depth; budget. Proposed total depth of the well; proposed casing and cementing program of the well; and an itemized budget of the applicant's best estimate as to the costs of drilling the well and of completing and equipping the same if it is a producer. 
(4)  Railroad forms and permits. True copies of Railroad Commission Form No. 1 and railroad commission drilling permit, if issued. 
(5)  Drilling near airport notices. A copy of the notice to the federal aviation administration and city airport advisory board of intention to drill, if required. 
(6)  Insurance certificates. An insurance certificate dated not more than ten days prior to filing the application indicating that the applicant has complied with the minimum insurance requirements specified in this article. 
(7)  Bonds. All bonds required by this article. 
(8)  Filing fee. A filing fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule in cash or bank money order or certified or cashier's check. 
(b)  Certified field notes. In addition, the application shall be accompanied by field notes certified by a licensed surveyor. If the application is for a permit to drill an oil well, the plant and field notes shall designate a 40-acre oil unit; if for a permit to drill a gas well, the plat and field notes shall designate a 320-acre gas unit. 
(c)  Certified plat. In addition, the application shall be accompanied by a plat certified by a licensed surveyor. The plat shall show the proposed surface location of the well, together with the distances from the location to the exterior boundary lines of the drilling block and to all residences, public or parochial schools, hospitals, churches, cemeteries, parks, and public buildings which are located within 400 feet of the surface well location and to all streets and alleys which are located within 50 feet of the surface well location. Such unit designation shall be in as nearly a square or parallelogram as is practicable, taking into consideration existing property lines, boundaries of previously designated oil or gas units, natural boundaries, and availability of surface drill sites. 
(d)  List of parties in interest and property owners. Each application shall be accompanied by a list of the names and last known addresses of all record owners of interests in and to oil, gas, and other minerals under the property located within the drilling block on which the proposed well is to be located. Such list shall specify the fractional share of operating rights within the block owned by each of the owners. The applicant shall indicate separately the percentage of total operating rights within the drilling block owned or controlled by applicant, including those rights acquired by contract from other operating interest owners. 
(e)  Copies of related leases and contracts. There shall be attached to the application photostatic or certified copies of all leases and contracts within the drilling unit which are controlled or owned by the applicant and of all requisite permissions from the owners of the surface and improvements thereon to the end that the application shall show what specified part of the unit the applicant holds under lease or contract with the owners, what specified part of the unit the applicant does not hold under lease or contract with the owners, and that he owns or controls the interest in the unit and the permission from the owners of the surface required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art III, § 2, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-27. - Required interest of applicant in unit. 
    No permit shall be granted under this article for the drilling and operation of any well unless the surface site of the well is owned by the applicant or held by the applicant under an oil and gas lease or a drilling contract from the owners of the site giving the owner's permission to drill a well thereon. No permit shall be granted unless the applicant owns or holds under oil and gas lease or drilling contract from the owners thereof at least 51 percent of the total operation rights in the unit. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art III, § 5, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-28. - Location restrictions. 
    No permit shall be issued under this article for the drilling of an oil and gas well, and no oil or gas well shall be drilled, in the city: 
(1)  Within or at any location nearer than 50 feet from any street, alley, or utility easement. 
(2)  Nearer than 400 feet from any residence or other permanent structure intended for human occupancy, unless the applicant furnishes with his application written waivers executed by all the owners and tenants of the residences and the structures that are located within 400 feet of the proposed. 
(3)  On or within 400 feet of any exterior boundary line of land used by any public or parochial school, hospital, church, or public building; provided, however, that the city council may grant a variance and allow the drilling of a well that does not meet these requirements if the applicant attaches to his application written evidence that the owners or governing bodies of the public or parochial school, hospital, church, or public buildings have consented and agreed in writing to the proposed well location. 
(4)  On or less than 400 feet from the exterior boundary line of lands utilized for cemetery or public park purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art III, § 7, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-29. - Conflicting applications. 
    If the clerk receives and there is pending at the time of hearing applications by more than one applicant for permits to drill to the same reservoir on any single unit within the corporate limits of the city, the city council shall prefer the application, if otherwise sufficient, which is made by the applicant holding the greater percentage of the total operating rights in the unit be fee ownership, or lease or drilling contract from the fee owner of the rights. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art III, § 6, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-30. - Notices; hearing. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application for a permit required by this article, the city clerk shall set a date for a hearing on the application, which date shall be not less than 20 days subsequent to the date of filing the application. 
(b)  Notice of the application and hearing shall be given by the applicant (on the form approved by the city council and available in the office of the city clerk) by certified mail to each owner and each lessee of any lot, block, or tract of land in the unit not owned by applicant or held by him under lease or contract from the owners thereof. The notices shall be addressed to the last known address of the owners and lessees and shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. Prior to the hearing, the applicant shall file an affidavit showing the date and the persons to whom and the addresses to which the notice was mailed by the applicant. 
(c)  A copy of the notice shall be posted by the city clerk on the bulletin board in the entrance hall of the city hall and at the Courthouses of DeWitt and Lavaca County, Texas, at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(d)  The city clerk shall also cause a copy of the notice to be published at least twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, the first publication to be not less than ten days before the date set for hearing. Proof of publication of the notice shall be made by the printer or publisher of the newspaper publishing the same by affidavit filed with the city clerk and the affidavit shall be prima facie evidence of the publication. 
(e)  At the time fixed in the notice, a public hearing on the application shall be held and may be continued at the discretion of the city council from time to time as the council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art III, §§ 3, 4, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-31. - Final decision of city council. 
(a)  Granting of application and issuance of permit. If, after the completion of the hearing, an application is found by the city council to comply in all respects with the terms of this article and that the drilling and operation of a well on the designated unit and at the designated site is not prohibited by the terms of this article or state law, the council shall issue a permit for the drilling and operation of the well. 
(b)  Denial of application. The city council shall refuse the application if it is not found by the city council to comply in all respects with the terms of this article. The city council may also refuse any application for a permit to drill and operate a well at a particular location where by reason of the particular location and the character and value of the permanent improvements already erected on or approximately adjacent to the proposed location and the use to which the land and surroundings are adapted for school, hospital, park, or civic purposes, or for health or safety reasons or any of them, the drilling or operation of a well at the particular location is reasonably calculated to be injurious and disadvantageous to the city and to its inhabitants as a whole or to a substantial number of its inhabitants. 
(c)  Issuance of permit subject to conditions. The city council may also elect to grant a permit on the conditions imposed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art III, §§ 9, 10, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-32. - Bond required. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued until the permittee files with the city clerk a surety bond signed by the applicant as principal and by a good and sufficient corporate surety company in the amount of $1,000,000.00, conditioned that the principal shall: 
(1)  Comply with all the terms and conditions of this article in the drilling and operations of the well. 
(2)  Remedy and repair any and all damages to streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water lines, fire hydrants, and other public property occasioned in any manner by the principal, his agents, employees, contractors and servants. 
(3)  Reimburse the city for all expenditures made by the city with regard to well control and relief wells as provided in this article. 
(4)  Promptly clear all premises of all litter, trash, waste, refuse, and other substances used, allowed, or occurring in the drilling and producing operations and will grade, level, and restore the property to the same surface condition as near as practicable as existed when operations were first commenced. 
(5)  Indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all liability growing out of or attributable to the granting of the permit. 
(b)  The bond shall be payable to the city in a form acceptable to the city attorney. Each bond shall become effective on or before the date it is filed with the city clerk and shall remain in force and effect until the times prescribed in this article; provided, however, the surety on any bond shall have the right to cancel the same upon 30 days' notice to the city clerk, but the cancellation shall not affect any liability which may have arisen hereunder up to the time of the cancellation. Any cancellation shall automatically terminate the permittee's right to operate under the permit until such time as permittee shall furnish another bond as required in this chapter. 
(c)  The term "good and sufficient corporate surety company," as used in this section, means a surety company licensed to do business in this state whose name appears on the current list of accepted surety on federal bonds published by the federal government. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art III, §§ 12, 14, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-33. - Insurance required. 
    Each permittee shall maintain public liability insurance in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art III, § 13, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-34. - Termination of permit; return of bond. 
(a)  Permits issued under this article shall terminate and become inoperative without any action on the part of the city at the expiration of 180 days from the date of issuance, unless within that time actual operations for the drilling of a well shall have commenced. 
(b)  After operations shall have commenced, prior to the completion of a well, the cessation of drilling operations for a period of 90 days shall operate to terminate and cancel the permit and it is unlawful thereafter to continue the operation or drilling of the well without the issuance of another permit. 
(c)  If any permit shall terminate or if the permittee shall file with the city clerk written notice of his election to surrender the permit, then if no claims under the bond filed by the permittee are filed with the city clerk within 120 days thereafter, the city clerk shall return the bond furnished by the permittee. If any claims are filed within the time, then upon the satisfaction or final judicial denial of the claims, the bond shall be returned to the permittee or his assigns. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art III, § 11, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-35. - Reworking operations. 
    If a well shall be completed as a well capable of production and shall thereafter cease to be capable of production, the permittee shall have the right to conduct reworking operations within 90 days after it becomes incapable of production without having to procure a new permit. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art III, § 11, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-36. - Final report. 
    Within 30 days after completion of any well, the permittee shall file with the city clerk a final report including the casing program actually utilized in the well. The final report shall specify any changes in well location, depth, or any other variation from the terms of the application and shall specify the perforated interval and include information pertaining to other perforations, if any. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 14, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-37. - Special relief well permit. 
(a)  Drilling of a relief well may be commenced without first securing a permit if the action is deemed necessary in the good faith opinion of the operator. The operator shall make all reasonable efforts to notify the city oil and gas inspector by telephone as soon as feasible but failure to make the notification shall not be deemed a violation of this article. 
(b)  Within 24 hours after the commencement of operations for the drilling of the relief well, the operator drilling the same shall notify the city oil and gas inspector that the operations have been commenced, stating fully the reasons therefor, and shall within five days after the commencement of operations make application to the city for a special permit to drill the well as a relief well. No filing fee shall be required for a relief well permit but the operator drilling the relief well shall furnish the city any information with respect to the relief well as may be from time to time requested by the city council or the city oil and gas inspector. 
(c)  No well drilled as a relief well shall be completed as a producing well unless a permit therefor shall have been issued in the same manner as is required under this article for the drilling of any other well. 
(d)  A relief well permit will be for a six-month period only, and any relief well not completed as a producing well shall be plugged and abandoned within six months after commencement of drilling operations unless an extension is granted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 16, 6-10-1980) 
Secs. 30-38-30-62. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNITIZATION 

Sec. 30-63. - Purpose. 
    To facilitate the orderly development of oil and gas production in the city and to avoid confiscation of property, all mineral interests in each unit for which a permit is granted shall be unitized as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art IV, § 1, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-64. - Well density restrictions. 
    No more than one completion shall be made in any reservoir on any unit until special field rules have been adopted by the railroad commission for the reservoir. The final well density within each unit shall be no greater than that prescribed by the railroad commission in special field rules which may be adopted for the field. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art IV, § 1, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-65. - Procedure. 
(a)  Not exclusive. The procedure provided in this section for the unitization of oil and gas interests is not intended to be an exclusive method for unitizing the interests. Voluntary unitization is authorized as a substitute for the procedures provided in this section. 
(b)  Options. In the event an application for permit for the drilling, completion, and operation of an oil or gas well is made by a person who does not own in fee or hold by lease or drilling contract from the owners all of the operating rights in the unit as to which the permit is granted, then all of the owners of the operating rights not held or controlled by the permittee shall be entitled to the following options: 
(1)  Mineral fee owners. A mineral fee owner of an oil and gas interest not covered by an existing oil and gas lease shall be entitled to participate as a royalty owner on the basis of one-sixth royalty interest in the property covered by his mineral fee. In addition the mineral fee owner shall be entitled to elect between the options available to the lessees in this section; however, if the mineral fee owner fails to elect between the options available to the lessee within 30 days after the giving of the notice provided for this section, he shall be conclusively presumed to have elected to participate as a royalty owner on the basis of a one-sixth royalty. If any mineral fee owner owns an interest in the oil and gas on, in, and under the land less than the entire fee simple oil and gas mineral estate, then the royalty participation of the mineral fee owner and his share of participation as an operating owner or as a carried owner under Options No. 1 or 2 below shall be reduced in the proportion that his interest bears to the whole and undivided fee and in accordance with the nature of the estate of which he is seized. 
(2)  Oil and gas lessees. An oil and gas lessee shall be entitled to elect between the following options: 
a.  Option No. 1. Lessee may elect within 30 days after the date of posting of the notice to participate in the drilling and production of the well as an active operating interest owner, in which event he shall pay his proportionate part of all drilling and operating costs and shall participate in production in proportion to his ownership in the production unit. If the owner elects to participate as an operation owner, he shall either post bond written by a good and sufficient corporate surety company or deposit cash with the permittee guaranteeing payment to the permittee of the operating interest owner's proportionate share on a surface acreage basis of the following amounts: The estimated monthly operating expenses. If the cost of drilling and completing the well exceeds the estimated cost, the owner shall forthwith on demand pay his proportionate share of the excess to the permittee or, if the actual costs are less than the estimate, the owner's proportionate share of the difference shall be refunded by permittee on demand. Such operating interest owner shall advance to applicant at monthly or other mutually acceptable intervals the owner's share of estimate expenses of operating the production unit, or at the election of the permittee, the owner's share of the operating expenses may be deducted by permittee as they accrue from the revenues from production which otherwise would be payable to the owner. 
b.  Option No. 2. Lessee may elect to become the owner of a carried interest. If lessee elects to be a carried interest owner, he shall not be entitled to receive any revenue from his interest in the drilling block until the time as the participating owners have received from the proceeds of production attributable to the carried interest owner's leasehold interest an amount equal to his proportionate part of the current operating expenses, the cost of purchasing and installing all pipeline, tank batteries, and other equipment installed by the participating owners to facilitate production of oil and gas from the drilling block, and an amount equal to the carried interest owner's proportionate share of the cost of drilling and completing the well within the unit. The interest of the carried interest owner shall be subject to its proportionate share of the unit in accordance with accepted accounting procedures. Any remaining income attributable to the carried interest shall be payable to the owner thereof monthly. If a lessee fails to elect to participate under one of the two options shown herein within 30 days after the date of notice given to him as hereinafter provided, then and in that event the lessee shall be presumed to have elected to participate as a carried interest owner under Option No. 2. 
(c)  Notice to owners. Notice to the owners (whose addresses are known or are ascertainable to use of ordinary diligence) of the oil and gas interests within the affected unit that are not owned or leased by the permittee, and that are not covered by voluntary unitization agreements, shall be given as follows: 
(1)  The permittee shall deliver or send by certified mail to all the owners at their last known address a written notice (in the form approved by the city council, a copy of which is available in the office of the city clerk). The notice shall include: 
a.  A legal description of the unit. 
b.  The type of interest held by the owner being notified (mineral fee, royalty, lessee, overriding royalty, etc.). 
c.  A statement of the options available to the owner being notified as set out in this section, if applicable. 
d.  Notification that if the owner fails to notify the applicant in writing within 30 days from the date of mailing or delivering the notice to the owner of the selection of one of the available options, the owner will be conclusively presumed to have elected to participate as a royalty owner in the case of a fee owner and as a carried interest owner in the case of a lessee. 
(2)  In addition to the individual notification, the applicant shall publish in two issues of a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice in substantial compliance with the form approved by the city council and available in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art IV, § 2, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-66. - Allocation of production; agreements for alternative allocation. 
(a)  Production from any unit shall be allocated to tracts that are unitized under the provisions of this article in the proportion that the number of surface square feet of each the individual tract has to the total surface square footage in the unit. Owners of interests under the tracts shall share in the production allocated to the individual tracts on the basis of their respective interests therein. Production from the unit in which the owner participates shall be treated as production from all of the tracts within the unit. 
(b)  The permittee and the owners of other mineral interests in any unit may alter the obligations set out in this article by agreement between them, provided that the agreement is not in conflict with the other provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art IV, § 3, 6-10-1980) 
Secs. 30-67-30-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DRILLING AND OPERATIONAL STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 30-91. - Earthen and steel pits. 
    It is unlawful for any person to use in connection with any drilling or reworking operation within the city any earthen pit. All pits shall be portable steel pits which shall be removed from the city, with their contents, promptly upon the completion or abandonment of the well. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 1, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-92. - Crude oil storage and receiving tanks. 
    After any oil or gas well is brought into production, all crude oil storage or receiving tanks for the well must be located outside the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 2, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-93. - Derricks and rigs. 
    No operator shall use or operate in connection with the drilling or reworking of any well any wooden derrick or steam powered rig. Motive power for all drilling and other operations shall be diesel electric or gas or gasoline engines. All engines shall be equipped with effective mufflers. No steam-powered rig shall be permitted. No drilling rig or derrick shall be permitted to remain on the drilling site for a period of longer than 30 days after the completion or abandonment of the well. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 3, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-94. - Drilling fluid. 
    The bore holes of all wells while being drilled or reworked shall at all times contain drilling fluid of sufficient weight to exceed the formation pressure anticipated and of the weight and viscosity a reasonably prudent operator would use to keep the well under control. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 4, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-95. - Blow-out preventers. 
(a)  Two dual controlled, fluid operated blow-out preventers with working pressure rating equal to the maximum anticipated well-head pressure shall be used for all drilling or completion operations involving the use of drill pipe or tubing after the surface casing has been set. A hydril type blow-out preventer shall be used in addition to the two dual controlled blow-out preventers above specified. A choke manifold having the same working pressure rating as the preventers shall be installed below the blow-out preventer stack. 
(b)  The mechanical operation of the blow out preventers shall be checked a minimum of every 24 hours and pressure tested prior to installation on each casing string. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 5, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-96. - Drill stem tests. 
    No drill stem test shall be conducted except during daylight hours and then only if the well effluent during the test is produced through an adequate oil and gas separator to storage tanks and the effluent remaining in the drill pipe at the time the tool is closed is flushed to the surface by circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 6, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-97. - Surface casing. 
(a)  All operators shall be required to set and cement a sufficient amount of surface casing to protect properly all fresh water sands in accordance with the requirements of any governmental agency having jurisdiction. The surface casing shall, however, in no case be set to a depth of less than 1,150 feet. 
(b)  The surface casing shall be of new casing and shall be cemented by the pump and plug method. 
(c)  A volume of cement shall be used that, according to accepted engineering procedures, is calculated to fill the annular space between the surface casing and well bore to the surface of the ground and the cement shall be allowed to stand for a minimum period of 12 hours under pressure and for 24 hours before drilling plug or initiating test. 
(d)  After cementing, the surface casing shall be tested by pump pressure of at least 750 pounds per square inch. If at the end of 30 minutes the pressure shows a drop of 150 pounds per square inch or more, the casing shall be condemned. After corrective operations, the casing shall again be tested in the same manner. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 7, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-98. - Production and protection casing. 
    The producing or protection strings of casing shall be of new pipe meeting API specifications. Cementing shall be by the pump and plug method and a volume of cement which is, according to accepted engineering standards, sufficient to fill the annular space between the casing and the well bore to a point at least 600 feet above the shoe or the highest producing zone, whichever is the shallower depth. Cement shall be allowed to stand for a minimum period of 12 hours before drilling the plug. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 8, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-99. - Formation pressures. 
    No well shall be completed or operated in a zone which is reasonably anticipated to produce shut-in pressures in excess of the working pressure rating of the standard API wellhead equipment on the well. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 9, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-100. - Wellheads. 
    All wells drilled or completed in the city shall be equipped with casing heads, tubing heads, and wellhead connections conforming to API standards. The casing heads on the wells shall have working pressure ratings of not less than 3,000 pounds per square inch. Tubing heads and wellhead connections used on the wells shall have working pressure ratings in excess of the well's shut-in surface pressure. All the wells having a surface shut-in pressure of 3,000 pounds per square inch or less shall be equipped with at least one master valve and one wing valve. All wells having surface shut-in pressures in excess of 3,000 pounds per square inch shall be equipped with at least two master valves and one wing valve and no such well shall have threaded connections between the surface safety valve and the Christmas tree. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 10, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-101. - Multiple and tubingless completions. 
    Multiple completions and tubingless completions are permitted. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 11, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-102. - Surface safety valves. 
    A high-low surface safety valve shall be installed on all wells with a surface shut-in pressure in excess of 3,000 pounds per square inch. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 12, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-103. - Subsurface safety valves. 
    All flowing wells having shut-in well head pressure of 1,500 pounds per square inch or above or which are located within 50 feet of a public street shall be equipped with subsurface safety valve installed in the tubing or production string. The valve shall be pulled and inspected each year between April 1 and August 1 and more often if desired by the operator and a report of the inspection shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 13, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-104. - Fences. 
    All wells and production facilities shall be adequately protected by a six-foot chainlink fence with a barbed wire guard at the top and a gate with heavy duty lock. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 18, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-105. - Pumping unit prime movers. 
    Only electric prime movers shall be permitted for the purpose of pumping wells. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 19, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-106. - Vented gas. 
    No operator shall allow gas to escape or be vented into the air except for bleed gas normally vented from standard gas operated controls and normal stock tank vapors. All gas burned shall be burned in a manner which does not create or constitute a fire hazard and the location of the torch, pipe, or other burning device, the construction thereof, the maintenance and operation thereof shall at all times be in compliance with the regulations as may be from time to time issued by the city fire department. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 20, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-107. - Salt water and waste disposal. 
    All salt water produced from any oil or gas well shall be disposed of outside the confines of the city limits. No person shall permit any crude oil, gas, or other petroleum product, salt water, mud, or other effluent to spill over, overflow, leak, drain out, escape or accumulate in or about the premises, on any surface, in any open surface ditch or other exposed surface conduit, or any sewer. No person shall handle any hydrocarbon in any manner or amount which creates a potential fire hazard or permit any condition which may pollute any surface or subsurface water or damage any publicly-owned land. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 21, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-108. - Electrical insulation and isolation. 
    All wells must be electrically isolated from all metallic piping and gathering systems unless the well and the piping are cathodically protected as a system. Electrical isolation of the wells shall be by the use of insulating sleeves and washers in flanges or insulating unions. The effectiveness of the insulating devices must be tested at least every six months and the results of the test reported to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 22, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-109. - Maintenance of premises and surface equipment. 
    All surface areas utilized by an operator for production facilities shall be kept clear of high grass, weeds, and combustible trash and other rubbish or debris; all surface equipment shall be maintained in good condition. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 23, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-110. - Fire hazard and well and operation identification signs. 
    Printed signs with at least two inch letters reading "danger, no smoking or open flames allowed," or similar words shall be posted in conspicuous places on each well and production facility. The signs shall include the drilling block number and the emergency telephone number of the fire department. Well and lease designations required by the railroad commission or any other governmental authority having jurisdiction shall also be displayed. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 23, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-111. - Blocking of streets and alleys. 
    Except when necessary to protect life or property in connection with emergency operations, no street or alley shall be blocked or obstructed by any drilling or producing operations unless prior consent for the blockage is obtained in the form of a resolution by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 24, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-112. - Electrical storms and hurricanes. 
    No well shall be permitted to produce at any time during an electrical storm or hurricane. All drilling and reworking operations shall be shut down during any hurricane and drill pipe shall be either laid down or left in the well bore and drilling and workover masts shall be laid down. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 25, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-113. - Pipelines. 
    Excavation for and installation of pipeline to move oil and gas from any well site across city rights-of-way should be as provided in section 40-1. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 17, 6-10-1980) 
Sec. 30-114. - Loss of control of well. 
(a)  In the event of the loss of control of any well, the operator shall immediately take all reasonable steps to regain control of the well, regardless of any other provisions of this article, and shall notify the city oil and gas inspector as soon as practicable after receipt of notice by the operator of the occurrence of the loss of well control endangering persons or property. 
(b)  If the city oil and gas inspector certifies in writing to the city clerk that, in his opinion, danger to persons or property exists because of the loss or well control (briefly describing the same) and the operator is not taking or is unable to take all reasonably necessary steps to regain control of the well, the city oil and gas inspector may employ any well control experts or other contractors or suppliers of special services or may incur any other expenses for labor or material that the city oil and gas inspector deems necessary to regain control of the well. 
(c)  The city shall have a valid lien against the interest owners in the well to secure the payment of any expenditures made by the city pursuant to any the action in regaining control of the well. However, the lien shall attach to the interest in the well of those persons who have been presumed to have elected to participate as carried interest owners under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 15, 6-10-1980) 
Chapter 32 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal parks and other recreational and cultural resources generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 306.001 et seq.; municipal authority to acquire and maintain parks, museums, and historic sites, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 331.001 et seq.; public use of municipal recreational facilities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 331.007; municipal parks outside municipal limits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 315.001; municipal recreational programs and facilities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 332.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Scope; purpose. 
    This chapter shall apply to all public parks and recreational facilities within the corporate limits of the city, for the purpose of regulating and maintaining recreational facilities conducive to the good health and well-being of the community, and also for the purpose of encouraging the future civic and cultural development of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 15-31; Ord. No. 1431, 6-10-1986) 
Secs. 32-2-32-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD 

Sec. 32-21. - Appointment of members; terms. 
    The city council shall appoint seven members to serve on the parks and recreation board for such terms as may be designated by the board. 
(Code 1973, § 15-32; Ord. No. 1431, 6-10-1986) 
Sec. 32-22. - Jurisdiction; powers and duties. 
(a)  The parks and recreation board is given jurisdiction to provide policy leadership to the operation of city-maintained recreational projects of the city, including all parks and any recreational facilities such as municipal golf course, swimming pool, ball fields, rodeo, tennis courts and playgrounds equipment. 
(b)  The parks and recreation board is empowered to promulgate rules and regulations for operation of programs of the parks and recreation departments as well as recommend fees to be charged. 
(c)  The board shall encourage use of parks and recreational facilities of the city by its citizens as well as recommend capital improvements to be made. 
(Code 1973, § 15-33; Ord. No. 1431, 6-10-1986) 
Sec. 32-23. - Hours. 
    The public parks of the city shall close at 11:00 p.m., and it is unlawful for any persons to be in the park area after 11:00 p.m. and before 6:00 a.m., unless such persons have been granted a permit for use within those hours. 
(Code 1973, § 15-34; Ord. No. 1431, 6-10-1986) 
Sec. 32-24. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit required, exception, conditions. Any persons desiring to use any city park or park facilities between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall make written application to the parks superintendent for a permit to use such facilities after hours, which application shall contain such information as the parks superintendent may reasonably require. The parks superintendent may grant such permit upon the determination that use by the applicant of the park for the hours requested in such application will not result in loud or excessive noise or disorders, a requirement for additional police protection, and interference with the rights of adjoining property owners, or any condition detrimental to the orderly administration of the affairs of the city. The parks superintendent may choose to have the parks and recreation board make a final determination on the application. 
(b)  Fees. The parks and recreation board may establish such fees for the granting of a permit as may be reasonably necessary to defray expenses incident to issuing such permit. Such fees shall be included in the city fee schedule. 
(c)  Revocation. Any permit granted by the parks superintendent or parks and recreation board may be reviewed by the parks and recreation board at any time, and may be revoked if such use creates any of the conditions outlined above or if such use is contrary to the purposes set forth in the application. 
(Code 1973, § 15-35; Ord. No. 1431, 6-10-1986) 
Secs. 32-25-32-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARK REGULATIONS 

Sec. 32-52. - Glass beverage containers in city parks. 
    It is unlawful to possess glass beverage containers within any city park unless the beverages are served by an authorized concession operator at events authorized by the director of community services and the beverage is served into non-glass containers with the glass dispensing containers being disposed of by the concession operator in approved garbage receptacles. The following types of glass containers are permitted within the city parks: 
(1)  Glass-lined vacuum bottles and glass-lined picnic beverage coolers; 
(2)  Baby bottles or baby food jars containing products for consumption by a baby; 
(3)  Glass bottles containing over the counter or prescribed drugs; 
(4)  Glass containers made for the containment and serving of food; and 
(5)  Any other such similar glass containers as listed above. 
(Code 1973, § 15-3; Ord. No. 1711, §§ 1-3, 12-9-1997) 
Chapter 34 - PERSONNEL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- In this article, the term "board of commissioners" has been retained for historical accuracy as the governing body when the Texas Municipal Retirement System was adopted. The city's current governing body is the city council. 

Sec. 34-31. - Standard benefits; determination to participate; effective date. 
    On behalf of the city, the board of commissioners exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243h; and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are accepted, effective August 1, 1951. 
(Code 1973, § 16-1; Ord. No. 598, § 1, 7-5-1951) 
Sec. 34-32. - Notice of participating departments. 
    The city manager is directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the city has elected to participate and have the employees of the following city departments participate in such system: administrative department, street department, sanitary department, police department, park department, fire department and utility department. This section pertains only to those employees who are regular full-time employees of the departments declared as participating above. 
(Code 1973, § 16-2; Ord. No. 598, § 2, 7-5-1951) 
Sec. 34-33. - Participation by new employees. 
    Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department shall be included within and subject to the provisions of the Texas Municipal Retirement System beginning on the date such person becomes an employee as defined in subsection 14, section 2 of such system. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3; Ord. No. 598, § 3, 7-5-1951) 
Sec. 34-34. - Refusal to add new departments. 
    The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to such system but shall never discontinue as to any participants. 
(Code 1973, § 16-4; Ord. No. 598, § 4, 7-5-1951) 
Sec. 34-35. - Remitting to trustees; calculations; reports. 
(a)  The city clerk is directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, at its office in Austin, Texas, the city's proper contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by the board under the provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243h. The city clerk is authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of the city the prior service rendered to the city by each of the employees of the participating departments and the average prior service compensation received by each, and to make and execute all other reports and certificates which may be required by the city under the provisions of the act or the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(b)  The city clerk is directed to remit monthly to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System at its office in Austin, Texas, as the city's contributions to the supplemental benefits fund of such system, the percentage of earnings of the participating employees of the city as may be fixed by the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System; provided that the rate of contribution to the fund shall not exceed one-half of one percent of the earnings of the employees of the city who are covered under the fund; and such official shall make for the city such reports as the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System may prescribe. 
(Code 1973, §§ 16-5, 16-9; Ord. No. 598, § 5, 7-5-1951; Ord. No. 763, § 4, 10-8-1959) 
Sec. 34-36. - Texas Municipal Retirement System, supplemental benefits; determination to participate. 
    The city, by its board of commissioners, elects to have the employees of all participating departments of the city participate in and be covered by the supplemental benefits fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as provided by Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243h; and all the benefits and obligations of participation in the fund are accepted by the city as to such employees. 
(Code 1973, § 16-6; Ord. No. 763, § 1, 10-8-1959) 
Chapter 36 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of signs by municipalities generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.001 et seq.; authority for municipal regulation of signs, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.901; regulation of political signs by municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.903; municipal boards on sign control, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.004; regulation of outdoor advertising generally, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 391.031 et seq.; licenses and permits for outdoor advertising, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 391.061 et seq.; municipal authority to regulate sign placement, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 393.0025. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Temporary signs for public events. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to permit temporary installation or placing of banners and signs on or over any public rights-of-way. Such installation shall only be permitted for a public celebration or event considered to be in the best interest of the general public, and shall be subject to all appropriate local and state permits. 
(b)  Installation of banner or other signs on city utility poles will be performed only by authorized city personnel. Such installations shall be subject to fees as set from time to time by the city council in the city fee schedule. The city may provide this service for the Yoakum Area Chamber of Commerce and the Yoakum Heritage Museum at no cost. 
(Code 1973, § 5-7; Ord. No. 619, § 5, 2-5-1953; Ord. No. 1997, § 1, 1-10-2012) 
Sec. 36-2. - Definitions. 
    In this chapter: 
    "On-premises sign" means a freestanding sign identifying or advertising a business, person, or activity, and installed and maintained on the same premises as the business, person, or activity. 
    "Off-premises sign" means a sign displaying advertising that pertains to a business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service, or product not principally located or primarily manufactured or sold on the premises on which the sign is located. 
(Ord. No. 2118, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
Sec. 36-3. - Off-premises signs. 
    This section applies to all off-premises signs placed within the City of Yoakum. This section does not apply to directional signs, on-premises signs, or official signs that are exempted from the application of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 391.031. 
(1)  Off-premises sign placement. Off-premises sign placement is restricted to property directly adjacent to a state highway, and zoned as commercial - C2 or Industrial - I, or an un-zoned property used for commercial or industrial purposes under the City of Yoakum's Zoning Ordinance. 
a.  A permitted sign may not be erected within five feet of any property line or highway right-of-way line. The distance shall be measured from the end of the sign face nearest the property line. 
b.  A permitted sign may not be erected within ten feet of a power line. 
c.  Sign must be placed on a lot, platted to meet the minimum lot requirement of the city. 
d.  Permitted signs may not be erected closer than 300 of a property used for residential purposes. 
e.  Permitted signs on the same side of a highway outside the incorporated boundaries of a municipality, may not be erected closer than 750 feet apart. 
f.  Permitted signs on the same side of a highway and within the incorporated boundaries of a municipality may not be erected closer than 750 feet apart. 
g.  For the purposes of this section, the space between signs is measured between points along the right-of-way of the highway perpendicular to the center of the signs. 
h.  No other sign, on-premises or off-premises, shall exist on the same property. 
(2)  Off-premises sign size. A sign face may not exceed 336 square feet in area, 14 feet in height; and 24 feet in length. A sign, including its support system, may not exceed an overall height of 28 feet. 
a.  For the purposes of this section, border and trim are included as part of the sign face. 
b.  The base, apron, supports, and other structural members, are excluded as part of the sign face. 
c.  A sign may have two or more sign faces that are placed back-to-back, or in "V" type construction with not more than one sign face presented in each direction. If such an arrangement is used, the sign structure or structures are considered to be one sign for all purposes. 
d.  A sign may not have a moveable protrusion. 
e.  For the purposes of this section, height is measured from the centerline of the main-traveled way closest to the sign face, at a point perpendicular to the sign location. 
f.  In the event that the main-traveled way that is perpendicular to the sign structure is below grade, sign height will be measured from the base of the sign structure. 
g.  The height measurement does not include any renewable energy device such as solar panels or wind turbines that are attached to the sign structure above the sign face to improve the energy efficiency of the sign structure. 
(Ord. No. 2118, § 2, 12-13-2016) 
Secs. 36-4-36-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND LOCATION SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 36-21. - Signs on or over public space. 
    No billboard or sign shall be erected in or project over any street, alley or public space except as otherwise specifically permitted by this article. 
(Code 1973, § 5-3; Ord. No. 619, § 1, 2-5-1953; Ord. No. 1997, § 1, 1-10-2012) 
Sec. 36-22. - Distance from residence, obstructing light, creating hazard. 
    No billboard or sign shall be erected or installed within 50 feet of the boundaries of any premises used for residence, nor so placed as to obstruct the lighting of any street, alley or public space, nor to interfere with any public utility service, nor to create a traffic hazard by obstructing the view. 
(Code 1973, § 5-4; Ord. No. 619, § 2, 2-5-1953) 
Sec. 36-23. - Setbacks. 
    In areas where billboards and signs are permitted, none shall be erected or installed within six feet of any building, nor within six feet of the sideline of any lot, nor closer than 15 feet of any street line. 
(Code 1973, § 5-5; Ord. No. 619, § 3, 2-5-1953) 
Sec. 36-24. - Wood construction. 
    No billboard or sign framed with or constructed of wood or other combustible material shall be erected in the fire limits or within 50 feet of any frame building; provided, however, that the use of wood posts as means of support of such billboard or sign is permitted. 
(Code 1973, § 5-6; Ord. No. 619, § 4, 2-5-1953) 
Sec. 36-25. - Size. 
    If a business is lawfully pursued on premises either in the business or residential areas, signs limited to ten square feet in area may be used pertinent to such business, even when such sign is within 50 feet of the boundary of other residence premises. 
(Code 1973, § 5-8; Ord. No. 619, § 6, 2-5-1953) 
Chapter 38 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal powers relating to public health, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 122.006; minimum standards of sanitation and health protection measures, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.001 et seq.; local regulation of sanitation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq.; Solid Waste Disposal Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.001 et seq.; Solid Waste Resource Recovery Financing Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 362.001 et seq.; Comprehensive Municipal Solid Waste Management, Resource Recovery, and Conservation Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 363.001 et seq.; Texas Litter Abatement Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 365.001 et seq.; environmental quality, 30 Tex. Admin. Code; waste minimization and recycling, 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 328; municipal solid waste, 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 330; composting and mulching, 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 32. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dry kitchen refuse means the solids remaining after liquid or slop has been drained off. 
    Kitchen garbage means dry kitchen refuse, all meat, vegetable and fruit refuse, small dead animals and dead fowls. 
    Premises means all business and residential premises, vacant lots and all other places within the city where garbage, trash or rubbish accumulates. 
    Rubbish means tin cans, bottles, glass, scraps of iron, tin, wire or any other metals. 
    Trash means paper of all kinds, rags, old clothing, paper containers, old rubber, pieces of wood, boxes, barrels, crates, feathers, weeds, grass and tree limbs and other disposable and disposed of materials. 
(Code 1973, § 10-1; Ord. No. 470, § 1, 7-5-1946) 
Secs. 38-2-38-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION 

Sec. 38-21. - Containers. 
(a)  Portable garbage containers. It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation that is a bona fide customer of the hand pickup solid waste collection services of the city to utilize the portable garbage containers provided by the city. 
(b)  Placement of containers of trash, rubbish, etc. Containers of trash, rubbish, tree limbs and leaves shall be placed inside the curbline of the street. 
(c)  Placement of dumpsters. Mechanized containers must be placed in locations approved by the sanitation department of the city. 
(d)  Maintenance. All receptacles shall be kept in a sanitary condition and tightly closed. 
(Code 1973, §§ 10-2-10-4; Ord. No. 470, §§ 12, 13, 7-5-1946; Ord. No. 1501, § I, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 38-22. - Wholesale accumulations. 
    The places of wholesale accumulations, such as killing and dressing plants for fowls, wholesale fruit and vegetable houses and storage and other places where the daily accumulation of kitchen garbage, trash and rubbish is more than the ordinary quantities, are not included in the service furnished by the city garbage department and such places are required to remove such accumulations at their own expense in the manner and by the method directed by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 10-5; Ord. No. 470, § 3, 7-5-1946) 
Sec. 38-23. - Heavy accumulations. 
    Heavy accumulations, such as bricks, broken concrete, ashes, clinkers, cinders, dirt and plaster, sand or gravel, automobile frames, trees and other bulky, heavy material, shall be disposed of at the expense of the owner or person controlling such accumulations under the direction of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 10-7; Ord. No. 470, § 5, 7-5-1946) 
Sec. 38-24. - Manure and waste oil. 
    Manure from cow lots, horse stables, poultry yards and pigeon lofts, and waste oils from garages or filling stations, shall be disposed of at the expense of the party responsible for same, under the direction of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 10-8; Ord. No. 470, § 6, 7-5-1946) 
Sec. 38-25. - Unauthorized use of containers and collection prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person that is not a bona fide customer of city sold waste collection services to: 
(1)  Place any garbage, trash, rubbish, dead animals or other types of solid waste into a commercial container or dumpster, or to otherwise interfere with or pilfer therefrom. 
(2)  Place refuse, trash, rubbish or other solid waste at any locations in any street or alley within the city. 
(3)  Place kitchen garbage, trash, rubbish or any article, thing or material in any street or alley within the city, except as permitted in this chapter. 
(4)  Collect garbage, trash and rubbish or of any kind of junk within the city unless authorized to do so by the provisions of this chapter or otherwise by the city council. 
(Code 1973, §§ 10-9, 10-11; Ord. No. 470, § 11, 7-5-1946; Ord. No. 1501, § I, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 38-26. - Disposal at transfer station. 
    The disposal of any kind of rubbish in any place within the city is prohibited except at the City of Yoakum transfer station. 
(Code 1973, § 10-10; Ord. No. 470, § 8, 7-5-1946) 
Sec. 38-27. - Collection fees; billing; delinquency. 
    Persons utilizing city water, electric power and sewer inside the city limits automatically become customers of the sanitation department of the city and liable for payment of charges for garbage collection service. Solid waste collection service fees are as provided in the city manual of fees and service charges and billed monthly with charges for water, electric power and sewer service. All charges in the billing become delinquent on the same date. 
(Code 1973, §§ 10-12, 10-13.1; Ord. No. 470, § 15, 7-5-1946; Ord. No. 601, 11-7-1951; Res. No. 1045, 9-12-1972; Ord. No. 1252, § 1, 10-2-1979; Ord. No. 1296, § 1, 7-14-1981; Ord. No. 1359, § 1, 7-12-1983; Ord. No. 1378, § 1, 7-11-1984; Ord. No. 1408, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 1435, 7-8-1986; Ord. No. 1583, § 4, 10-13-1992) 
Chapter 40 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General authority of home rule municipalities concerning highways, streets and alleys, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.001; general authority of home rule municipality regarding sidewalks, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.004; use of municipal streets and sidewalks for public convenience and amenities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 316.001 et seq.; municipal streets generally, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 312.001 et seq.; drainage on public roads, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 254.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 40-1. - Pipeline excavations. 
(a)  Before any excavation or construction work is commenced on any pipeline to move oil, gas, water, or other product to or from any well site on, over, under, along, or across any city street, sidewalk, alley, or other city property, the operator proposing to construct the pipeline shall file with the city clerk a plat showing the proposed location and size of the pipeline. 
(b)  Upon the payment to the city of the sum specified in the city fee schedule for each foot of pipeline proposed to be laid on, over, under, along, or across any city street, sidewalk, alley, or other city property, the operator shall be granted an easement to construct the pipeline. Such easement shall remain in effect so long as production or operations may be continued under any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  No operator shall interfere with or damage any existing storm sewer, drainage facility, water line, sewer line, gas line or facility of any public utility located on, under, or across, the course of any the pipeline. 
(d)  All crossings for pipelines under paved or black-topped streets, alleys, or sidewalks, shall be bored or jacked. 
(e)  All pipelines shall be buried beneath the surface of the streets, alleys, and sidewalks to such depth as shall be safe for the pressure carried. 
(f)  The operator shall, at his own expense, at all times restore and repair any injury or damage to the streets, sidewalks, and alleys caused by laying or removing or repairing the pipeline. 
(Ord. No. 1266, art II, § 17, 6-10-1980) 
Secs. 40-2-40-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREETS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 40-20. - Modifications to existing streets. 
(a)  Applicability. All modifications to existing streets and sidewalks in the city shall conform to all existing features, dimensions, and construction as approved by the city manager or as follows: 
(1)  Sixty-foot wide streets. All streets that are 60 feet in width shall have the roadway thereof reduced to a minimum width of 34 feet, leaving a space of 13 feet on either side of the roadway between the curbline and the property line to be divided and arranged as follows: 
a.  There shall be a space of one foot left between the property line and the sidewalk or walkway; 
b.  There shall be a space four feet in width on which to construct a sidewalk; 
c.  There shall be a space eight feet in width extending to the curbline and roadway, to be called a parkway, and such parkway shall be subject to the use of the abutting property owner for the purpose of more effectually beautifying his property. 
(2)  Fifty-foot wide streets. All streets that are 50 feet shall have a roadway of 28 feet in width in the center thereof, a parkway on either side six feet in width, a space for a sidewalk four feet in width on either side and a space of one foot in width between the sidewalk and property line, all to be similarly arranged and devoted to the same purposes as mentioned in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(3)  Forty-foot wide streets. All streets that are 40 feet in width shall have a roadway in the center thereof 24 feet in width, a parkway on either side three feet in width, with four feet of space for sidewalk construction, and one foot of space between the sidewalk and property line, thus placing the curbline on such streets eight feet from the property line. 
(4)  Streets less than 40 feet wide. All streets that have a width of less than 40 feet, the entire street shall be left as a roadway and there shall be no parkways on the sides of such streets, but all sidewalks shall be four feet in width and a space of one foot shall be left between the four-foot sidewalk and the property line. 
(b)  All sidewalks constructed along any of the streets mentioned in this section shall be four feet in width and constructed on the established grade furnished by the city engineer. 
(Code 1973, § 18-5; Ord. No. 1071, § 1, 3-3-1913) 
Sec. 40-21. - Obstruction prohibited; notice and removal. 
(a)  Upon a finding by the city council that there is an obstruction, encroachment or encumbrance of any public street, alley or ground, the city manager is authorized to notify, by certified mail, the party causing such obstruction, encroachment or encumbrance that unless same is removed within ten days, that the city will have same removed. 
(b)  If the party responsible for the obstruction, encroachment or encumbrance of any public street, alley or ground has not removed same within ten days, city employees under the direction of the city manager shall remove any such obstruction, encroachment or encumbrance. 
(c)  The cost of removal of any obstruction, encroachment or encumbrance shall be a personal charge against the party causing same, payable to the city after such removal. 
(Code 1973, § 18-8; Ord. No. 1143, §§ 1-3, 8-12-1975) 
Secs. 40-22-40-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MOVING HEAVY OBJECTS 

Sec. 40-46. - Moving heavy objects; injury to pavement prohibited. 
    No heavy object that would endanger the surface of any street in the city shall be moved over, upon or across any such street. Heavy objects include buildings, houses, structures and portions thereof, motor vehicles equipped with pneumatic tires, ordinary farm wagons and buggies. 
(Code 1973, § 18-1; Ord. No. 314, §§ 1, 2, 8-5-1937) 
Sec. 40-47. - Permit, conditions. 
    When a necessity arises for the moving of any such heavy object over, upon or across a city street as is hereinabove prohibited, upon application made to the city manager showing such necessity, giving the name of the owner of such object, the location of same at the time of application and the destination, and accompanied by a fee as set from time to time by the council in the manual of fees and service charges of the city, and such other bond as is necessary to protect the city from loss or damage on account of injury to city streets, the amount and sufficiency of such other bond to be determined by the city manager, the city manager shall permit the moving of such object over, upon or across city streets, the moving to be done at such hours and along such route as the city manager shall specify. The proposed method of moving such object shall be subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 18-2; Ord. No. 314, § 3, 8-5-1937) 
Sec. 40-48. - Moving city wires. 
    In the event any electric line of the municipal utilities needs to be raised, moved, or handled in any manner during the moving of such object and to facilitate such moving, a fee shall be charged as set from time to time by the council in the city fee schedule for equipment charges. The cost of any material necessary to be used in such moving of wires shall be paid by the mover. The charges provided for in this section shall be made jointly and severally against the owner of the object and the contractor moving the object, and shall be covered and guaranteed by the bonds the same as damages. Damage or injury to any city property, including municipal utility property, shall be covered by the bonds. 
(Code 1973, § 18-3; Ord. No. 314, § 4, 8-5-1937; Ord. No. 1964, 12-8-2009) 
Secs. 40-49-40-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STRUCTURAL AND VEGETATIVE INTRUSIONS 

Sec. 40-70. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Curbline means the boundary of that portion of any street which is improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Plant means any hedge, bush, shrub, vine, palm or other vegetation, except trees. 
    Street means the entire width of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of traffic. 
    Traffic means pedestrians, riders of animals, and drivers of vehicles while using any street for purposes of travel. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, except devices moved by human power. 
(Code 1973, § 18-20; Ord. No. 719, § 1, 11-6-1957) 
Sec. 40-71. - Visibility at residential district intersections. 
(a)  Obstructions prohibited. On a corner lot in any residential district nothing should be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impair vehicle drivers' vision at intersections. 
(b)  Fences, walls and hedges. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, fences, walls and hedges may be permitted in any required yard, or along the edge of any yard, provided that such fences, walls or hedges along lot lines at street intersections do not impair visibility at the intersection within an area defined by lines of joining points located 20 feet back from the intersection of all curblines extended, 
(Code 1973, § 18-23; Ord. No. 719, § 2(b), 11-6-1957; Ord. No. 1184, 4-12-1977) 
Sec. 40-72. - Maximum plant, fence, wall and structure height in and near corner triangles. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any plant having a height of greater than three feet above the level of the center of the nearest abutting street, on or in any portion of any corner lot in the city, which portion is included in a triangle on the street corner of the lot formed by a diagonal line intersecting the property lines at points 20 feet from the street corner intersection of the property lines. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or replace, or cause to be constructed or replaced, on the portion of a corner lot described in section (a) any non-opaque fence, wall, or other structure having a height greater than three feet above the level of the center of the nearest abutting street. 
(c)  It is unlawful for either the owner or the occupant of any corner lot in the city to place, maintain or permit or cause to be placed or maintained, any plant having a height greater than three feet above the level of the center of the nearest abutting street or in that area which lies between the property line of such corner lot and the curblines of streets abutting such property lines and which area extends for a distance of 50 feet back from the intersection of the curblines of such abutting streets. 
(d)  The invalidity of any section or provision of this section shall not invalidate other sections or provisions thereof. 
(Code 1973, §§ 18-21, 18-22; Ord. No. 719, §§ 2(a), 3(a), 11-6-1957; Ord. No. 2084, § I, 4-14-2015) 
Sec. 40-73. - Tree or other plant between property line and curbline. 
    It is unlawful for either the owner or the occupant of any lot in the city to place, maintain or permit, or cause to be placed or maintained, any tree or other plant on or in the area between the property line thereof and the curbline of any street abutting such property line in such a way as to obstruct the free passage on and use of that area by the public. 
(Code 1973, § 18-24; Ord. No. 719, § 3(b), 11-6-1957) 
Sec. 40-74. - Tree or other plant near fire hydrant. 
    It is unlawful for either the owner or occupant of any property in the city to place, maintain or permit, or cause to be placed or maintained thereon, any tree or other plant within five feet of any fire hydrant in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 18-25; Ord. No. 719, § 3(c), 11-6-1957) 
Sec. 40-75. - Minimum vegetation height above street; pruning required. 
    It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property in the city to maintain or permit limbs of trees growing thereon to overhang or grow above the area between the property line and the curbline of any abutting street, unless such limbs and all branches and foliage thereon are kept trimmed and pruned to a minimum of eight feet above the street level at the nearest curbline. 
(Code 1973, § 18-26; Ord. No. 719, § 3(d), 11-6-1957) 
Sec. 40-76. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Authority of city inspector to identify visibility obstructions. Obstruction of visibility at an intersection and other violations of this division shall be determined by the city inspector. 
(b)  Appeal of inspector's determination. Any person who does not agree with the decision of the city inspector shall have an appeal to the zoning board of adjustments and appeals. If the board determines that there is no obstruction of visibility or other violation, the person shall not be required to remove any fences, walls, or hedges or remove or trim vegetation as required in this division. If the board determines that there is an obstruction, the party shall be considered in violation of this section and subject to charges being filed in municipal court unless the object is immediately removed. 
(c)  Duty of chief of police to serve notice of violation. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to cause a written notice to be served upon the owner or occupant of any property upon which there exists a violation of this division. The notice shall advise the owner or occupant of the nature of the violation and that the violation must be corrected within ten days after serving of the notice. The notice shall further advise the owner or occupant that if such condition is not corrected or remedied within the ten-day period, the city manager may cause the violation to be removed or corrected at the owner's expense. 
(d)  Failure of owner to correct violations. The owner or occupant of any property who shall fail within ten days after service of such written notice by the chief of police to trim, prune or remove any such tree, plant, hedge, wall fence or other structure or vegetation that violates the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed on every day that any such violation is permitted to remain after the expiration of the period of ten days after the service of the notice. The property owner shall also be responsible for all costs of correction of the violation. 
(e)  Authority of city manager to trim or remove vegetation. The city manager is authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, any tree or plants found between the opposite curblines in any street in the city, and to trim branches, limbs or foliage of any tree or plant which overhangs or grows above the area which lies between the opposite curblines of any street, so as to provide a minimum clearance of eight feet above the street level at the curbline and so as to be graduated toward the center of the street to a clearance of 12 feet above the street level at the center of the street. 
(Code 1973, §§ 18-23, 18-27-18-29; Ord. No. 719, §§ 2(b), 3(e), 3(f), 4(a), 11-6-1957; Ord. No. 1184, 4-12-1977) 
Secs. 40-77-40-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 40-96. - Obstruction prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed, or allow to remain, on any street or sidewalk in the city, any box, barrel, crate, merchandise, fuel or any other article which in any way obstructs the free passage along such street or sidewalk; provided, however, this section shall not apply to merchandise or other articles on sidewalks which are actually being received or sent out, if the same do not occupy more than half of the sidewalk and do not remain thereon for more than one hour. 
(Code 1973, § 18-4; Ord. No. 1124, § 1, 10-9-1925) 
Sec. 40-97. - Uniform width and specified grade required in business districts. 
    In the business districts, sidewalk construction shall be of a uniform width of ten feet and on the grade established by the city engineer. 
(Code 1973, § 18-6; Ord. No. 1071, § 2, 3-3-1913) 
Sec. 40-98. - Crosswalks to be constructed by property owners. 
    When the city constructs crosswalks over the streets or roadways of the city, it shall be the duty of the abutting property owner to construct a crosswalk of like character as his sidewalk, to connect such sidewalk at the curbline with the crosswalk constructed by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 18-7; Ord. No. 1071, § 3, 3-3-1913) 
Chapter 42 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal and county authority to regulate subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 242.001 et seq.; municipal zoning authority generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq.; municipal planning and development generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 371.001 et seq.; municipal zoning boards of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.008; issuance of local permits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 245.001 et seq.; municipal comprehensive plans, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 213.001 et seq.; authority for municipal regulation of signs, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved plat means a plat of a subdivision which has been approved in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and regulations and which has been filed for record with the county clerks of DeWitt or Lavaca counties. In instances where a lot lies in both counties, the approved plat must be filed in both counties. 
    Easement means a right granted for the purpose of limited public or semipublic use across, over or under private land. 
    Lot means land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings and including such open spaces as are required by ordinances of the city and having its principal frontage upon a public street or officially approved place. 
    Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the offices of the county clerks of DeWitt or Lavaca counties, or parcel of land, the deed for which was recorded in the offices of the county clerks of DeWitt or Lavaca counties prior to the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
    Plat means a complete and exact subdivision plan submitted to the city council for final approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to the county clerks of DeWitt or Lavaca counties. 
    Standards means the official maps, comprehensive master plans, ordinances and specifications of the city. 
    Street means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, alley, land, place, or however otherwise designated, including: 
(1)  Street, primary or arterial, means a street used primarily for fast or heavy traffic designated in the major street plan as a primary street, expressway or freeway. 
(2)  Street, secondary or collector, means a street that carries traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development, designated in the major street plan as secondary streets. 
(3)  Street, minor, means a street used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
(4)  Street, marginal, means a minor street that is parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways and that provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(5)  Street, cul-de-sac, means a short minor street having but one vehicular service access to another street and terminated by vehicular turnarounds. 
(6)  Street, dead-end, means a street other than a cul-de-sac with only one outlet. 
(7)  Alley means a minor way used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    Subdivider and developer are synonymous and include any person, partnership, firm, association, corporation or any officer, agent, employee, servant and trustee thereof who does or participates in the doing of any act toward the subdivision of land within the intent, scope and purview of this chapter. 
    Subdivision means the division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or tracts for the purpose of transfer of ownership, dedication of streets, alleys or easements, or for use for building development; provided, a division of land for agricultural purposes into lots or tracts of five acres or more and not involving a new street or alley shall not be deemed a subdivision. The term "subdivision" includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
(Code 1973, § 19-1; Ord. No. 1017, § 1, art. II, 9-8-1971) 
Sec. 42-2. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide procedure and standards for the development, layout and design of subdivisions of land within the city, and for such other areas as may be authorized by state law, and to: 
(1)  Promote and develop the utilization of land to ensure the best possible community environment in accordance with the master plan of the city. 
(2)  Guide and assist and expedite the developers in correct procedures to be followed and to inform them of the standards which shall be required. 
(3)  Protect the public interest by controlling the location, design, class and type of streets, sidewalks, utilities and essential areas and services required. 
(4)  Protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare. 
(Code 1973, § 19-3; Ord. No. 1017, § 1, art. I, 9-8-1971) 
Sec. 42-3. - Chapter provides minimum standards. 
    In the interpretation and application of the provisions of these regulations, it is the intention of the city council that the principles, standards and requirements provided for herein shall be minimum requirements for the platting and developing of subdivisions in the city, and, where other provisions of this Code are more restrictive in their requirements, such other provisions shall control. 
(Code 1973, § 19-2; Ord. No. 1017, § 1, art. I, 9-8-1971) 
Sec. 42-4. - Fees. 
    All fees related to this chapter shall be established from time to time by the council as provided in the city fee schedule. Fees shall be collected by the city in advance, and no action of the city council shall be valid until the applicable fees have been paid to the city. These fees shall be charged on all plats, regardless of the action taken by the city council, whether the plat is approved or denied. The money collected shall defray the cost of administrative, clerical and inspection services necessary to properly investigate the plats, replats and subdivisions. 
(Code 1973, § 19-18; Ord. No. 1017, § 1, art. VII, 9-8-1971) 
Sec. 42-5. - Variances. 
(a)  The city council may authorize a variance from these regulations when in its opinion undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a variance, the city council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary or desirable to the public interest in making the findings required in this section. 
(b)  In determining whether to grant a variance, the city council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land involved and existing uses of the land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of such variances upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity. No variance will be granted unless the city council finds that: 
(1)  There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved, such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land. 
(2)  The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant, that the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or injurious to other property in the area. 
(3)  The granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other lands in the area in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Such findings of the city council together with the specific facts on which such findings are based shall be incorporated under the official minutes of the city council meeting at which such variance is granted. 
(d)  Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. Pecuniary hardship to the subdivider, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship. The city council may not authorize a variance that would constitute a violation of any other valid ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 19-20; Ord. No. 1017, § 1, art. X, 9-8-1971) 
Sec. 42-6. - Violations declared public nuisance; enforcement authority of city manager. 
    Any subdivision of land being developed in violation of the terms and provisions of these regulations is declared to be a public nuisance and the city manager is authorized to institute any action which may be necessary to restrain or abate such violation. 
(Code 1973, § 19-21; Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 9-8-1971) 
Sec. 42-7. - Withholding city services and facilities for noncompliance. 
(a)  The city defines its policy to be that the city will withhold all city improvements and facilities of whatsoever nature, including the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of sewerage facilities and water services, from all additions, the platting of which has not been approved by the city planning commission. 
(b)  The city may withhold the issuing of a street number or building permit for the erection of any building in the city on a newly subdivided parcel of land until all the requirements of these subdivision regulations have been complied with, including installation of and acceptance by the city of all waterworks, sewerage and paving improvements for the area designated. 
(c)  No construction work shall begin on the proposed improvements in any proposed subdivision prior to approval of the final plat by the city and the filing of such plat with the county clerks of the DeWitt or Lavaca counties. 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 17, art. VI(D), 9-8-1971) 
Secs. 42-8-42-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLAT PROCEDURE 

Sec. 42-33. - Preapplication consultation. 
    The subdivider shall avail himself of the advice and assistance of the city manager before preparing the preliminary plat and before formal application for its approval in order to save time and money and to make the most of his opportunities. 
(Code 1973, § 19-4; Ord. No. 1017, § 1, art. III(A), 9-8-1971) 
Sec. 42-34. - Preliminary plat submission and review. 
(a)  Application filing. On reaching conclusions informally as recommended above regarding the general program and objectives, the subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat together with improvement plans and other supplementary material as applicable in other sections of this article. Five copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary materials specified shall be submitted to the city with the filing fee as provided in the city fee schedule and written application for conditional approval at least ten days prior to the city council meeting at which it is to be considered. 
(b)  Size; scale; paper. All preliminary plats shall be printed on good grade processed paper blue line or direct black and white. Copies or prints of the proposed subdivision shall be drawn on sheets a maximum size of 24 inches by 36 inches and drawn to a scale of 90 feet to the inch (one inch equals 90 feet). In cases of large developments which would exceed the dimensions of the sheet of 90 foot scale, the preliminary plat may be at a scale of 200 feet to the inch (one inch equals 200 feet). Each subdivision consisting of three acres or more shall be prepared on a topographic base map showing contours at intervals not greater than five feet. Any subdivision smaller than three acres which, in the opinion of the city manager, would be affected by the topographical features of the terrain shall also show contours at two foot intervals. All topographical maps shall be based on sea level data. 
(c)  Content. The application for proposed subdivision shall show the following: 
(1)  The title of the subdivision or addition, name of subdividers and engineer, surveyor or planner platting the tract. 
(2)  Boundary lines, bearings and distances sufficient to locate the exact area proposed for subdivision. 
(3)  The name and location of all adjoining subdivisions shall be drawn to the same scale and shown in dotted lines adjacent to the tract proposed for subdivision in sufficient detail to show accurately the existing streets and alleys and other features that may influence the layout of development of the proposed subdivision. Adjacent unplatted land shall be so designated. If there is no adjacent subdivision, then a map on a smaller scale must be presented to show the nearest subdivision and how the streets, alleys or highways in the subdivision submitted may connect with those in the nearest subdivision. 
(4)  Recorded lot lines, survey abstract lines, corporation lines and the location of existing utility easements, streets, highways, expressways and freeways traversing, abutting or within a reasonable distance. 
(5)  The proposed locations and widths of streets, alleys, easements, walkways, open channels and lots. 
(6)  The location of all existing property lines, buildings, sewer or water mains, gas mains or other underground structures, easements or other existing features within the area proposed for subdivision. 
(7)  Lot or tract numbers or city block numbers, addition names and dates recorded. 
(8)  Proposed arrangement of lots and proposed use of same; however, approval of a preliminary plat or final plat with uses so indicated does not constitute approval of such uses. 
(9)  Proposed building lines showing conformance with this article and city zoning regulations. 
(10)  The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, the name and address of the owner with the name of the land planner, licensed land surveyor or registered professional engineer platting the tract. 
(11)  Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds or other public uses. 
(12)  Scale, north arrow, date and other pertinent data and so drawn that the north direction is to the top or left side of the map. 
(13)  Contours with intervals of five feet or less shall be shown for the area. All elevations on the contour map shall be referenced to the latest U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey data. 
(14)  All physical features of the property to be subdivided, including locations of all watercourses, ravines, bridges, culverts, existing structures and other features pertinent to subdivision. The outline of wooded areas or the location of important individual trees may be required. 
(d)  Plats to be marked as preliminary. The following notice shall be placed on the face of each preliminary plat by the developer: "Preliminary Plat." 
(e)  City manager review of application. The city manager shall make a study of the plat and give a report to the city planning commission before its final action on the preliminary plat. 
(f)  Planning commission review. The planning commission shall examine application, plat and related material submitted for conformity to these regulations and may, if necessary, enter into negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by him. The commission shall thereafter submit its recommendation to the city council. 
(g)  Action by city council. The city council shall, within 30 days after the filing of such preliminary plat, act thereon as submitted or modified, and, if approved, the city council shall express its approval as conditional approval and state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproval, shall express its disapproval and its reasons therefor. The action of the city council shall be noted on two copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions required by the city council. Action of the city council shall be certified by the city clerk. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the other retained in the files of the city. 
(h)  Effect of conditional approval by city council. Conditional approval of a preliminary plat by the city council shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layouts submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the installation of streets, water, sewer and other required improvements and utilities and to the preparation of the final or record plat. Except as provided for herein, approval of the preliminary plat shall constitute conditional approval of the final plat when all conditions of approval noted as provided in this section have been met. No work shall be done on the subdivision before the final plat is accepted and recorded except with the written approval of the city council. 
(i)  Term of conditional approval; expiration. Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for one year unless reviewed by the city council in the light of new or significant information which would necessitate the revision of the preliminary plat. If no development or change in requirements has occurred which would affect the proposed plat at the end of the year of an effective approval, the city council may extend its approval another year without the submission of a new preliminary plat by reapproving the original preliminary plat. No filing fee is required for such reapproval. 
(Code 1973, § 19-14; Ord. No. 1017, § 1, arts. III(B), VI(A), 9-8-1971) 
Sec. 42-35. - Final plat submission, review and recording. 
(a)  Size, scale, paper. All final plats shall be printed on good grade processed paper blue line or direct black and white. All final plats shall be submitted on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches, and to a scale of not less than 90 feet to the inch or larger. Where more than one sheet is required to encompass the subdivision, an index sheet 24 inches by 36 inches shall be filed showing the entire subdivision, together with the complete dedication, attests, dates, titles and seals on one sheet. 
(b)  Required markings and permitted tables. The exterior boundary of the subdivision shall be indicated by the distinct dash line and corner markers by individual symbols. The length and bearing of all straight lines, radii, area lengths, tangent lengths and central angles of all curves shall be indicated along the boundary line of the subdivision and each block. All dimensions along the lines of each lot shall be shown. The curve data pertaining to the block or lot boundary may be placed in a curve table at the base of the plat and prepared in the following manner: 
CURVE TABLE 
Curve 
Number Description Elements Outer 
Property 
Line Center Line Inner 
Property 
Line  
(c)  Title and owners, adjoining properties, lots and blocks, streets, and utility easements. The final plat shall show: 
(1)  A title including the name of the addition or subdivision, the names of the owner and engineer or surveyor, the scale and location of the subdivision with reference to the original land grant or survey and the abstract number and north point with true or magnetic north. 
(2)  The names of all adjoining subdivisions, the dimensions of all abutting lots, lot and block numbers and accurate reference ties to courses and distances of at least two recognized land corners. 
(3)  The names and accurate locations of all streets adjoining, abutting or within not more than 500 feet of the subdivision. 
(4)  The location and dimension of any utility easement adjoining or abutting the subdivision or proposed within the subdivision. 
(d)  Survey monuments. The description and location of all survey monuments placed in the addition or subdivision shall be shown. 
(e)  Relationship to preliminary plat. The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved and shall incorporate all changes, directions and additions imposed by the city council. If so desired by the developer, the final plat may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and then develop; provided, however, that such portion conforms to all the requirements of these regulations. 
(f)  Engineering plans. Engineering plans showing details of streets, alleys, culverts, bridges, storm sewers, water mains, sanitary sewers and other engineering details of the proposed subdivision shall be submitted to the city manager along with the final plat of the subdivision. Such plans shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer and shall conform to the design standards established by the city. The final plat will not be released for filing until detailed engineering plans have been approved by the city council. 
(g)  Certificates. The following certificates must be submitted as indicated: 
(1)  Ownership. A certificate of ownership giving a metes and bounds description of the property, dedication of all streets, alleys, parkways and parks, where donated to the city and dedication or reservation of all easements and drainage ways to the public use, signed and acknowledged before a notary public by the owner of the land, shall appear on the face of the plat or index sheet of the plats where two or more sheets are required. 
(2)  Survey. The certificate of the licensed professional engineer or licensed public surveyor who surveyed, mapped and monumented the land, which certificates shall be attested before a notary public, shall be placed on the face of the plan on index sheets of the plats together with the seals of the engineer or surveyor and notary public. Printed seals and signatures are prohibited except for extra prints that the owner or developer may need certified for other purposes. The certificate of the engineer or surveyor to be placed on the plat shall be in the form approved by the city council from time to time, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(3)  Taxes. At the time the developer files the final plat with the city manager, he shall also file a certificate showing that all taxes have been paid on the tract to be subdivided and that no delinquent taxes exist against the property. 
(h)  Review by city manager and approval by city council. Upon receipt of the final plat, accompanied by a final filing fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule, the city manager shall check the plat to ascertain its compliance with these regulations and the action of the city council. When the copy of the final plat has been checked and found to meet all general requirements and design standards, the developer or his engineers shall submit six copies of the final plat to the city manager. The city manager shall stamp on each of the six copies the certificate of approval of the city council attested by the chairperson of the city council when such final plat has been approved. 
(i)  Recording of final plats. The developer or his authorized agent will secure the required number of plats and record them with the county clerks of DeWitt or Lavaca counties, within 30 days of the date of the final approval; otherwise the approval of the city council becomes invalid. Two copies of the recorded final plat shall be returned immediately to the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 19-6; Ord. No. 1017, § 1, arts. III(C), VI(B), 9-8-1971) 
Secs. 42-36-42-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 

Sec. 42-59. - Streets. 
(a)  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the city major thoroughfare plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
(b)  When such streets are not on the major thoroughfare plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either provide for the continuation of appropriate projections of existing streets in surrounding areas or conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the city planning commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformity to existing streets impracticable. 
(c)  Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(d)  If the subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the city planning commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage, deep lots with rear service alleys or such treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection to residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(e)  Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is definitely placed in the city under conditions approved by the city planning commission. 
(f)  Street jobs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided. 
(g)  Arterial street intersections shall be at 90-degree angles. Other street intersections shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall intersect at less than 75 degrees. 
(h)  Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown on the master thoroughfare plan and if not shown therein shall be not less than as follows: 
(1)  Primary or arterial thoroughfares: Maximum 90 feet, depending upon the location and the city street plat with which the primary thoroughfare is to be connected. 
(2)  Secondary thoroughfares: 60 feet. 
(3)  Minor residential streets: 50 feet. 
(4)  Access or service roads: 40 feet. 
(5)  Minor streets in apartment, commercial or industrial areas: 60 feet. 
(i)  Half streets are prohibited except when essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conforming to the other requirements of these regulations, and where the city council finds it will be practical to require the dedication of the other one-half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Whenever a partial street exists along a common property line, the other portion of the street shall be dedicated. Where part of a street is being dedicated along a common property line and the ultimate planned width is 50 feet, the first dedication will be 30 feet; where the ultimate planned width is 60 feet, the first dedication will be 35 feet. 
(j)  A cul-de-sac shall not be longer than 600 feet and at the closed end shall have a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 80 feet and a street property line diameter of at least 90 feet. 
(k)  New streets of like alignment shall bear the names of existing streets and shall be dedicated at equal or greater widths than the existing streets. No street name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to approval of the city council. 
(l)  All new streets dedicated within a subdivision shall be improved in accordance with specifications of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 19-7; Ord. No. 1017, § 1, art. IV(A), 9-8-1971) 
Sec. 42-60. - Alleys. 
(a)  Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts except that the city council may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access such as off-street loading, unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the use proposed. Service alleys in commercial and industrial districts shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width. 
(b)  In residential districts, alleys, if provided, shall be parallel or approximately parallel to the frontage of the street. Alleys in residential districts shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width and must be covered by six inches of gravel. 
(c)  Where the deflection of alley alignment exceeds 30 degrees, a cutback of a minimum of 15 feet or of such greater distance as to provide safe vehicular movement shall be established on the inside property line and the alley, if paved, shall have the paving cut back in the same manner. 
(d)  Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead-end as determined by the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 19-8; Ord. No. 1017, § 1, art. IV(B), 9-8-1971) 
Sec. 42-61. - Easements. 
(a)  Easements shall be provided at the rear of lots not served by alleys, running parallel or approximately parallel to the frontage of the street. All easements in residential districts shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width. 
(b)  Easements across lots or centered on side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be of such widths as may be reasonably necessary for the utility using same. 
(c)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or street, there shall be provided a storm easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with such course and of such additional width as may be designated by the city manager that will be reasonably adequate for the purpose. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection with this. 
(Code 1973, § 19-9; Ord. No. 1017, § 1, art. IV(C), 9-8-1971) 
Sec. 42-62. - Blocks. 
(a)  The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated, zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions, and needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic. 
(b)  In general, intersecting streets, which determine the blocks' lengths and widths, shall be provided at such intervals as to serve cross traffic adequately and to meet existing streets or customary subdivision practices. Where no existing subdivision dictates, the block length shall not exceed 1,600 feet and shall generally be 1,000 to 1,200 feet in length. Where no existing subdivision dictates, the block shall not be less than 500 feet in length; however, in cases where physical barriers or property ownership creates conditions where it is appropriate that these standards be varied, the length may be increased or decreased to meet the existing conditions having due regard for connecting streets, circulation of traffic and public safety. 
(c)  Where blocks in the vicinity of a school, park or shopping center are platted 1,000 feet or longer, the city council may require a walkway near the middle of the block or at a street that terminates between the streets at the ends of the block. The walkway shall not be less than four feet or more than eight feet in width, shall have a four-foot concrete walk through the block from sidewalk to sidewalk, or to the rear property line if no street. Where no existing subdivision controls, the block width or depth shall be platted to give lots with a depth to width ratio of generally not more than 21/2 to one and in no case more than four to one, and the platting shall be such that the block width or depth generally shall not exceed 350 feet or be less than 215 feet. When possible, the block width and length shall be such as to allow two tiers of lots back to back to an alley. 
(d)  Pedestrian walks not less than four feet wide shall be provided around the perimeter of all blocks. 
(Code 1973, § 19-10; Ord. No. 1017, § 1, art. IV(D), 9-8-1971). 
Sec. 42-63. - Lots. 
(a)  Lots shall conform to the minimum requirements of the established zoning district. 
(b)  Each lot shall face on a public street. 
(c)  Where corner lots are key lots, that is where lots face the frontage street and also other lots face the side street, the corner lot shall have a front building line on both streets. 
(d)  Key lots or irregularly shaped lots shall have sufficient width at the building line to meet frontage requirements of the appropriate zoning district. Also, the rear width shall be sufficient to provide access for all utilities including garbage collection, but not less than ten feet. 
(e)  No lot shall be platted less than 90 feet in depth except in cases where an irregularly shaped tract is platted into lots and the remnant piece of property is of sufficient area to plat one or more lots. The city council may waive the depth requirement to prevent a hardship on the developer. 
(f)  Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. 
(g)  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantage of topography and orientation. Where lots have double frontage, a front building line shall be established for each street. 
(h)  Lot sizes may be increased from that originally platted, provided that there is no remaining portion of a lot smaller than the original lot and that the final plat is submitted in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(i)  In areas where the city sewer is not immediately available, a lot shall be platted of such area as to meet the minimum requirements of the city pertaining to septic tank operation or applicable county health office standards. The minimum area of any lot not served by the city sewer shall be 12,000 square feet. 
(j)  No lot shall be replatted to reduce the size of the lots originally platted by a common dedicator, unless the consent of all the property owners in the same addition has been obtained. No lot will be reduced in width below a 50-foot frontage with an area of 5,000 square feet, except for property having a local retail, commercial or manufacturing zoning classification and not for residential use. 
(k)  When an applicant exhibits a duly executed and recorded deed covering a lot having dimensions of 50 feet by 90 feet or more, which has been sold by metes and bounds prior to the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and such lot is being assessed for school taxes and conforms to the established lot pattern and zoning classification in the block where located, then a building permit may be issued, provided the requested use of such property conforms to the permanent zoning of the property covered by the application. 
(l)  Subdivision plats for housing projects, apartment areas, shopping centers and industrial districts will not be required except in cases where dedications for streets, street widening, alleys or easements are required. Site plans shall be filed with the city for approval by the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 19-11; Ord. No. 1017, § 1, art. IV(E), 9-8-1971) 
Sec. 42-64. - Survey monuments. 
    In all subdivisions and additions, corner monuments shall be established at the corner of each block in the subdivision consisting of an iron rod or pipe not less than three-quarters inch in diameter and 24 inches deep set flush with the top of the sidewalk. Lot corner monuments shall be placed at all lot corners except corners which are also block corners, consisting of iron rods or pipes of a diameter of not less than one-half inch and 18 inches deep set flush with the top of the sidewalk. In addition, curve point markers shall be established of the same specifications as lot corner monuments. 
(Code 1973, § 19-15; Ord. No. 1017, § 1, art. VI(B), 9-8-1971) 
Sec. 42-65. - Building lines. 
    Building lines shall be as shown on the final plat on all lots intended for business and residential use and shall provide the minimum setback as required by the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1973, § 19-12; Ord. No. 1017, § 1, art. IV(F), 9-8-1971) 
Sec. 42-66. - Public sites and open spaces. 
(a)  The subdivider may give consideration to suitable sites for schools, parks, playgrounds and other areas for public use so as to conform to the recommendations of the city council. Any provision for schools, parks, etc., may be indicated on the preliminary plat. 
(b)  No individual, partnership, firm or corporation shall deepen, widen, fill, reroute or change the course or location of any existing ditch, channel, stream or drainage way without first obtaining written permission of the city or other agency having jurisdiction. 
(c)  In cases where a subdivision contains or abuts a school, park or playground, the subdivider shall dedicate one-half a normal residential street, 25 feet, and provide for one-half the cost of paving and the full cost of all the utilities necessary. The interested agency shall provide the necessary right-of-way to make the street 60 feet in width (which is 35 feet), and provide one-half the cost of the paving. 
(Code 1973, § 19-13; Ord. No. 1017, § 1, art. V, 9-8-1971) 
Sec. 42-67. - Improvements required prior to acceptance. 
(a)  Monuments. Monuments shall be placed as required by this article. 
(b)  Storm drainage. An adequate storm sewer system consisting of inlets, pipes and other underground drainage structures with approved outlets shall be constructed where runoff of storm water and the prevention of erosion cannot be accomplished satisfactorily by surface drainage facilities. Areas subject to flood conditions, as established by the city, will not be considered for development until adequate drainage has been provided. 
(c)  Water. All subdivisions shall be provided with an approved water system. In the corporate limits of the city, subdivisions shall be connected with the city water supply distribution system. Without cost to the city, the subdivider shall install all water and sewer lines, including customer services. The engineer representing the subdivider shall prepare the plans and specifications for the water and sewer lines and present them to the city for approval before construction. All construction shall be paid for by the subdivider. Meters will be installed by the water department in accordance with established tapping fees. 
(d)  Street, alley and sidewalk improvements. 
(1)  Before approval and acceptance of any final plat, the developer shall prepare, or have prepared, and submit three copies of the complete engineering plans of streets, alleys, curbs and gutters, storm sewers and drainage structures, and water and sanitary sewer improvements for the area covered by the final plat. The developer shall have these plans prepared by his own engineers subject to approval of the plans by the city. The city manager shall review the plans and specifications and, if approved, two sets shall be marked with the objections noted and returned to the developer for correction. 
(2)  After approval of the plat and of the plans and specifications, the developer shall cause his contractor to install the facilities in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and these regulations. The developer shall cause his engineer to design, stake and supervise the construction of such improvements and shall cause his contractor to construct the improvements in accordance with these regulations. The city will inspect the installation of the improvements. 
(3)  When found to be installed in accordance with the plans and specifications, and after the improvements have been completed and upon receipt of the city of a one-year maintenance bond from each separate contractor in the amount of ten percent of the contract price, along with three sets of as-built plans and one set of as-built sepias, and upon receipt of a letter of the contractor's compliance with these regulations, the city manager shall receive and approve for the city the title, use and maintenance of the improvements. As used in this section, the term "as-built plans" means the developer or his engineer shall present the city with a reproducible (sepia) complete as-built set of plans and three sets of blue line or black line prints on paper of as-built plans for all paving, drainage structures and water mains within 60 days after completion of each contract. 
(4)  Minor residential streets shall be paved 31 feet wide from back of curb to back of curb. Minor apartment streets and secondary collector streets shall be paved 41 feet wide from back of curb to back of curb. The minimum street improvements which shall be made by the developer shall be six-inch curb and 24-inch gutter of 2,500 psi concrete with adequate drainage inlets and structures to drain the area properly. Street surfacing consisting of 11/2-inch thickness cold or hot mix asphaltic concrete on six inches compacted thickness gravel base with a separate curb and gutter or five inches reinforced concrete (2,500 psi) pavement with either separate or integral curb and gutter. 
(5)  Sidewalks shall be four feet wide, four inches thick and shall be of 2,500 psi concrete. 
(6)  Alleys when provided shall have a minimum surfacing of six inches of gravel. 
(e)  Sewer improvements. 
(1)  All subdivisions shall be provided with an approved sewage disposal system and where the subdivision is inside the city limits shall be connected to the city sanitary sewer system. The developer shall furnish and install the complete sewerage system, including the mains, manholes, cleanouts, Y branches and service laterals for all lots, lift stations and appurtenances. The sewerage system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the master plan and standard specifications of the city. 
(2)  In locations where sanitary sewers are not available and where there is no immediate prospect for installation of sanitary sewers, septic tanks of an approved type may be installed in conformity with the rules, regulations and ordinances of the city pertaining to public health; provided, however, that in no case shall septic tanks be installed without the express approval and inspection of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 19-16; Ord. No. 1017, § 1, art. VI(C), 9-8-1971) 
Sec. 42-68. - Street signs. 
(a)  Within the corporate limits of the city, street signs will be installed by the city at each intersection and the subdivider shall pay to the city the amount per street sign set forth in the city fee schedule toward the cost of installation of each street sign. The developer shall pay such sum as computed by the city manager for street signs as set out herein at the time at which he submits his final plat for approval, and this sum shall be in addition to the filing fee set forth hereinabove. 
(b)  In subdivisions lying beyond the corporate limits of the city, street name signs shall be placed by the subdivider at all intersections within or abutting the subdivision. Such signs shall be of a type approved by the city and shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 19-19; Ord. No. 1017, § 1, art. IX, 9-8-1971) 
Chapter 44 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal Sales and Use Tax Act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.001 et seq.; Development Corporation Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 501.001 et seq.; real and tangible personal property taxable, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.01; intangible personal property taxable, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.02; freeport exemption of tangible personal property, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 11.251; homestead exemption, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 41.001; municipal hotel occupancy taxes, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 351.001 et seq.; tax abatement in municipal reinvestment zones, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 312.201 et seq.; authority to levy certain occupation taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 101.008. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 44-1. - Sales and use tax. 
    The city council officially and affirmatively declares that the one per cent local sales and use tax within the city has been properly and lawfully adopted in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1973, § 7-14; Ord. No. 1603, 8-10-1993) 
State Law reference- Municipal Sales and Use Tax Act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.001 et seq. 
Secs. 44-2-44-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAXES 

Sec. 44-21. - Certificate of taxes due; issuance; fee. 
    Upon application to the tax assessor and collector of any property owner of the city, his agent or attorney, and the payment of a fee hereinafter mentioned, the tax assessor and collector of the city shall as soon as practical issue a certificate showing the amount of taxes due, if any, on any piece of real estate in the city and shall properly seal and attest same. The tax assessor and collector shall collect a fee as set by the city council for the certificate covering each piece of property, which shall be credited to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 7-13; Ord. No. 1603, 8-10-1993) 
Sec. 44-22. - Tax delinquency penalties and interest. 
    If any person fails to pay taxes imposed on him or his property by the city on or before January 31 of the next succeeding year for which such taxes are assessed, the penalty and interest as set out in the state property tax code, is due and payable. 
(Code 1973, § 7-15; Ord. No. 1603, 8-10-1993) 
Secs. 44-23-44-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal hotel occupancy taxes, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 351.001 et seq.; levy of tax authorized, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 351.002; tax rates, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 351.003. 

Sec. 44-48. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hotel means any building, trailer or other facility in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term "hotel" shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodginghouses, inns, roominghouses, trailer houses, trailer motels, or dormitory space where bed space is rented to individuals or groups, but shall not mean apartments occupied by permanent residents, and shall not include hospitals, sanitariums, or nursing homes. 
    Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to use or possession of any room, space, or sleeping facility in a hotel for any purpose. 
    Occupant means anyone who, for a consideration of at least $2.00 per day, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room or sleeping space or facility in a hotel or other accommodations defined as a hotel. 
    Permanent resident means any occupant who has or shall have the right of occupancy of any room or sleeping space or facility in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the calendar year or preceding year. 
    Person means any individual, company, corporation, partnership or association owning, operating, managing, or controlling any hotel. 
    Quarterly period means the regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February, and March; the second quarter being the months of April, May, and June; the third quarter being the months of July, August, and September; and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November, and December. 
    Tax assessor-collector means the tax collector-assessor of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 7-16; Ord. No. 1202, § 1, 9-13-1977) 
Sec. 44-49. - Levy of rate; exceptions. 
(a)  There is levied a tax upon the occupant of any room or space furnished by any hotel where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day; such tax to be equal to a percentage, pursuant to the manual of fees and service charges of the city, of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room, space, or facility to such hotel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental agencies and exclusive of any sales taxes. 
(b)  No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident. 
(c)  No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon an occupant of any room or space rented from a corporation or association organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, or education purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
(d)  All revenue derived from the occupancy tax imposed in subsection (a) of this section shall be used for the following: 
(1)  The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation and maintenance of convention center facilities, including, but not limited to, civic center convention buildings, auditoriums, coliseums and parking areas or facilities for the parking or storage of motor vehicles or other conveyances located at or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities. 
(2)  The furnishing of facilities, personnel and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants. 
(3)  For advertising of general promotional nature and tourist advertising of the city and its vicinity, and conducting a solicitation and operating program to attract conventions and visitors either by the city or through contracts with persons or organizations selected by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 7-17; Ord. No. 1202, § 2, 9-13-1977) 
Sec. 44-50. - Collection. 
    Every person owning, operating, managing, or controlling any hotel, as herein defined, shall collect the tax imposed herein for the city. 
(Code 1973, § 7-18; Ord. No. 1202, § 3, 9-13-1977) 
Sec. 44-51. - Reports. 
    By the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required herein to collect the tax imposed by this article shall file a report with the tax assessor-collector showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies and any other information as the tax assessor-collector may reasonably require. Such persons shall pay the amount of tax collected from occupants during the period of the report at the time of the filing of such report. 
(Code 1973, § 7-19; Ord. No. 1202, § 4, 9-13-1977; Ord. No. 1287, 4-14-1981) 
Sec. 44-52. - Rules and regulations. 
    The tax assessor-collector shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied herein, and shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records belonging to such hotels as herein defined necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 7-20; Ord. No. 1202, § 5, 9-13-1977) 
Sec. 44-53. - Penalties. 
    If any person owning, operating, managing, or controlling any hotel as herein defined shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed herein, or shall fail or refuse to file a report as required herein, or shall fail or refuse to pay to the tax assessor-collector the tax as imposed herein when the report for payment is due, or shall file a false report, then such person shall be determined guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00. In addition, such person who fails to remit the tax imposed by this article within the time required shall forfeit five percent of the amount due as a penalty, and after the first 30 days shall forfeit an additional five percent of such tax; provided, however, that the penalty shall never be less than $1.00. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of six percent per annum, beginning 30 days from the date due on the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1973, § 7-21; Ord. No. 1202, § 6, 9-13-1977) 
Sec. 44-54. - Reimbursements. 
    The person shall have the right to retain one percent of the amount of the tax collected as reimbursement for the cost of collecting the tax. In the event the person fails to file reports as required in section 44-51, then the one percent reimbursement shall be forfeited. 
(Code 1973, § 7-22; Ord. No. 1312, 12-8-1981) 
Chapter 46 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Rules of the road, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq.; powers of local authorities regarding regulation of traffic, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202; limitations on local authorities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 42.203; municipal authority to regulate parking, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 601.001; municipal streets generally, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 312.001 et seq.; railroad and roadway crossings, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 471.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Use of engine brake prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to use or operate an auxiliary or compression engine brake that produces any noise in addition to the normal operating engine noise within the city except when such use is required due to the failure of a vehicle's service brakes or for the avoidance of imminent danger. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the use of such braking mechanism by emergency vehicles while in the performance of their official or normal duties. 
(Code 1973, § 14-3; Ord. No. 1923, § 1, 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 46-2. - Repairing or washing vehicle in street. 
    No person shall repair or wash any vehicle in any street in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 21-1; Ord. No. 1121A, § 3, 8-4-1925) 
Sec. 46-3. - Driving on new pavement or closed street. 
    It is unlawful for any person to drive upon newly laid or constructed city pavement or any other closed street in the city so long as there are barriers or notices posted along or across such street, and until such time as the street is officially opened for public use. 
(Code 1973, § 21-2; Ord. No. 107, § 1, 12-5-1929) 
Sec. 46-4. - Turning around. 
    It is unlawful for any person operating any vehicle within the city to turn such vehicle on any city street so as to proceed in the opposite direction. 
(Code 1973, § 21-9; Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 8-9-1971) 
Secs. 46-5-46-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEIGHT LIMITS AND TRUCK ROUTES 

Sec. 46-27. - Truck routes designated; heavy trucks required to use. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, truck routes shall be those routes designated as state or federal highways including farm-to-market highways as marked in the city. It is unlawful for any person to operate or permit operation of any motor truck with a carrying capacity of more than two tons on any street in the city other than certain listed streets designated in this article as truck routes. 
(Code 1973, §§ 21-3, 21-4; Ord. No. 923, §§ 1, 2, 6-12-1967; Ord. No. 1241, 4-10-1979) 
Sec. 46-28. - Deviation for certain purposes. 
    Truck route restrictions shall not apply to the operation of a motor truck of more than two tons carrying capacity to locations to secure fuel or repairs or to load or unload cargo or for the purpose of parking an unloaded vehicle on private property. Any such operation away from the designated truck routes shall be by the most direct route and return thereto. 
(Code 1973, § 21-5; Ord. No. 923, § 5, 6-12-1967; Ord. No. 1241, 4-10-1979) 
Secs. 46-29-46-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing and parking generally, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.301; parking, towing and storage of vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 681.001 et seq. 

Sec. 46-60. - Manner of parking. 
    No person shall park the vehicle in a street other than parallel with the edge of the street, headed in the direction of the traffic, and with the curb-side wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the edge of the curb or the edge of the roadway, except upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking as approved by the chief of police and city manager, in which case vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by the mark or sign. Whenever parking spaces are marked by lines on the pavement, whether for parallel or angle parking, a vehicle must be parked entirely within the lines of the parking space. 
(Code 1973, § 18-53; Ord. No. 1915, § 3, 12-12-2006) 
Sec. 46-61. - Parking near intersections restricted. 
    Parking is prohibited within 15 feet from the intersection of curblines or edge of the roadway at an intersection, except at alleys where parking shall be prohibited within ten feet from the edge of the intersection of the alley with the roadway unless otherwise marked. 
(Code 1973, § 18-53; Ord. No. 1915, § 3, 12-12-2006) 
Sec. 46-62. - Parking in alleys prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to use the alleys within the city for the purpose of parking vehicles except for temporary use for loading and unloading. 
(Code 1973, § 18-54; Ord. No. 1915, § 4, 12-12-2006) 
Sec. 46-63. - Parking prohibited on designated streets. 
    Parking is prohibited on the following streets or portions thereof: 
(1)  The south side of the 300 block of West Grand Avenue; 
(2)  On the north side of the 300 block of West Grand Avenue as marked; 
(3)  The east side of Irvine Street for a distance of 55 feet, eight inches in a southerly direction beginning at the southern right-of-way of West Grand Avenue; 
(4)  The west side of Irvine Street for a distance of 60 feet, six inches in a southerly direction beginning at the south curbline of West Grand Avenue; 
(5)  The east side of Irvine Street for a distance of 70 feet in a southerly direction beginning at the south curbline West May Street; 
(6)  The west side of Irvine Street for a distance of 47 feet in a southerly direction beginning at West May Street; 
(7)  The 100 block of Irvine Street; 
(8)  The south side of West Gonzales for a distance of 150 feet in a westerly direction beginning at the west right-of-way line of Irvine Street; 
(9)  The north side of West Gonzales for a distance of 950 feet in an easterly direction beginning at the curbline of Capitol Street; and 
(10)  The south side of West Gonzales Street between Irvine and Hopkins Streets. 
(Code 1973, § 18-55; Ord. No. 1915, § 5, 12-12-2006) 
Sec. 46-64. - Truck and trailer parking. 
(a)  Parking of any two-ton rated truck or larger with or without trailers, and all trailers pulled by the trucks is prohibited along both sides of all streets and highways on publicly owned rights-of-way within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Parking of any trailer, motor home, or recreational vehicle whether pull behind or motorized is prohibited along both sides of all state marked thoroughfares on publicly owned rights-of-way within the corporate limits of the city except to perform maintenance or service activities. 
(c)  Parking of any vehicle, trailer, motor home, or recreational vehicle may be prohibited on any street within the corporate limits of the city by law enforcement officers as deemed necessary to maintain adequate traffic flow or to avoid any traffic hazard. 
(d)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle regulated under this section except: 
(1)  For temporary use for loading and unloading; 
(2)  When necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic; 
(3)  At the direction of a police officer; or 
(4)  In obedience to a traffic control device. 
(Code 1973, §§ 18-56, 18-57, 21-5; Ord. No. 923, § 5, 6-12-1967; Ord. No. 1241, 4-10-1979; Ord. No. 1915, §§ 6, 7, 12-12-2006) 
State Law reference- Overnight parking of commercial motor vehicles in or near residential subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.307. 
Secs. 46-65-46-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLAY VEHICLES AND DEVICES 

Sec. 46-87. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Central business district shall be defined as that portion of the city bounded by West Gonzales Street on the north, West Street on the south, McCarty Street on the west and the railroad lines on the east. 
    Unsafe manner means to operate a vehicle or device in such a manner that may endanger the health and safety of the rider or any member of the public. 
(Code 1973, § 18-81; Ord. No. 1933, § 1, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 46-88. - Use on sidewalks in central business district prohibited. 
    No person shall ride in, upon or in any manner operate any skateboard, roller skates, rollerblades, foot-operated scooter, bicycle or similar device upon any public property, including streets, alleys and sidewalks, within the central business district. 
(Code 1973, § 18-82; Ord. No. 1933, § 2, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 46-89. - Use in unsafe manner prohibited. 
    No person shall ride or in any manner operate any skateboard, roller skates, rollerblades, foot-operated scooter, bicycle, or similar devices in an unsafe manner on any street, sidewalk, walkway, or on any public property at the entrance or exit used for passage of persons or vehicles to which the public or substantial group of the public has access. 
(Code 1973, § 18-82; Ord. No. 1933, § 2, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 46-90. - Ramps, jumps or similar devices prohibited. 
    No person will construct any ramp, jump or similar device intended for use by a person with a skateboard, roller skates, rollerblades, foot-operated scooter, bicycle or similar device on any public property, including, but not limited to, street, alley, sidewalk, walkway, waterway or the locations used for passage of persons or vehicles. 
(Code 1973, § 18-83; Ord. No. 1933, § 3, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 46-91. - Deposit of wax or similar substances prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place any wax or other similar substance used to provide a lubricated surface for the purpose of easing the movement of skateboards, roller skates, rollerblades, foot-operated scooters or similar devices on any public property, right-of-way or any other place that has been or may be prohibited or which contains any sign prohibiting the riding of skateboards, skates, rollerblades or similar devices. 
(Code 1973, § 18-84; Ord. No. 1933, § 4, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 46-92. - Authority to prohibit operation on private property. 
    Owners or managers of restaurants, businesses, professional buildings, churches, schools, or shopping centers may prohibit persons from riding in, upon, or in any manner operate any skateboard, roller skates, rollerblades, foot-operated scooters, bicycles or similar devices upon sidewalks and parking lots of the premises. Owners or managers of these types of establishments may prohibit such activity by posting a sign bearing one of the following legends: 
(1)  "Use of skateboards, roller skates, rollerblades, foot-operated scooters, bicycles or similar devices on these premises is unlawful per Yoakum City Code." 
(2)  "It is unlawful to use skateboards, roller skates, rollerblades, foot-operated scooters, bicycles or similar devices on these premises during business hours per Yoakum City Code." 
(Code 1973, § 18-85; Ord. No. 1933, § 5, 1-8-2008) 
Secs. 46-93-46-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GOLF CARTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Golf carts and utility vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 551.401 et seq.; requirements for slow-moving vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 547.703; vehicle equipment, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 547.001 et seq. 

Sec. 46-113. - Applicability. 
    This article pertains only to golf carts that are not registered by or titled in this state. 
(Code 1973, § 18-103; Ord. No. 1962, § 1, 12-8-2009) 
Sec. 46-114. - Operation permitted during daylight hours only; maximum speed. 
    Persons possessing a valid driver's license may operate a golf cart on roadways within the city limits unless otherwise prohibited by the state department of transportation. Such golf carts may only be operated at speeds of 35 miles per hour or less and only during daylight hours (from 30 minutes before sunrise to 30 minutes after sunset). 
(Code 1973, § 18-101; Ord. No. 1962, § 1, 12-8-2009) 
Sec. 46-115. - Required equipment and safety features. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, any golf cart operated in the city must be equipped with all safety features required by state law, including, without limitation, functional safety belts, headlamps, tail lamps, parking brake, side-view mirrors, reflects and slow-moving vehicle emblem; provided, however, that golf carts operated not more than two miles from the location where the golf cart is usually parked and for transportation to and from a golf course are not required to have safety belts or side-view mirrors. The operator and all occupants of the golf cart are required to utilize all safety equipment and features. 
(Code 1973, §§ 18-101, 18-102; Ord. No. 1962, § 1, 12-8-2009) 
Sec. 46-116. - Maximum number of occupants. 
    Golf carts operated in the city may not carry more occupants than the number of seats provided by the cart. Each occupant must occupy a proper seat. 
(Code 1973, § 18-101; Ord. No. 1962, § 1, 12-8-2009) 
Sec. 46-117. - Liability insurance. 
    Any golf cart operated in the city must be covered by appropriate liability insurance as required for motor vehicles by state law. 
(Code 1973, § 18-101; Ord. No. 1962, § 1, 12-8-2009) 
Chapter 48 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal water and utilities generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 551.001 et seq.; municipal utility systems, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 552.001 et seq.; agreement with conservation and reclamation districts, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 552.903; Texas Water Quality Act, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 21.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 48-1. - Prohibiting the sale of water. 
    It is unlawful for any person other than the city to barter, give away, or offer for sale water originating from any source within the city. This section shall not prohibit the sale of bottled or distilled water. 
(Ord. No. 2037, § 5, 3-12-2013) 
Sec. 48-2. - City manager in charge. 
    The city utilities, consisting of all the properties of the sewer, water and electricity plants, and systems of the city shall be under the control, management and maintenance of the city manager, who shall at all times be responsible to the city council for the proper and legal conduct of all the affairs of the city utilities. Among his other duties, he shall, subject to the approval of the city council, employ and fix wages and salaries of all employees of the department. 
(Code 1973, § 22-1; Ord. No. 695, § I, 3-13-1957) 
Sec. 48-3. - Referendum required before sale of system. 
    The city utilities system shall never be sold by the city unless and until such sale shall have been authorized at an election held to decide on the propriety of such sale, in which election a majority of the votes cast shall have been in favor of such sale. 
(Code 1973, § 22-2; Ord. No. 695, § II, 3-13-1957) 
Secs. 48-4-48-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RATES, CHARGES, BILLING AND COLLECTIONS 

Sec. 48-25. - No free service. 
    No free service shall be rendered by the waterworks, sewer or electric system to any customer except institutions operated by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 22-10; Ord. No. 715, § 5, 9-10-1957) 
Sec. 48-26. - Fees, rates and charges provided in city fee schedule. 
    Fees, rates and charges associated with this chapter shall be in the amounts established from time to time by the city council as provided in the city fee schedule, including, but not limited to, water service rates, electric service rates, sewer service rates, connection and reconnection charges, tap charges, pavement cutting and restoration fees, fire sprinkler fees, fog system fees, late fees and interest. Industrial sewer use surcharges are subject to the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
Sec. 48-27. - Payment of water connection charges. 
    Water tapping fees will be paid at the time the taps are requested unless the meter is larger than one inch. If meter is larger than one inch, the customer will be billed the actual cost plus 25 percent. In existing additions where a developer is opening up several lots and new street work is to be done, the developer will be required to have the taps put in place and pay for the taps at the existing rates before any street work is completed. In new additions where we require taps to be put in by the developer, or where there is an existing tap on a vacant lot, there will be a meter setting charge. 
(Code 1973, § 22-4; Ord. No. 929-A, § 1, 6-28-1967; Ord. No. 1257, 12-11-1979; Ord. No. 1388, 12-11-1984; Ord. No. 1433, 7-8-1986) 
Sec. 48-28. - Payment for other city utility service charges; late payment penalty. 
    Rates and charges provided in the city fee schedule shall be paid by users of the waterworks, sewer or electric system to the city clerk in advance of the tenth day of each month, which shall be the date such service rates or charges shall become due and payable. If any user or customer of such system does not pay the amount due on the tenth day of the month, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to add a ten percent penalty to the amount past due and unpaid. 
(Code 1973, § 22-8; Ord. No. 715, § 3, 9-10-1957; Ord. No. 929-A, § 1, 6-28-1967) 
Sec. 48-29. - Cut off for delinquency; reconnection charge. 
    In the event any user or customer of the waterworks, sewer or electric system does not pay matured service rates and charges within eight days from the date they become due and payable, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to disconnect the water service or the electric service; whenever the amount past due and delinquent is paid by such user or customer, such service may be resumed upon payment of a reconnect fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. After hours is defined as on weekends, and after 5:00 p.m. and before 8:00 a.m. on weekdays. No disconnects shall be made on Fridays, nor on days preceding a holiday. 
(Code 1973, § 22-9; Ord. No. 715, § 4, 9-10-1957; Ord. No. 1063, 4-10-1973; Ord. No. 1388, 12-11-1984) 
Sec. 48-30. - Discontinuance of utility and garbage service for delinquency. 
    Failure to pay any charges for water, electric power, sewer or garbage service within the time specified for payment shall entitle and empower the city to discontinue service for all such utilities. 
(Code 1973, § 22-12; Res. No. 1045, 9-12-1972) 
Secs. 48-31-48-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INDUSTRIAL SEWER USE 

Sec. 48-49. - Prohibited discharges; types of water. 
(a)  No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, downspouts, yard drains, yard fountains and ponds, lawn sprays, water from swimming pools or unpolluted industrial water into any sanitary sewer in the system. 
(b)  No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, into any public sewer any of the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature greater than 122 degrees Fahrenheit (50 degrees Centigrade). 
(2)  Any toxic, corrosive, flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas, such as gasoline, kerosene, phenols, benzene, naphtha, etc. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes which contain wax, greases, oil, cleaning solvents, mineral oils or other substances which will solidify or become discernible viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees to 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly comminuted or shredded (the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the city manager). 
(5)  Any solid or viscous substances, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud gravel, straw, tar asphalt, ceramic wastes, shavings, sawdust, metal, glass, rags, feathers, plastics, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime residues, lime slurries, slops, chemical residues, paint residues, or bulk solids. 
(6)  Any material which may cause excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions where the coloration will not be removed by the sewage treatment process. 
(7)  Any heavy metals, such as those listed below: 
Antimony Lead Arsenic Manganese Barium Mercury Beryllium Molybdenum Bismuth Nickel Boron Rhenium Cadmium Selenium Chromium (Hexa) Silver Chromium (Tri) Strontium Cobalt Tellurium Copper Tin Iron Uranylion Zinc  
Discharge of these materials into the sewer system shall be prohibited. 
(8)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or concentration that exceeds limits established by the U.S. Public Health Service for Public Drinking Water Standards. 
(9)  Any waste or substance which exerts an excessive chlorine requirement which will cause a chlorine demand greater than that which is considered normal, based on the past history of chlorine demand. 
(10)  Any waste or substance causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand (COD). 
(11)  Any wastes or waters containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(Code 1973, §§ 22-20, 22-21; Ord. No. 1502, §§ A, B, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 48-50. - Permissible discharges. 
    Discharge into the city sewerage system shall consist only of domestic sewage, properly shredded garbage, industrial wastes and other wastes which are free from the prohibited constituents listed in section 48-49, and limited in BOD, suspended solids, dissolved sulfides, pH grease, fats, and oils as follows: 
(1)  Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of such wastes delivered shall not exceed 200 ppm., as determined by standard methods. 
(2)  Suspended solids delivered shall not exceed 200 ppm., as determined by standard methods. 
(3)  Hydrogen ion concentration (pH) of the sewage delivered shall be no lower than 6.0 nor higher than 9.0 and any acid wastes shall not be discharged unless neutralized to a pH of 6.0 or more, and any alkaline waste shall not be discharged until neutralized to a pH of 9.0 or less. 
(4)  Dissolved sulfides in the wastes delivered to the system shall not exceed 0.1 ppm. 
(5)  Alkalinity shall not exceed 400 ppm. 
(6)  Dissolved oxygen content shall be at least 2.0 ppm through 3.0 ppm minimum. 
(7)  Fats, oil, and grease shall not exceed 90 ppm. 
(Code 1973, § 22-22; Ord. No. 1502, § C, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 1757, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 1921, § 1, 5-8-2007) 
Sec. 48-51. - Volume and rate of flow. 
    The volume and rate of flow of wastes to the sewerage system shall not be in excess of the capacity of the facility provided as determined and regulated by the city utility department. 
(Code 1973, § 22-23; Ord. No. 1502, § D, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 48-52. - Pretreatment; inspection facilities; interceptors. 
(a)  Pretreatment required; control manhole. Any persons or owners discharging industrial wastes into the sewerage system which exhibit any of the prohibited wastes set out in this article shall pretreat or otherwise dispose of such industrial waste in a manner that meets all federal, state, local, or other public agency requirements, to make the remaining wastes meet the requirements of this article, and be acceptable to the city utility department. Any such person or owner shall provide and maintain, in a suitable accessible position on his premises, an inspection chamber or control manhole near the outlet of such sewer prior to the discharge into the city system. Every such chamber shall be of such design and construction which will prevent infiltration of any water or foreign matter into the city system and shall be so maintained by the person discharging wastes so that any authorized representative of the city may readily and safely measure the volume and obtain samples of the flow at all times. 
(b)  Design and installation of plant, equipment of pretreatment or equalization facilities. Where pretreatment or equalization of waste flows is practiced prior to discharge to the city's sewer system, the design and installation of the plants and equipment of the pretreatment or equalization facilities shall be subject to the review and approval of the city manager and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. 
(c)  Grease, sand, oil interceptors; type; capacity; location; construction. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, lint, or any flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city utilities superintendent and plumbing inspector, and shall be located as to be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperatures. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. Such interceptors shall be maintained by the user at his expense, in a continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(d)  Waste of unusual strength. No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern for any portion of the excess cost to the city of handling and treating such industrial wastes, as may be established by the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 22-24) 
Sec. 48-53. - Damaging, uncovering, defacing structures, equipment, etc. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1973, § 22-25; Ord. No. 1502, § E, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 48-54. - Industrial discharge into storm sewers prohibited. 
    The discharge of industrial sewage wastes into the storm sewer system or stormwater drainage system of the city is prohibited. 
(Code 1973, § 22-26; Ord. No. 1502, § I, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 48-55. - Industrial sewer charge schedule. 
(a)  Generally. Industrial sewage waste is more costly and more difficult to process due to the injurious material and biochemical oxygen demand contained in the sewage. To ensure that industrial users pay their fair, reasonable and just cost for use of the city's sewer system, all persons using any portion of the city sewer system and either directly or indirectly discharging sewage waste into the system shall be charged the current rate in the manual of fees and service charges of the city or a charge set by the city council. 
(b)  Surcharge. In the event any person, firm, or corporation who is an industrial user of the sewer system and sewer lines of the city, and whose wastes discharged to the city sewer system exceed the values set out in section 48-50, then the person, firm, or corporation shall pay a surcharge for waste treatment in addition to the customer charges as listed in the utilities section of the manual of fees and service charges. 
(c)  Surcharge determination factors. The surcharge shall be calculated as follows: 
ISc = V [a(BOD - 200) + b(S.S. - 200) + c(FOG - 100)] 
where: 
(1)  ISc = Industrial surcharge. 
(2)  V = Volume discharge in thousands of gallons as based upon metered water consumption as recorded in meter reading records, unless discharger installs a meter, at his expense, to determine the volume discharged. Metering device to be approved by the city. 
(3)  a = BOD surcharge factor (dollars per 1,000 gallons, per milligram, per liter) based on the treatment costs attributable to BOD. 
(4)  BOD = Five day biochemical oxygen demand at 20 degrees Celsius, of the industrial waste, in parts per million measured on composite samples. 
(5)  b = S.S. surcharge factor (dollars per 1,000 gallons, per milligram, per liter) based on the treatment costs attributable to the removal of S.S. 
(6)  S.S. = suspended solids in the industrial waste in parts per million, measured on composite samples. 
(7)  c = FOG surcharge factor (dollar amount per 1,000 gallons, per milligram, per liter) based on treatment cost. 
(8)  FOG = Fats, oil, and grease measured in parts per million, measured on composite samples. 
(9)  Composite samples = A sample composed of a series of not less than three samples taken over a period of time not exceeding 24 hours. 
(10)  Grab sample = Taken on a one-time basis with no regard to flow or time. 
(11)  The factors "a," "b," and "c" shall be evaluated as follows: 
a = 0.0034 
b = 0.0017 
c = 0.0005 
These factors shall be subject to review with each increase in domestic sewer service charges so that industrial users will carry their fair share of the costs for construction and operation of sewage treatment within the city. 
(d)  Users whose water is not wholly supplied by city. In the event any person, firm or corporation who is an industrial user of the sewer system and sewer lines of the city and whose water is not supplied wholly by the city, and where the bill for the water used thereon or therein in this event would not clearly show the amount of sewage the industrial user was putting into the city's municipal sewer system, then in each case the amount of water so used shall be otherwise measured and determined by the city manager in order to determine the fair and reasonable charge to be made for sewer services provided in this section and these users shall be billed accordingly. 
(e)  Industrial sewage waste discharge. The discharge of industrial sewage wastes into the storm sewer system or stormwater drainage system of the city is prohibited. 
(Code 1973, § 22-27; Ord. No. 1502, § I, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 1757, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 1921, § 1, 5-8-2007) 
Sec. 48-56. - Powers and authority of enforcing agents. 
    The city manager and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identifications shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observations, measurement sampling, and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 22-28; Ord. No. 1502, § F, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 48-57. - Testing procedures. 
(a)  Generally. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association or, if the city deems it necessary, sampling shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the most current edition of EPA publication, "Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants," or with other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the EPA. The measurements and test shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the affect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards of life, limb, and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample shall be taken. 
(b)  Sampling, testing, measurements to be made by city. All sampling, testing and measurements shall be made by the city. The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to perform the measurements, sampling or testing. All cost incurred by the city shall be at the expense of the person, firm, or corporation discharging into the sewer system. 
(Code 1973, § 22-29; Ord. No. 1502, §§ J, K, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 48-58. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Generally. Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. If the offender continues violation after the expiration of the time stated, the city council may prohibit the further use of the sewage system by the offender and may remove or close the offender's sewage and water connections. 
(b)  Continuing violations. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-15 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Liability. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1973, § 22-30; Ord. No. 1502, § G, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 1757, 7-11-2000) 
Secs. 48-59-48-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL 

Sec. 48-90. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Air gap means a physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or nonpressure receiving vessel. An approved air gap shall be at least double the size of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel, in no case less than one inch. 
    Approved air gap, a double check valve assembly, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly, or other backflow prevention assemblies or methods means any assembly judged by the water purveyor to be in conformance with this article and the AWWA standards. 
    Approved water supply means a water supply that is in compliance with the state rules and regulations for public water systems and is approved by this state and the city. 
    Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the city's approved public water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural sources, such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or used waters or industrial fluids. These waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the city is not afforded complete access and control. 
    Backflow means the undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases, or other substances into the distribution pipes of the potable supply of water from any source. 
    Backflow preventer means an assembly or means designed to prevent backflow. 
    Backpressure means any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by pump, thermal expansion, elevation of piping, or steam or other gaseous pressure) above the supply pressure at the point of consideration which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of flow. 
    Backsiphonage means a form of backflow due to a reduction in system pressure which causes a subatmospheric pressure to exist at a site in the water system. 
    Consumer means the owner of the property and private plumbing system, and any person responsible for initiating or maintaining an active or inactive water or sewer service with the water purveyor. 
    Contamination means an impairment of a potable water supply by the introduction or admission of any foreign substance that degrades the quality and creates a health hazard. 
    Cross-connection means any unprotected actual or potential connection or structural arrangement between a public or a consumer's potable water system and any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable system any used water, industrial fluid, gas or substance other than the intended potable water with which the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements, bumper connections, removable sections, swivel or change-over devices and other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow can or may occur are considered to be cross-connections. 
    Cross-connection, control by containment, means the appropriate type or method of backflow protection at the service connection, commensurate with the degree of hazard of the consumer's water system. 
    Cross-connection, control by isolation, means the appropriate type or method or backflow protection, providing internal system control at the cross-connection or point of potential entry into any potable water system, commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
    Cross-connection, controlled, means a connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
    Direct cross-connection means a cross-connection which is subject to both backsiphonage and backpressure. 
    Double check valve backflow prevention assembly means an assembly composed of two independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. This assembly shall only be used to protect against a non-health hazard (i.e., pollutant). 
    Hazard, degree of, means either a pollutional (non-health) or contamination (health) hazard and is derived from the evaluation of conditions within a system. 
    Hazard, health, means a cross-connection, potential cross-connection, or other situation involving any substance that could cause death, illness, spread of disease, or has a high probability of causing such effects if introduced into the potable drinking water supply. 
    Hazard, plumbing, means an internal or plumbing type cross-connection in a consumer's potable water system that may be either a pollutional or a contamination type hazard. Such a connection, if permitted to exist, must be properly protected by an appropriate type of backflow prevention assembly. 
    Hazard, pollutional, means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of a water system or the potability of the public or consumer's potable water system but which would not constitute a health or system hazard as defined. The maximum degree of pollution to which the potable water system could be degraded under this definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause minor damage to the system or its appurtenances. 
    Hazard, system, means an actual or potential threat of severe danger to the physical properties of the public or consumer's potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the systems. 
    Indirect cross-connection means a cross-connection which is subject to backsiphonage only. 
    Industrial fluids means any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration which would constitute a health, system, pollutional, or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water system. This may include, but not be limited to: polluted or contaminated used waters, all types of process and used waters, chemicals in fluid form, acids and alkalies, circulated cooling waters, auxiliary water supplies, oils, gases, glycerin, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions, and other gaseous fluids used industrially, for other purposes, or for firefighting purposes. 
    Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a non-health hazard or impair the usefulness of the water. 
    Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly means an assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and below the first check valve. The unit shall include the properly located resilient seated test cocks and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves at each end of the assembly. This assembly is designed to protect against a non-health (i.e., pollutant) or a health hazard (i.e., contaminant). This assembly shall not be used for backflow protection of sewage, radioactive or reclaimed water, or any other potentially lethal contamination. 
    Water, nonpotable, means a water supply which has not been approved for human consumption by this state and the city or which may be of unknown or questionable quality. 
    Water, potable, means any public water supply which has been investigated, approved, and is in compliance with state rules and regulations for public water supplies, and the city. In determining what constitutes an approved water supply, the water purveyor has final judgment as to its safety and potability. 
    Water, service connection, means the terminal end of the service connection from the city's potable water system (where the city may lose jurisdiction and sanitary control of the water at its point of delivery to the consumer's water system). If a water meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection means the downstream end of the water meter. 
    Water, used, means any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and is no longer under the complete control of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 22-41; Ord. No. 1673, § 2, 4-9-1996) 
Sec. 48-91. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  Any person who shall fail or refuse to comply with any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. Each day of violation of this article shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1973, § 22-43; Ord. No. 1867, 3-8-2005) 
Sec. 48-92. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is: 
(1)  To protect the public potable water supply of the city from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the consumer's internal distribution systems or the consumer's private water systems such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public water system; 
(2)  To promote the discovery and elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the consumer's potable water systems and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping system; and 
(3)  To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems. 
(Code 1973, § 22-40(a); Ord. No. 1673, § 1, 4-9-1996) 
Sec. 48-93. - Authority of city manager to make rules and policies for enforcement of article. 
    The city manager is authorized to make all necessary and reasonable rules and policies with respect to the enforcement of this article. All such rules and policies shall be consistent with the provisions of this article. Where provisions in this article differ with backflow requirements of the city plumbing codes, this article shall regulate. 
(Code 1973, § 22-42(b)(8); Ord. No. 1673, § 3, 4-9-1996) 
Sec. 48-94. - Responsibility of water purveyor generally. 
    The water purveyor is responsible for delivering safe, clean, potable water to the consumer's service connection, and for the enforcement of this article. If, in the judgment of the water purveyor, and in accordance with this article and its references, an approved backflow prevention assembly is required (at the consumer's water service connection or within the consumer's private water system) for the safety of the water system, the water purveyor's designated agents shall give notice in writing to the consumer to install such an approved backflow prevention assembly at a specific location on his premises. 
(Code 1973, § 22-40(b); Ord. No. 1673, § 1, 4-9-1996) 
Sec. 48-95. - Responsibility of consumer generally. 
    The consumer is responsible for maintaining his private water system to ensure that no unprotected cross-connections or unacceptable plumbing arrangements are permitted to exist on his premises, and that no pollutants, contaminants, nor any other material enters his water system. The consumer shall install backflow prevention assemblies at the consumer's own expense within the time specified in a notice from the water purveyor that such device is necessary. Failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the consumer to install, have tested and maintained the assemblies shall constitute grounds for denying or discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met. The existence of a serious threat to the integrity of the city water supply shall be considered sufficient grounds for immediate termination of water service. 
(Code 1973, § 22-40(b); Ord. No. 1673, § 1, 4-9-1996) 
Sec. 48-96. - Water system components. 
(a)  Two-part system. The water system shall be considered as being made up as two parts, the water purveyor's system and the consumer's system. 
(b)  Water purveyor's system. The water purveyor's system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the purveyor, up to the point where the consumer's system begins. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the distribution system. The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the consumer's system. 
(c)  Consumer's system. The consumer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the water purveyor's distribution system which are utilized in conveying potable water to points of use. 
(Code 1973, § 22-42(a); Ord. No. 1673, § 3, 4-9-1996) 
Sec. 48-97. - Backflow prevention assembly required; effect of failure to comply. 
(a)  No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained unless the water supply is protected as required by the rules and regulations of this state and the city. An approved backflow prevention assembly, commensurate with the degree of hazard, shall also be installed on each service line to a consumer's water systems at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served; and, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply. 
(2)  In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the city water system which may be subject to deterioration in quality. 
(3)  In the case of premises having internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected or protected against or intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impractical or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist. 
(4)  In the case of a premises having controlled cross-connections which, because of actual or potential health hazard or system hazard contamination, requires the installation of an internal, isolating, backflow preventer. 
(5)  In the case of any premises having more than one water service connection. 
(b)  Residential potable domestic services where served by a common valved section of a common main, and where not interconnected with any other system may be exempted by the water purveyor. 
(c)  Service of water to any premises may be denied or discontinued by the city if a backflow prevention assembly required by this article is not installed, tested, and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. 
(Code 1973, § 22-42(b)(1), (3); Ord. No. 1673, § 3, 4-9-1996) 
Sec. 48-98. - Minimum device specifications. 
(a)  The minimum type of protective assembly required under this article shall depend upon the degree of hazard as recommended in the current AWWA M-14 Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control, the USCFCCCHR Manual of Cross-Connection Control, this state, and which exists as follows: 
(1)  In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply, the city's water system shall be protected by an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. 
(2)  In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health which may be handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential cross-connection to the potable water system, the potable water systems shall be protected by an approved double check valve backflow prevention assembly. 
(3)  In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to a potable water system, the potable water systems shall be protected by an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. 
(4)  In the case of any premises where there are unprotected cross-connections, either actual or potential, the city's water system shall be protected by an approved air gap or reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly at the service connection. 
(5)  In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross-connection survey, the city's water system shall be protected from backflow from the premises by either an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly at each service to the premises. 
(b)  Any backflow prevention assembly required herein shall be a make, model and size approved by the water purveyor. 
(Code 1973, § 22-42(b)(4), (5); Ord. No. 1673, § 3, 4-9-1996) 
Sec. 48-99. - Field tests. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the consumer at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have a field test performed by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester upon installation; and at least once per year thereafter for health hazard or system hazard protection; and at least once every three years thereafter for non-health hazard protection certifying that it is operating within specifications. 
(b)  In those instances where the water purveyor deems it necessary, field tests at more frequent intervals may be required. These tests shall be at the expense of the consumer, and shall be performed by certified testers approved by the water purveyor. It shall be the duty of the consumer to see that the tests are made in a timely manner. 
(c)  If requested by the water purveyor, the consumer shall notify the water purveyor in advance when the tests are to be undertaken so that an official representative of the city may witness the field tests if so desired. 
(Code 1973, § 22-42(b)(6); Ord. No. 1673, § 3, 4-9-1996) 
Sec. 48-100. - Expenses of installation and maintenance; records. 
    All assemblies shall be installed, repaired, overhauled, replaced, and tested at the expense of the consumer. Original records shall be submitted to the city for record-keeping purposes as required by this state. Copies of all records of such installations, tests, repairs, overhauls, and replacements shall be kept by the consumer and made available to the city. 
(Code 1973, § 22-42(b)(6); Ord. No. 1673, § 3, 4-9-1996) 
Sec. 48-101. - Applicability of state standards. 
    Requirements not specified within this article regarding certified testers, test reports, customer service inspections and certificates, service agreements, etc., shall meet the requirements of this state. 
(Code 1973, § 22-42(b)(6); Ord. No. 1673, § 3, 4-9-1996) 
Sec. 48-102. - Pre-existing systems. 
    All, non-health hazard presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this article but were approved devices for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained shall, except for the testing and maintenance requirements herein, be excluded from these rules so long as the water purveyor is assured they will protect the city's water system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location or requires more than minimum maintenance, or when the water purveyor finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 22-42(b)(7); Ord. No. 1673, § 3, 4-9-1996) 
Sec. 48-103. - Inspections; discontinuance of service for violations. 
    The consumer's system should be available for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the city to determine whether unprotected cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the water purveyor may deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the consumer has corrected the conditions in conformance with all state statutes and city ordinances relating to plumbing and water supplies and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1973, § 22-42(b)(2); Ord. No. 1673, § 3, 4-9-1996) 
Sec. 48-104. - Appeals. 
(a)  The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the water purveyor to the construction board of adjustments and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The water purveyor rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)  The provisions of this article do not apply to the specific case. 
(3)  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of this article, or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(b)  Notice of appeal shall be in writing, addressed to the board and filed within 30 calendar days after the decision is rendered by the water purveyor. 
(Code 1973, § 22-42(b)(9); Ord. No. 1673, § 3, 4-9-1996) 
Secs. 48-105-48-121. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER WELLS 

Sec. 48-122. - Drilling prohibited; pre-existing wells. 
    It shall be unlawful to drill an injection well for any purpose or a well for the production of water for any commercial, industrial, agricultural or domestic purpose within the city limits. This section shall not apply to any well drilled to serve the city water system. 
(Ord. No. 2037, §§ 1, 2, 3-12-2013) 
Sec. 48-123. - Pre-existing wells. 
    Any private well drilled and completed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may continue in use until such time as it ceases production for any reason or is abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 2037, § 2, 3-12-2013) 
Sec. 48-124. - Special exception; procedure for obtaining. 
(a)  An application for an exception to drill a private well for the production of water may be made by the city council for the drilling of a well: 
(1)  Used exclusively for nonpotable use, regardless of depth; 
(2)  Upon and designed to provide water to a property located more than 300 feet from any existing or proposed water main; or 
(3)  Upon and designed to provide water to a property when it has been determined by the city's engineer that any existing or proposed water line is inadequate to meet the needs of the proposed property use. 
(b)  Application for an exception must be made to the city clerk a minimum of ten workings days prior to the council's consideration and include the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and contact information for responsible property owner; 
(2)  Name, address and license number of driller responsible for proposed work; 
(3)  Planned casing diameter and proposed depth of the well; 
(4)  Site plan, drawn to scale, providing property description, property lines, location of proposed well, any existing or proposed improvements, and the location of nearest city owned water main; and 
(5)  Documentation that the proposed well meets or exceeds the technical and vocational standards adopted by the state department of licensing and regulations, as well as the requirements of any federal, state or regional regulatory authority. 
(c)  The applicant has the burden to justify the need for an exception and to demonstrate that the granting of an exception will not be injurious to the city's water supply or distribution system, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2037, §§ 3, 4, 3-12-2013) 
Sec. 48-125. - Cross-connection with city water lines prohibited. 
    Water lines connected to private water well shall not be cross connected with any line supplying water from the water system of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2037, § 6, 3-12-2013) 
Chapter 50 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority for municipal regulation of taxicabs and limousines, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.004; municipal regulation of drivers and porters, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.029; airport taxicab regulation by joint county and municipal boards, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 22.081. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Taxicab means a motor vehicle, other than a limousine or touring vehicle, used for the transportation of passengers for hire. 
(Code 1973, § 20-1; Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 10-11-1994) 
Sec. 50-2. - Exclusions from provisions of chapter. 
    This chapter shall not apply to the operation of motor vehicles licensed by the state railroad commission to operate on the public highways of the state. 
(Code 1973, § 20-2; Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 10-11-1994) 
Secs. 50-3-50-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 50-23-50-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS LICENSE 

Sec. 50-48. - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab business without first obtaining a taxicab business license as provided in this division. 
(Code 1973, § 20-3; Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 10-11-1994) 
Sec. 50-49. - License application; fee. 
(a)  Applications for taxicab business licenses shall be made on a form provided by the city clerk, which shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, residence address, driver's license number, and phone number. 
(2)  The name, address, location address, and telephone number of the taxicab business. 
(3)  The make, model, year, license number, vehicle identification number, and rated seating capacity of all taxicabs to be used in the business. 
(4)  Taxi drivers' names, residence address, driver's license number, and telephone number. 
(5)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude. If so, the type of crime and the date and place of conviction. 
(6)  A schedule of rates to be charged any persons for taxicab service. 
(7)  A statement by the applicant under oath that all information contained in the application is true and correct. 
(b)  Each applicant shall procure and maintain in full force a policy of public liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this state with policy limits in accordance with applicable requirements of state law. This policy shall not contain a passenger liability exclusion. 
(c)  The completed application form shall be accompanied by copies of certificates of title for all taxicabs to be used in the business, copies of the current certificate of insurance meeting applicable state requirements covering all taxicabs to be used in the business, and a non-refundable fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule for each taxicab to be used by the business. 
(d)  The fee in this section is levied, assessed and ordered to be collected for the general fund of the city, as an annual license fee for the calendar year. Applications made after January 1 during any year shall be accompanied by the pro rata part of the annual license fee as the period of time between the date of such application and the end of the calendar year bears to the calendar year. 
(Code 1973, § 20-4; Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 10-11-1994) 
Sec. 50-50. - Inspection of vehicles and facilities. 
    Upon submission of an application, the city manager or a duly authorized representative shall perform or cause to be performed the inspections described in this section. An inspection of all taxicabs shall be performed to verify the vehicle identification number, and an inspection of all offices and stands used in connection with a taxicab business shall be performed to determine compliance with applicable city ordinances, including building codes and off-street parking requirements. 
(Code 1973, § 20-5; Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 10-11-1994) 
Sec. 50-51. - Investigation; license issuance or denial. 
(a)  The chief of police, or a duly authorized representative, shall conduct an investigation into the background of all applicants for taxicab business licenses. The investigation shall include making a permanent record of the identity of all applicants, and shall not exceed ten working days to conduct. 
(b)  The chief of police shall deny issuance of a license if the application or investigation shows any of the following: 
(1)  The application contains a false statement by the applicant. 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude within the three years preceding the date of application. 
(3)  The applicant has had a taxicab business license revoked within the two years preceding the date of application. 
(c)  Upon approval of an application by the chief of police and certification of compliance with inspection requirements, the city clerk shall issue a license to the applicant containing the name and address of licensee, name and address of the business for which the license is issued, and the expiration date of the license (which shall be December 31 of the year in which it is issued). 
(Code 1973, § 20-6; Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 10-11-1994) 
Sec. 50-52. - License not transferable. 
    Licenses issued under this division are not transferable. 
(Code 1973, § 20-6; Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 10-11-1994) 
Sec. 50-53. - Renewal. 
    All taxicab business licenses shall be subject to annual renewal in accordance with the procedures for issuance of such licenses. 
(Code 1973, § 20-7(a)) 
Sec. 50-54. - Suspension. 
    A taxicab business license shall be suspended for 30 days upon two violations of this division within any one-year period. In addition, any license issued under this division shall be suspended upon cancellation of liability insurance covering taxicabs of the business, and such suspension shall remain in effect until a new certificate of insurance is presented to the city clerk. 
(Code 1973, § 20-7(b)) 
Secs. 50-55-50-81. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPERATOR LICENSE 

Sec. 50-82. - Required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a taxicab without first obtaining a taxicab operator license as provided in this chapter, save and except the taxi business licensee. It is unlawful for any taxicab business licensee to employ as a driver any person who does not have a current valid taxicab operator license. 
(Code 1973, § 20-8; Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 10-11-1994) 
Sec. 50-83. - Application. 
(a)  Applications for taxicab operator licenses shall be made on a form provided by the city clerk, which shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, residence address, date of birth, and state driver's license number and class. 
(2)  The applicant's places of employment during the last two years. 
(3)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any felony, any crime involving moral turpitude, or any crime pertaining to the operation of a motor vehicle other than traffic violations. If so, the type of crime and the date and place of conviction. 
(4)  A statement by the applicant under oath that all information contained in the application is true and correct. 
(b)  The completed application form shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. The fee shall be an annual fee levied, assessed and ordered collected, and shall not be prorated for periods of less than one year. 
(Code 1973, § 20-8; Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 10-11-1994) 
Sec. 50-84. - Investigation; license issuance or denial. 
(a)  The chief of police, or a duly authorized representative, shall conduct an investigation into the background of all applicants for taxicab operator licenses. The investigation shall include making a permanent record of the identity of all applicants, and shall not exceed ten working days to conduct. 
(b)  The chief of police shall deny issuance of a license if the application or investigation shows any of the following: 
(1)  The application contains a false statement by the applicant. 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony, any crime involving moral turpitude, or any crime pertaining to the operation of a motor vehicle other than traffic violations within the three years preceding the date of the application. 
(3)  The applicant has had a taxicab operator license revoked within the two years preceding the date of the application. 
(c)  Upon approval of an application by the chief of police, the city clerk shall issue a license to the applicant containing the name and address of the licensee and the expiration date of the license (which shall be December 31 of the year in which it is issued). 
(Code 1973, § 20-9; Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 10-11-1994) 
Sec. 50-85. - Renewal. 
    All taxicab operator licenses shall be subject to annual renewal in accordance with the procedures for issuance of such licenses. 
(Code 1973, § 20-10(a)) 
Sec. 50-86. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  A license issued pursuant to this division shall be suspended for 30 days upon two violations of this chapter within any one-year period. In addition, a license issued under this division shall be suspended upon suspension of the license holder's state driver's license, and the period of suspension shall be the same as the state driver's license suspension period. 
(b)  A license issued pursuant to this division shall be revoked upon four violations of this chapter within any one-year period and upon revocation of the licensee's state driver's license. 
(Code 1973, § 20-10) 
Secs. 50-87-50-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUSINESS OPERATION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 50-116. - Taxicab equipment. 
    Each taxicab of a licensee under this article shall be identified as a taxicab on both sides in letters not less than two inches in height. A schedule of maximum fares shall be posted within each taxicab in a location that may be seen by any passenger in the vehicle. The interior of all taxicabs shall be kept clean and free of litter and debris at all times, and the taxicab shall be maintained in good mechanical condition at all times. 
(Code 1973, § 20-11; Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 10-11-1994) 
Sec. 50-117. - Fares. 
(a)  The applicant for a taxicab license shall file a schedule of rates and fares to be charged for taxicab services with the application filed for license, and by a licensee filing an application for renewal of license. Upon license issuance, the filed rates and fares shall be the established rates and fares to be charged for taxicab services. The established rates shall remain in effect until the issuance of a renewal license, or until rates are adopted and established by city council action as provided in this section. A copy of such rate schedule shall be maintained for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  The established rates and fares in this section may be reviewed, revised, and changed at any time by city council action. The rates and fares adopted by city council action shall be the established rates and shall be the fares and rates to be charged for taxicab services and shall remain in effect until changed by city council action. Thereafter, the licensee may, annually with application for license renewal, apply to the city council for rate and fare changes. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to charge any fare for taxicab services in excess of the established rates and fares. 
(Code 1973, § 20-12; Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 10-11-1994) 
Sec. 50-118. - Taxicab operation restrictions. 
    No taxicab shall be used to transport a number of persons in excess of the rate seating capacity of the vehicle. No taxicab operator shall solicit, undertake, or drive in search of passengers in any manner other than to respond to calls for service from intended passengers. No taxicab operator shall park at any time in a loading zone unless the taxicab is taking on or discharging passengers. 
(Code 1973, § 20-13; Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 10-11-1994) 
Chapter 52 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal zoning authority generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq.; municipal planning and development generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 371.001 et seq.; municipal zoning boards of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.008; issuance of local permits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 245.001 et seq.; municipal and county authority to regulate subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 242.001 et seq.; municipal comprehensive plans, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 213.001 et seq.; authority for municipal regulation of signs, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 52-1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The zoning regulations and districts established in this chapter have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and the general welfare of the city. They have been designed to lessen the congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view of conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of the land throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 1, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory building means: 
(1)  In a residential district, a subordinate building attached to or detached from the main building, without separate utilities, not used for commercial purposes, and not rented, and containing servants' quarters, a washroom, a storage room for domestic storage only and space for one or more automobiles. 
(2)  In other districts, a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to and used only in conjunction with the main building. 
    Accessory use means a use subordinate to the principal use of a building or lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the principal use. 
    Agent of owner means any person who can show certified written proof that he is acting for the property owner. 
    Alley means a public or private way not more than 30 feet wide affording only secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    Amusement redemption game room means any building, facility or other place that is open to the public and that contains one or more operational amusement redemption machines. 
    Apartment means a room or suite of rooms in an apartment house arranged, designed or occupied as a residence by a single family, individual or group of individuals. 
    Apartment house means any multiple-family dwelling or building, or portion thereof, that is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied as three or more apartments or which is occupied as the home or residence of three or more families living independently of each other and maintaining separate cooking facilities. 
    Basement means a story whose floor is more than 12 inches, but not more than half of its story height, below the average level of the adjoining ground (as distinguished from a cellar that is a story more than one-half of its story height below such level). A basement or cellar, when used as a dwelling, shall be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement. 
    Beginning of construction means the incorporation of labor and material within the foundation of the building. 
    Boardinghouse means a building other than a hotel where lodging for five or more persons are served for compensation. 
    Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or property. When such a structure is divided into separate parts by one or more unpierced walls extending from the ground up, each part is deemed a separate building. 
    Building line means a line parallel or approximately parallel to a lot line or street line and beyond which buildings may not be erected. 
    Building, main, means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the site on which it is located. In any residential district, any and all dwellings shall be deemed to be main buildings on the site on which they are located. 
    City inspector means the city inspector or other official appointed by the city to enforce this chapter. 
    Clinic, medical, means an institution or station for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted out-patients. 
    Convalescent home means any structure used for or occupied by persons recovering from illness or suffering from the infirmities of old age. 
    Court means an open, unoccupied and unobstructed space, other than a yard, on the same lot with the building or group of buildings. 
    Coverage of a lot means the ratio of gross floor area of the first floor of a building or a group of buildings on the same lot to the area of the lot, expressed as a percentage. 
    Day nursery means a place where children are left for care between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. 
    Detached structure means any building, accessory building or structure that is not physically attached to any other building or structure by any means. 
    District or zoning district means a portion of the territory of the city within which certain uniform resolutions and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Dwelling means a building which contains at least one dwelling unit, and used exclusively for residential purposes, but not including tents, trailers, recreational vehicles, or mobile homes. 
    Dwelling, duplex, means a dwelling designed for and used by two families, each having its own dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family, means a dwelling designed for and used by three or more families, each having its own dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a dwelling designed for and used exclusively by one family. 
    Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, and in full compliance with the city's minimum housing standards. 
    Family means a person living alone, or two or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit and in which not more than four individuals are unrelated by blood. 
    Floor area of a building means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building, measured from the centerlines of exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings in square feet. 
    Grade, existing, means the average level of the original surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. 
    Hotel/motel means a building or group of buildings, including either separate units or a row or rows of units that contain living or sleeping accommodations primarily for transient occupancy, and have individual entrances. 
    Lot includes the terms "plot" and "parcel" and means one piece, parcel or tract of land that collectively meets all the following requirements: 
(1)  Is located in a single block; 
(2)  Has frontage on an accepted and improved public street; 
(3)  Is occupied or utilized or designated by its owner or developer to be occupied, developed or utilized as a unit for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such open spaces as are required by this chapter; and 
(4)  A plat of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk. 
    Lot, area of, means the net area of the lot and shall not include portions of streets and alleys. 
    Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and rear lot line of a zoning lot. 
    Lot line means a boundary of a lot. 
    Lot line, front, means the street right-of-way line at the front of a lot. 
    Lot line, rear, means the lot line opposite and most distant from the front. 
    Lot line, side, means a lot line which is not a front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a thoroughfare other than an alley is an exterior side lot line as opposed to an interior side lot line. 
    Lot width means the mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot. 
    Manufactured home means a HUD-Code manufactured home or a mobile home and collectively means and refers to both. 
    Manufactured home, HUD-Code, means a structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the federal department of housing and urban development transportable in one or more sections that, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected onsite, is 320 or more square feet, and that is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the home's plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. 
    Manufactured home park means a tract of land, not less than three acres in size, under single or common ownership, that is designed and improved to contain five or more sites available for long-term lease or rent to the public for the placement of manufactured homes, and that may include private streets, buildings, and other facilities and services for common use by the residents, meeting all requirements of this chapter. 
    Mobile home means a structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections that, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected in site, is 320 or more square feet, and that is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the home's plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. 
    Multi-wide HUD-Code manufactured home means a HUD-Code manufactured home in which the narrowest exterior wall is no less than 14 feet in width when assembled, transportable in two or more sections. 
    Nursing home means any premises where more than three persons are lodged and furnished with meals and nursing care. 
    Open space means an area included in any side, rear or front yard or any other unoccupied space on a lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicular-type portable structure without a permanent foundation that can be towed, hauled, or driven which is designed as a temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping, and travel use, and which includes, but is not limited to, travel trailers, truck-campers, camping trailers, and self-propelled motor homes. Except as provided in chapter 10, for use in conjunction with a temporary event or business activity otherwise allowed, and not to exceed 30 days, or parked on a lot with an otherwise conforming residence or business, and located on the lot for not longer than 14 days, the use of a recreational vehicle as a dwelling, other than within a recreational vehicle park, is prohibited. 
    Recreational vehicle park means any parcel or tract of land, not less than three acres in size, under single or common ownership, that is designed and improved to provide five or more camping unit sites that are offered for the use of the public by rent or lease, and that may include private streets, buildings, and other facilities and services for common use by the residents, meeting all requirements of this chapter. Recreational vehicle park sites are designed and intended to accommodate recreational vehicles only. 
    Servants' quarters, bona fide, means living quarters located on the same lot as the main building for the family of a servant employed on the premises who receives at least 50 percent of his total income from the occupant of the main building. 
    Setback line means that line which is parallel to and the minimum allowable horizontal distance from a given point or line or reference, such as a lot line, to the minimum required building line. 
    Sexually oriented business means any business that includes a sex parlor, nude studio, modeling studio, love parlor, adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult video arcade, adult movie arcade, adult video store, adult motel, or other commercial enterprise, the primary business of which is the offering of a service or the selling, renting, or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer. 
    Sign means any structure or part thereof, or any device attached to, painted on or represented on a building or other structure, upon which is displayed or included any letter, work, model, banner, decoration, device, or representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an announcement, direction, advertisement, or other attention-directing device. 
    Sign, area of, means the total exterior surface computed in square feet of a sign having but one exposed exterior surface; the aggregate exposed exterior surface computed in square feet of a sign having more than one such surface. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Street means any thoroughfare other than an alley. 
    Street line means a dividing line between a street right-of-way and an abutting lot, tract, or parcel of land. 
    Structural alteration means any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls, columns, beams, or girders. 
    Structure means anything constructed, the use of that required permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground. 
    Townhouse means a single-family dwelling constructed in a series or group of attached units with property lines separating each unit. 
    Townhouse, common area, means an area held, designed and designated principally for the common use of the occupants of a townhouse project. 
    Townhouse group means four or more contiguous townhouses connected by common walls. 
    Townhouse, private yard, means an area of open space within a townhouse but which is unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure. 
    Townhouse project means a townhouse development or plan which is submitted and approved by a single special permit and which is laid out on contiguous land, all uninterrupted by intervening public streets. 
    Used and occupied include the phrase "intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied." 
    Yard means an open, unoccupied space other than a court on the lot in which a building is situated that is unobstructed from the ground to the sky. 
    Yard, front, means an open, unoccupied space on a lot facing a street and extending across the front of a lot between the side yards and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building. 
    Yard, rear, means an open space unoccupied and unobstructed extending across the rear of a lot from one side lot line to the other side lot line and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the main building. 
    Yard, required front, means an open space extending the full width of a lot between the front line and the front setback line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise specified elsewhere in this chapter. 
    Yard, required rear, means an open space extending the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the rear setback line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise specified elsewhere in the chapter. 
    Yard, required side, means an open space extending from the minimum front yard setback line to the minimum rear yard setback line between the side yard setback line and the nearest side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise specified elsewhere in this chapter. 
    Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, situated between the building and side line of the lot, and extending through from the front yard to the required rear yard. Any lot line not the rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side line. 
    Zoning map, official, means the zoning map or maps of the city attested together with all amendments subsequently adopted 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 18, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 2009, § 4, 6-12-2012) 
Sec. 52-3. - Provisions of chapter declared to be minimum requirements; conflicts. 
    In interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 15, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-4. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  Adoption by reference; certification required. The city council has divided the city into zones or districts as shown on the official zoning map that, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is adopted by reference into this section. The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the official zoning map of the city referred to in the official City Code." 
(b)  Changes to map. No changes of any nature shall be made on the official zoning map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this chapter. Any unauthorized change is a violation of this chapter. If authorized changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, such changes shall be made on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the city council. The amending ordinance shall provide that such changes or amendments shall not become effective until they have been duly entered upon this official zoning map. The entry shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk. 
(c)  Original map controlling over copies in the event of conflicts. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map that may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map, located in the office of the city clerk, shall be the final authority as the current zoning status of land, building and other structures in the city. 
(d)  Adoption of new zoning map. In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the city council may by resolution adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original, this chapter or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the official zoning map previously adopted by the city." 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 3, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-5. - Districts established. 
    The use districts established by the city into which the city is divided are designated as follows: 
(1)  R-1 District: Residential District. 
(2)  R-2 District: Residential District. 
(3)  R-3 District: Residential District. 
(4)  R-4 District: HUD-Code Manufactured Housing Residential District. 
(5)  T District: Townhouse District. 
(6)  PUD District: Planned Unit Development District. 
(7)  B-1 District: Business District. 
(8)  C-1 District: Commercial District. 
(9)  C-2 District: Commercial District. 
(10)  I District: Industrial District. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 4, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-6. - Description and purpose of each use district. 
(a)  R-1 Residential Districts. R-1 districts consist mainly of areas containing single-family dwellings and of open spaces where single-family development appears desirable. In addition to the general purposes applying to all residential districts, regulations applicable to R-1 districts are designed to encourage the provision of single-family detached dwellings in low density residential areas. 
(b)  R-2 and R-3 Residential Districts. The R-2 and R-3 districts consist mainly of single-family areas that contain some two-family or multiple-family development or that are centrally located or suitable for additional two-family or multiple-family development. In addition to the general purposes applying to all residential districts, the regulations applicable to R-2 and R-3 districts are designed to encourage the provision of convenient rental accommodations as well as the provision of single-family detached dwellings. 
(c)  R-4 Residential Districts. R-4 districts consist mainly of single-family, HUD-Code manufactured housing. R-4 districts may include site built single-family and multifamily dwellings. In addition to the general purposes applying to all residential districts, the regulations applicable to R-4 districts are designed to provide higher density, affordable housing, rentals or owner occupied. 
(d)  T Townhouse Districts. T districts consist mainly of areas that contain townhouse and condominium development. 
(e)  PUD Districts. PUD districts contain a variety of uses, including residential, manufactured home and recreational vehicle parks, business, commercial, and industrial. Proposed uses, district boundaries, regulations, densities, lot coverage, yards, streets, drainage, utilities, and locations are collectively reviewed as a single development during the rezoning, subdivision or development process. Only those uses and regulations that are approved may be implemented. PUD districts may overlay or replace existing districts. PUD uses and regulations may vary from those of other districts. 
(f)  B-1 Business Districts. B-1 districts consist mainly of uses that coexist in harmony with residential districts or serve as a buffer zone between residential and commercial districts. 
(g)  C-1 Commercial Districts. C-1 districts consist mainly of land occupied by or suitable for the retailing of convenience goods and the furnishing of certain personal services to satisfy most of the daily needs of the neighborhood. C-1 districts also provide space for financial, administrative government, and business uses. 
(h)  C-2 Commercial Districts. C-2 districts consist mainly of land occupied by or suitable for a wide range of certain retail, wholesale, service and business activities that are not generally appropriate or compatible next to residential districts. This district is designed to permit development of the enumerated functions and to provide space for uses oriented to regional trade areas, but not so intensive as to restrict them to an industrial district. 
(i)  I Industrial Districts. I districts are designed to provide land for a wide range of industrial activities subject to limitations intended to protect nearby residential and business districts and to protect the permitted uses from one another. I districts consist mainly of areas occupied by or suitable for manufacturing, processing and other industrial activities. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 4, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-7. - Determining uncertain district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules of interpretation and procedure shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys; platted lot lines; city limits; railroad centerlines; banks or centerlines of banks, streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such lines. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsection (1) of this section, shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(3)  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not otherwise covered in this section, the board of adjustments shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 5, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-8. - Assignment of annexed property to zoning districts. 
(a)  Territory that may be annexed to the city shall be considered to be zoned R-1 residential. Application for building permits for uses other than R-1 residential in newly annexed areas shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission by the city inspector. 
(b)  The planning and zoning commission may recommend denial or, in recommending approval of the building permit, may impose such requirements and conditions with respect to location, construction, maintenance and operation, in addition to those expressly provided in this chapter for the particular use, as they may deem necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public interest. 
(c)  The application for permit together with the recommendations of the planning and zoning commission shall be forwarded to the city council for final authorization before issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 6, 1-10-1989) 
Secs. 52-9-52-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 52-35. - District regulations are minimum and to be applied uniformly. 
    The regulations set by this article within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, and particularly, except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 6, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-36. - Use and occupation must be in compliance with district regulations. 
(a)  No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(b)  No building or other structure shall be erected or altered to exceed maximum height regulations, to accommodate or house a greater number of families than permitted, to occupy a greater percentage of lot area than permitted, to have narrower or smaller yards or other open spaces than permitted, or to otherwise be contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 6, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-37. - Yard, open space and parking/loading rules must be met by each structure. 
    No part of a yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this chapter shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 6, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-38. - Reduction of existing yard or lot size prohibited. 
    No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 6, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-39. - Minimum lot requirements. 
    Minimum requirements for lots are as provided in Table 1 below. 
TABLE 1 
District Lot area* (sq. ft.) Lot width (feet) Lot depth (feet) Front Yard (feet) Side yard** (feet) Rear yard (feet) R-1 7,500 60 125 25 5 20 R-2 6,000 50 100 25 5 20 R-3 6,000 50 100 25 5 20 R-4 3,500 25 100 25 5 10 T See division 2 of this article for requirements PUD Requirements collectively reviewed *** B-1 Busi. - None 
Res. - Same as R-3 Busi. - None 
Res. - Same as R-3 Busi. - None 
Res. - Same as R-3 Busi. - 10 ft. 
Res. Same as R-3 Busi. - 5 ft. 
Res. - Same as R-3 Busi. - 5 ft. 
Res. - Same as R-3 C-1 Commercial - None 
Res.- Same as R-3 Commercial - None 
Res.- Same as R-3 Commercial - None 
Res. - Same as R-3 Commercial - 10 ft. 
Res. Same as R-3 Commercial - 5 ft. 
Res. - Same as R-3 Commercial - 5 ft. 
Res. - Same as R-3 C-2 Commercial - None 
Res.- Same as R-3 Commercial - None 
Res. - Same as R-3 Commercial - None 
Res. - Same as R-3 Commercial - 10 ft. 
Res. - Same as R-3 Commercial - 5 ft. 
Res. - Same as R-3 Commercial - 5 ft. 
Res. - Same as R-3 I Industrial - None 
Res. - Same as R-3 Industrial - None 
Res. - Same as R-3 Industrial - None 
Res. - Same as R-3 Industrial - 10 ft. 
Res. - Same as R-3 Industrial - 5 ft. 
Res. - Same as R-3 Industrial - 5 ft. 
Res. - Same as R-3  
*  Minimum lot area for single-family detached homes. 
**  All uses-ten feet minimum side yard when abutting a street. 
***  Structures for use in the business district that were existing on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall not be required to meet the minimum yard requirements for occupancy, however, such nonconformity shall not be increased. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 4, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 2142, § 1, 6-12-2018) 
Sec. 52-40. - Maximum bulk and minimum parking requirements for builders. 
    Maximum bulk limitations and minimum parking requirements for builders are as set forth in Table 2 below. 
TABLE 2 
District Height Lot Coverage Parking
Regulations R-1 281/2 feet 
21/2 stories 35% of lot 1 off-street parking space for dwelling unit R-2 281/2 feet 
21/2 stories 35% of lot 1 off-street parking space for dwelling unit R-3 281/2 feet 
21/2 stories 40% of lot 1 off-street parking space for dwelling unit R-4 281/2 feet 
21/2 stories 67% of lot 1 off-street parking space for dwelling unit T See division 2 of this article for requirements. PUD Requirements collectively reviewed. B-1 30 feet 50% of lot 1 off-street parking space per 200 square feet of business building C-1 30 feet 50% of lot 1 off-street parking space for 200 square feet of space for offices, retail and services C-2 33 feet 60% of lot Retail same as C-1 commercial-1 off-street parking space per 500 square feet of floor space for wholesale and warehouse I 60 feet* 80% of lot Local retail same as C-1 
C-2 same as above 
Industrial-1 off-street parking space per 1,000 square feet of general floor space and 1 parking space per 400 square feet of office and sales  
*  Over 60 feet if setbacks are increased one foot for each two feet of height above 60 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 4, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-41. - Accessory buildings. 
(a)  Accessory buildings detached from or attached to the main building by an enclosed or unenclosed structure may be permitted within the allowable building area of any lot defined by the required front, side and rear building lines. 
(b)  An enclosed storage building the use of which is consistent with uses allowed within the zoning district and subject to the setbacks and lot size restrictions applicable to that zoning district may be permitted. 
(c)  No accessory building shall be permitted in the required front yard or in the required side yard. 
(d)  If an accessory building is adjacent to a side street, the minimum side yard setback from the street shall be ten feet. 
(e)  Accessory buildings attached to the main building shall be considered to be part of the main building and regulated by the same regulations applicable the main structure. Accessory buildings or portions thereof detached from the main building may be permitted in the required rear yard provided that they are detached from the main building or structure and separated therefrom by a distance of not less than ten feet and the accessory buildings have a rear and side yard setback of not less than three feet. 
(f)  In no case shall the total floor area of all accessory buildings or portions thereof within the required rear yard exceed 30 percent of the area of the required rear yard defined as the product of the rear yard setback and the mean width of the rear yard setback and the mean width of the rear yard of the lot. Carports may exceed 30 percent coverage of the required rear yard in the R-2 and R-3 districts. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 8, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 2034, § 2, 2-12-2013) 
Sec. 52-42. - Distances between buildings. 
    Opposing walls of a building or of separate buildings shall not be closer than ten feet when any wall or portion thereof is parallel or within 30 degrees of another wall or portion thereof of the same building or of another building. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 8, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 2142, § 2, 6-12-2018) 
Sec. 52-43. - Setbacks for building lines established by special ordinance. 
    If a building line has been established by special ordinance and such line requires a greater setback than is prescribed by this chapter in the district in which the building line is located, no building shall be erected closer to the street than the line so established. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 8, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-44. - Determination of front, side and rear lot lines. 
    In no case shall the orientation of a building or structure, or the arrangement of doors, windows or other features of a building or structure determine the front, side or rear line of a lot for the purposes of this chapter. Lot lines shall be interpreted as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 8, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-45. - Minimum street frontage required for residential use. 
    Except as permitted in this chapter, no lot shall contain any building used in whole or in part for residential purposes unless such lot abuts for at least 30 feet on a street or officially approved place. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 8, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-46. - Off-street parking and loading area requirements. 
(a)  Off-street parking ratio requirements of this chapter shall be mandatory at the time any building or structure is erected, changed in building capacity, or changed in the building's use under occupancy classification in accordance with the adopted building code. 
(b)  Each off-street parking space shall be a rectangle ten feet by 18 feet exclusive of access drives or aisles, and shall be located completely on private property. Adequate ingress and egress to all parking spaces shall be provided. 
(c)  In applying the off-street parking requirements, the floor area shall be the sum of the several floors of all enclosed buildings and structures on the lot measured from the centerline of exterior walls. The floor area shall not include cellars and open unenclosed balconies, terraces, porches, stairs and parking structures. 
(d)  Where open land is used for sales, manufacturing, storage or other operations in a manner similar to indoor operations, such open land shall be added to the floor area in determining the number of parking spaces required. 
(e)  Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from adjoining premises of any residential district. 
(f)  Any off-street parking area, service drive or driveway for any building or structure which is erected, changed in building capacity, or changed in the building's use under occupancy classification in accordance with the adopted building code, shall be surfaced with an asphaltic or Portland cement binder pavement so as to provide a durable and dustless surface. Alternative materials may be allowed if the material is designed to limit mud, dust or rock from leaving the property. 
(g)  In any district, in connection with every building or part thereof erected and having a gross floor area of 3,000 square feet or more that is to be occupied by any use requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained, on the same lot with such building, at least one off-street loading space plus one additional loading space for each 30,000 square feet or major fraction thereof of gross floor area so used in excess of 3,000 square feet. 
(h)  Each off-street loading space shall be no less than ten feet in width, 25 feet in length and 14 feet in height. Such space may occupy all or part of any required yard or court space. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 8, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 2009, § 2, 6-12-2012) 
Sec. 52-47. - Projections into required yards. 
    Open and unenclosed building projections such as outside stairways and fire escapes, balconies, terraces or porches, awnings, eaves and roof extensions and ornamental features may project into the required yards for a distance not to exceed four feet. In no case shall such projections be located closer than three feet from any lot lines. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 8, 1-10-1989) 
Secs. 52-48-52-67. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 52-68. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the intent of the zoning regulations to provide for the establishment of residential districts that are free from the encroachment of commercial of manufacturing uses, but which permit certain uses that are necessary within residential neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 4, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 2018, § 1, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 2034, § 1, 2-12-2013) 
Sec. 52-69. - R-1 Residential Districts. 
(a)  The following uses are permitted within the R-1 Residential District: 
(1)  A single-family dwelling, specifically excluding manufactured homes. 
(2)  Accessory building for storage residential only and meeting all requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  An enclosed storage building for residential storage only and meeting all requirements of this chapter. 
(4)  Automobile parking, for residents and guest only. 
(5)  Cemetery or mausoleum. 
(6)  Electrical substation. 
(7)  Field crops, horticulture, nursery, truck gardening, but not including retail sales on the premises. 
(8)  Gas compressor or regulator station. 
(9)  Golf course, but not including commercial golf games or amusement. 
(10)  Public library or museum, park, playground or playfield. 
(11)  Radio or television broadcasting transmitter or tower, microwave relay tower. 
(12)  Schools; elementary, high, college and universities, public or denominational. 
(13)  School; nursery, kindergarten or day care for children. 
(14)  Signs, identification, of resident or permitted use, real estate, sales, lease, rent, development. 
(15)  Swimming pool, private. 
(16)  Telephone exchange, but not including garage shop service. 
(17)  Railroad right-of-way, but not including shops and yards. 
(18)  Tract offices and construction buildings which shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(19)  Home occupations as described in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Home occupations in R-1 districts are limited to any occupation that is customarily carried on at a place of residence that does not involve a structural change in the dwelling unit or in a building accessory to the dwelling unit, that does not require the employment of help other than members of the immediate household. The occupation cannot store material, inventory or product outside or result in fumes, odors or noises that create a nuisance. The following uses shall not be permitted as home occupations unless approved as specific use permits: 
(1)  Any office in which chattels, goods, wares or merchandise are commercially created, exchanged, or sold on site. 
(2)  Barbershops or beauty shops; beauty schools. 
(3)  Commercial stables or kennels. 
(4)  Medical offices for the treatment of patients. 
(5)  Commercial automobile repairs, motor vehicle repair of more than one vehicle. 
(6)  Small engine repair. 
(7)  Child care of more than six children under 14 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 4, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 2018, § 1, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 2034, § 1, 2-12-2013) 
Sec. 52-70. - R-2 Residential Districts. 
    In R-2 Residential Districts any use permitted in the R-1 district is permitted except manufactured homes. In addition, duplex (two family dwellings) are permitted in R-2 districts but require 2,000 square feet of lot area above the minimum required for one-family dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 4, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 2018, § 1, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 2034, § 1, 2-12-2013) 
Sec. 52-71. - R-3 Residential Districts. 
    In R-3 Residential Districts, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-2 district is permitted except manufactured homes other than multi-wide HUD-Code manufactured homes fully skirted as recommended by the manufacturer or installed on permanent foundation as recommended by the manufacturer both fully enclosing the underneath of the home. No more than one multi-wide HUD-Code manufactured home per lot and no more than four multi-wide HUD-Code manufactured homes per contiguous parcel of land or lots under single or common ownership are permitted. 
(2)  Multiple-family dwelling (three or more living units) or apartment projects: 
a.  Unless accessory to a primary single-family residence, two dwelling units - attached or detached shall require 2,000 square feet of lot area above the minimum required for one-family dwellings (i.e., 8,000 square feet). 
b.  Attached multiple-family dwelling (three or more living units) or apartment projects, shall require 1,000 square feet of lot area above the minimum required for a two-family structure for each living unit in the structure over two. 
c.  Three or four detached single-family units are allowed, provided 3,000 square feet of additional lot area is provided above the minimum required for a two-family structure for each living unit over two (i.e., 9,000 square feet for three, 12,000 square feet for four). 
d.  Five or more detached single-family units require a site plan approved through the planned unit development rezoning process. 
e.  Unless accessory to a primary single-family residence, a detached living unit must be a minimum of 320 square feet. 
    HUD code manufactured homes moved or relocated within the city must be less than ten years old. Previously owned HUD manufactured homes are subject to inspection by the code enforcement official prior to placement to insure conformance with the minimum standards for housing (see section 10-114 of the City of Yoakum Code of Ordinances). 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 4, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 2034, § 1, 2-12-2013; Ord. No. 2018, § 1, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 2090, § 1.1, 7-14-2015; Ord. No. 2142, § 3, 6-12-2018) 
Sec. 52-72. - R-4 Residential Districts. 
    In R-4 Residential Districts any use permitted in the R-3 district is permitted, specifically excluding mobile homes. HUD-Code manufactured homes of any size are permitted; provided however, that no more than one manufactured home per lot and no more than four manufactured homes per contiguous parcel of land or lots under single or common ownership are permitted. Manufactured homes must be fully skirted as recommended by the manufacturer or installed on permanent foundation as recommended by the manufacturer, either method fully enclosing the underneath of the home. 
    HUD code manufactured homes moved or relocated within the city must be less than ten years old. Previously owned HUD manufactured homes are subject to inspection by the code enforcement official prior to placement to insure conformance with the minimum standards for housing (see section 10-114 of the City of Yoakum Code of Ordinances). 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 4, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 2034, § 1, 2-12-2013; Ord. No. 2018, § 1, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 2090, § 1.2, 7-14-2015) 
Sec. 52-73. - T Townhouse Districts. 
(a)  Height and area requirements. The maximum height of any structure or building in a townhouse project shall be 21/2 stories not to exceed 35 feet. 
(b)  Front yards. No townhouse building or other structure of any kind or character shall be constructed or erected within 25 feet of the front property line of any building site. 
(c)  Side yards. No side yards are required for interior lots except the minimum distance between two building groups shall be 20 feet and the minimum distance between a building group and any subdivision boundary or zoning district boundary line shall be 20 feet. Buildings on corner lots shall have ten feet side yards adjacent to the street. 
(d)  Rear yards. No building or structure shall be constructed closer than ten feet from the rear property line. 
(e)  Lot width. Townhouse lots other than corner lots shall have a minimum width of 25 feet. Townhouse corner lots shall have a minimum width of 35 feet. 
(f)  Lot area per family. Every lot upon which an individual townhouse dwelling unit is erected (or altered after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived) shall have a lot area of not less than 2,500 square feet. 
(g)  Common open space. A minimum of 250 square feet of common open space per lot shall be provided within the townhouse project. In computing the required common open space, individually owned townhouse lots, required front, rear, or side setbacks, streets, alleys, or public right-of-ways of any kind, vehicular drives, parking areas, service drives, or utility easements containing or permitting overhead pole carried service shall not be included. Drainage easements may be used in computing common open space only when the planning and zoning commission determines that the use of such easements will not be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of residents in the subdivision, and will properly serve the designated uses of common open spaces as defined herein. 
(h)  Building site open space. The building site shall include open space, free and clear of any structure of any kind, of not less than 35 percent of the building site area. 
(i)  Service drives. Each townhouse lot shall be provided with rear access via a service drive. Service drives shall have a minimum width of 25 feet and a minimum centerline curve radius of 25 feet. Such drives must be developed in accordance with city construction standards. Service drives shall not be dedicated to the city, and maintenance of such drives shall be the responsibility of the owner or owners within the subdivision, subject to a cooperative maintenance agreement. 
(j)  Utility easements. All aerial utilities shall be installed in a utility easement which shall be at least 15 feet wide and that may be within and/or adjacent to the service drive at the rear of the townhouse unit. 
(k)  Off-street parking. There shall be at least two off-street parking spaces provided for each townhouse lot. Additional parking spaces may be provided in a communal parking area but no required front yard or side yard, along a public street, shall be used as a communal parking area. 
(l)  Building group. There shall be no less than four or more than eight individual dwelling units in each building or dwelling group. Each building or dwelling group shall be at least 20 feet from any other building or dwelling group, measured from the nearest points of their foundations. Each building or dwelling group shall be at least 20 feet from any subdivision or zoning district boundary line. 
(m)  Property ownership. Ownership of each dwelling unit and the lot upon which it sits is by an individual, while ownership of common open space and any service drives, communal parking areas and any other common elements is under cooperative ownership with other owners within the subdivision. Each co-owner may use the elements held in common in accordance with the purpose for which they were intended, as shown on the plat or expressed in the declaration or by-laws, without hindering or encroaching upon the lawful rights of the other co-owners. 
(n)  Maintenance agreements. The maintenance of required open space, drives, access ways, communal parking areas and other areas not under public ownership shall be according to a cooperative maintenance agreement of all owners within the townhouse subdivision. Such an agreement shall be in effect before any building permit is issued within the townhouse subdivision. 
(o)  Accessory building. Any detached accessory buildings permitted, except carports open on at least two sides, shall be set at least three feet away from the side lot lines unless their walls are equal in fire resistance to the common walls of the main structure. Detached carports, open on at least two sides, may be built to the property line with no common wall required. Any accessory building permitted in district R-1 shall be permitted in the townhouse project. 
(p)  Construction. Townhouse construction shall conform to the city building code. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 4, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 2034, § 1, 2-12-2013; Ord. No. 2018, § 1, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 52-74. - PUD Planned Unit Development Districts. 
    Planned Unit Development Districts may contain a variety of residential, business, commercial, and industrial uses. Proposed district boundaries, regulations, and uses are collectively reviewed during the rezoning process. Only those uses, regulations, and boundaries that are approved may be implemented. PUD districts may overlay or replace existing districts. PUD uses and regulations may vary from those of other districts. PUD designation areas must be of no less than two contiguous acres. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 4, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-2012) 
Sec. 52-75. - Location of structures. 
(a)  Only one main building in R-1 or R-2 districts with permitted accessory buildings may be located upon a lot or unplatted tract. 
(b)  Every dwelling shall face or front upon a street or officially approved place, other than an alley, which means of access shall have a minimum width of 30 feet. 
(c)  If a lot is used for retail, commercial, industrial, or a combination of same, or for a combination of retail and dwelling purposes, more than one main building may be located upon the lot, but only if such building conforms to all the open space, parking and density requirements applicable to the uses and districts and all such main buildings face upon a street or officially approved place, other than an alley. 
(d)  Whenever two or more main building or portion thereof, are placed upon a single lot or tract and such buildings will not face upon a street or officially approved place, same may be permitted when the site plan for such development is approved by the planning and zoning commission so as to comply with the normal requirements for platting. 
(e)  No parking area, storage area, or required open space for one building shall be computed as being the open space, yard or area requirements for any dwelling or other use. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 8, 1-10-1989) 
Secs. 52-76-52-93. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUSINESS, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 52-94. - B-1 Business Districts. 
(a)  Purpose and intent; uses excluded. It is the city's intent that B-1 business district consist of uses that co-exist in harmony with residential districts or serve as a buffer zone between residential and commercial districts. 
(b)  Retail commerce excluded; business to be conducted indoors. Unless otherwise listed in this section, businesses permitted in B-1 district shall be conducted indoors and shall not include retail commerce. 
(c)  B-1 uses prohibited in residential districts. In addition, any use that is judged by the city inspector to be included in the categories listed below is specifically not permitted in residential districts unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(d)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within B-1 districts: 
(1)  Any use permitted in R-3 districts. 
(2)  Business services. 
(3)  Professional services. 
(4)  Office and office buildings. 
(5)  Medical clinic, dental clinic, and associated laboratory facilities. 
(6)  Florist or nursery (outside sales and plant storage permitted). 
(7)  Limited repair, or assembly, of miscellaneous items, including home appliances, jewelry, leather goods, clothing, computers. 
(8)  Personal services including barber shops, beauty salons, photographic and artist studios, tailoring, and similar personal services. 
(9)  Bed and breakfast lodgings. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 4, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-95. - C-1 Commercial Districts. 
(a)  Purpose and intent; excluded uses. It is the intent of the zoning regulations to provide for the establishment of those uses within the C-1 district that may generally be described as consisting of the buying, selling or trading of "convenience goods" for the daily needs of the neighborhood; and the provision of personal services. 
(b)  Outdoor storage prohibited. It is also the intent of this section to exclude from the C-1 districts those uses that require outdoor storage of goods, materials, supplies and equipment. Any use listed below that requires outdoor storage in conflict with this section shall be restricted to C-2 Commercial Districts. 
(c)  C-1 uses prohibited in residential and business districts. Any use that by its nature is judged by the city inspector to be included within the categories listed below is specifically excluded from all residential and business districts unless otherwise permitted under this chapter. 
(d)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in C-1 districts: 
(1)  Any use permitted in B-1 districts. 
(2)  Automobile parking lots. 
(3)  Bakeries, retail sales only. 
(4)  Banking and financial institutions. 
(5)  Clubs or lodges. 
(6)  Eating establishments (indoor only). 
(7)  Gasoline service stations. 
(8)  Laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations. 
(9)  Studios such as radio, music, dancing, physical culture, or health. 
(10)  Theaters (enclosed). 
(11)  Retail stores and other local business uses supplying the every day shopping needs of the immediate neighborhood provided that: 
a.  The business must be conducted wholly within an enclosed building, except that outdoor display or sales are permitted. 
b.  The required yard spaces may not be used for display, sale or storage of merchandise, equipment, containers, or waste material. 
c.  All merchandise must be first-hand and be sold at retail on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 4, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-96. - C-2 Commercial Districts. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. It is the intent of this chapter to provide for the establishment of those uses within C-2 Commercial Districts that may generally be described as consisting of the buying, selling or trading of commodities or services. 
(b)  C-2 uses prohibited in residential, business and C-1 districts. Any use that is included in the categories listed below or that by its nature is judged by the city inspector to be included within the categories listed below is prohibited in any residential, business, or C-1 Commercial District, unless otherwise permitted in this chapter. 
(c)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in C-2 districts: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the C-1 districts. 
(2)  Ambulance service. 
(3)  Amusement, commercial: including dancing, bowling, golf recreational, carnivals, skating rink. 
(4)  Amusement redemption game rooms. 
(5)  Animal hospital, pound or shelter. 
(6)  Arena, coliseum, rodeo grounds, baseball park, or auditorium. 
(7)  Building material storage yards. 
(8)  Bus station. 
(9)  Business or commercial school. 
(10)  Carpentry, painting, or plumbing shop. 
(11)  Carting, crating, hauling and storage. 
(12)  Chemicals, allied products. 
(13)  Cleaning, and dyeing plants, laundry. 
(14)  Cold storage plant. 
(15)  Eating establishments-drive-in with service out of doors. 
(16)  Electrical goods such as supplies, apparatus, appliances, electronics, or parts. 
(17)  Farm equipment and implements, sales, service, repairs. 
(18)  Glass and cutting shop, mirror silvering. 
(19)  Hotels, motels. 
(20)  Ice plants. 
(21)  Lumber, construction materials, millwork, cabinet shop. 
(22)  Machine shop. 
(23)  Machinery such as commercial, construction, industrial, farm, professional, transportation equipment. 
(24)  Monument sales with incidental processing. 
(25)  Mortuaries. 
(26)  New or used automobile or trailer display and sales, repair garages, tire and seat cover shops, car wash. 
(27)  Paper products. 
(28)  Plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, refrigeration, supplies, repair. 
(29)  Printing and publishing. 
(30)  Sexually oriented business. 
(31)  Sign shop. 
(32)  Truck-new used sales. 
(33)  Trailer or equipment rental. 
(34)  Truck terminal. 
(35)  Water distillation. 
(36)  Warehouse. 
(37)  Wholesale house. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 4, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-2012) 
Sec. 52-97. - I Industrial Districts. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. It is the intent of this chapter to provide for the establishment of those uses within industrial districts that may generally be described as consisting of manufacturing, production and assembly, and in addition, certain other uses. It is also the intent of this section to exclude in industrial districts those uses that cause the emission of toxic, noxious or odorous matter, or smoke, dust or other air contaminants, or glare, vibration or radiation or that require the storage, handling or transportation of explosive, inflammable or radioactive material. 
(b)  I district uses prohibited in residential, business and commercial districts. Any use that is included in the categories listed below or that by its nature is judged by the city inspector to be included within the categories listed below is prohibited in any residential, business, or commercial district, unless otherwise permitted in this chapter. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Any use permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, B-1, C-1 and C-2 districts are permitted in I districts except junkyards, automobile wrecking yards, uses involving outside display of used auto parts, amusement redemption game rooms, sexually oriented businesses, gunpowder storage and manufacture, or other uses associated with explosives. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 4, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 2009, § 1, 6-12-2012) 
Secs. 52-98-52-122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NONCONFORMING LOTS, STRUCTURES AND USES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 52-123. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures, and uses of land and structures that were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended but are prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendment and, therefore, nonconforming. 
(b)  It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. 
(c)  It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same districts. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 7, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-124. - Preservation of rights in pending litigation and violations. 
    By adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless specifically such use falls within a use district where the actual use is a conforming use. Otherwise, such uses shall remain nonconforming uses where recognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be. It is further the intent and declared purpose of this chapter that no offense which was committed, and no liability, penalty of forfeiture, either civil or criminal, incurred prior to the time this chapter was repealed and recreated, shall be discharged or affected by such repeal; but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties or forfeitures may be instituted or causes presently pending proceeded with in all respects as if such prior ordinance had not been repealed. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 19, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-125. - Extension or enlargement of nonconformities prohibited. 
    A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this chapter by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses of a nature that would be prohibited generally in the district involved. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 7, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-126. - Exception for nonconformities under construction. 
    To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, constructed or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. The term "actual construction" as used in this section means the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 7, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-127. - Repairs and maintenance. 
(a)  On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding ten percent of the current replacement value of the building, provided that the cubic content of the buildings as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter shall not be increased. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by an official of the city whose responsibilities are directly involved upon order of such official charged with protecting the public safety. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 7, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-128. - Uses permitted by exception not deemed nonconforming. 
    Any use for which an exception is permitted as provided in this chapter shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall without further action be deemed a conforming use in such district. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 7, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-129. - Fees, charges and expenses. 
    The city council has established fees associated with this chapter as provided in the city fee schedule and a collection procedure for building permits, amendment applications, appeals and other matters pertaining to this chapter. No permit, amendment, special exception or variance shall be issued unless or until all applicable costs, charges, fees or expenses have been paid in full. Further, no action shall be taken or public hearing be held unless or until preliminary charges and fees have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 13, 1-10-1989) 
Secs. 52-130-52-156. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFIC NONCONFORMITIES 

Sec. 52-157. - Lots of record. 
    In a district where single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family detached dwelling may be erected on a lot of official record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, irrespective of its area or width, provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of yard dimensions and other requirements shall be obtained only through action of the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 7, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-158. - Land uses. 
    If, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, lawful use of the land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted or amended, such use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided that: 
(1)  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor shall be extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. 
(2)  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. 
(3)  If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 30 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is located. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 7, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-159. - Structures. 
    If a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of the ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure of its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided that: 
(1)  No such structure may be enlarged or altered in any way which increases its nonconformity. 
(2)  Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 7, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-160. - Structure uses. 
    If a lawful use of structure, or of structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided that: 
(1)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(2)  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
(3)  If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure or structure and premises, may be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the board of adjustment, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the board of adjustments may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not be resumed. 
(5)  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months or for 18 months during any three-year period, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 7, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-161. - Combined nonconforming structure and land. 
    If a nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 7, 1-10-1989) 
Secs. 52-162-52-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 52-191. - City inspector to enforce; duty and authority. 
    The city inspector shall administer and enforce this chapter. If the city inspector finds that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, including the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations, or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 9, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-192. - Complaints regarding violations. 
    Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the city inspector. He shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate and take action thereon as provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 16, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-193. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor subject to penalties as provided in section 1-15. 
(b)  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(c)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 17, 1-10-1989) 
Secs. 52-194-52-224. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING PERMITS 

Sec. 52-225. - Building permits. 
(a)  Required. No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit therefor, issued by the city inspector. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, except after written order from the board of adjustment. 
(b)  Application; plans. All applications for building permits for local retail, commercial or industrial uses shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any, and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration. The application shall include such information as lawfully may be required by the city inspector, including existing or proposed building or alteration; existing or proposed uses of the building and land; the number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  Disposition of plan copies. One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the city inspector, after he shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved together with the date and attested to the same by his signature on such copy. The second copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the city inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 9, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-226. - Approved site plan required. 
(a)  The purpose of site plan approval is to determine compliance with this chapter and to promote the orderly and harmonious development of the city. 
(b)  A site plan and duplicate copy shall be submitted to and approved by the city inspector prior to the issuance of a building permit for new construction, or additions to an existing building or structure. A file shall be kept of all approved site plans in the city offices. Approval shall be indicated by the signature of the city inspector on the site plan with the date of approval. A duplicate copy of the submitted site plan as disapproved, approved or conditionally approved shall be given to the applicant together with all the recommendations of the reviewing body. 
(c)  A site plan is a plan of development drawn to scale indicating: 
(1)  The location and arrangement of buildings on subject property. 
(2)  Building setbacks and yards. 
(3)  Landscaping and/or walls and fences for screening purposes. 
(4)  Off-street parking and loading areas and design of ingress and egress to and from abutting streets. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 8, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 2034, § 3, 2-12-2013) 
Sec. 52-227. - Construction to comply with plan, application and permit. 
    Building permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the city inspector authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications. Any other use, arrangement or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 9, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-228. - Expiration and cancellation of permits. 
(a)  For failure to timely begin construction. If the work described in any building permit has not begun within 90 days from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire and be cancelled by the city inspector. Written notice of the expiration and cancellation shall be given to the persons affected. 
(b)  For failure to timely complete construction. If the work described in any building permit has not been substantially completed within two years of the date of issuance thereof, the permit shall expire and be cancelled by the city inspector, and written notice thereof shall be given to the person affected, together with notice that further work as described in the cancelled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new building permit has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 9, 1-10-1989) 
Secs. 52-229-52-249. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPECIFIC USE PERMITS 

Sec. 52-250. - Uses that may be subject of specific use permits. 
    The city council of the city may, after public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected, and after recommendation from the planning and zoning commission containing such requirements and safeguards as are deemed necessary to protect adjoining property, authorized by ordinance the location of any of the following in the following specified districts: 
(1)  Any public building erected or used by the city, county, state or federal government in any district. 
(2)  Institutions of a religious, educational or philanthropic nature in any district. 
(3)  Airport, landing field or heliport in any district. 
(4)  Hospital, convalescent home, nursing home, retirement center, maternity home, boarding house, or similar uses in any district; or on a minimum of five acres, penal or correctional institution, jail, prison, substance abuse facility, social rehabilitation facility, halfway house, psychiatric care facility, or similar uses in any district. 
(5)  Drive-in theater in any district, minimum lot size ten acres. 
(6)  Home occupations as defined in section 52-69(19). 
(7)  Mining, mineral extrication, oil and gas exploration, sand and gravel excavation quarrying in any district. 
(8)  Temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant in any district. 
(9)  Slaughterhouse or abattoir. 
(10)  Light production and manufacturing of goods but only in C-2 districts and only if the premises provide storefront display and retail sales of products produced. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 10, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 2009, § 3, 6-12-2012; Ord. No. 2018, § 1, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 2086, § 1.4, 7-14-2015) 
Sec. 52-251. - Recommendations of planning and zoning commission. 
    The planning and zoning commission may, within its discretion, recommend to the city council that a specific use permit be denied or that it be granted or granted with such conditions as permitted in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 10, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 2009, § 3, 6-12-2012; Ord. No. 2018, § 1, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 52-252. - Conditional permits. 
(a)  Authority of city council to impose. In granting a specific use permit, the city council may impose conditions that must be complied with by the grantee before a certificate of occupancy may be issued by the city inspector for the use of the buildings on such property pursuant to the specific use permit. 
(b)  Compliance with conditions required for issuance of certificate of occupancy. Such conditions shall not be construed as conditions precedent to the granting of the specific use permit for a change in zoning for such property, but shall be construed as conditions precedent to granting of the certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Regulatory measures that may be included as permit conditions. The following are regulating measures that may be included in the conditions of a specific use permit: 
(1)  Parking stipulations. 
(2)  Site plan modifications. 
(3)  Approval of means of ingress and egress. 
(4)  Approval of building size and location. 
(5)  Control of outside lighting and screening. 
(6)  Special setbacks and/or building lines. 
(7)  Surfacing of parking areas and drives. 
(8)  Installation of curbs and drainage structures. 
(9)  Approval of use or uses permitted. 
(10)  Limit the terms and establish expiration dates for specific use permits. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 10, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 2009, § 3, 6-12-2012; Ord. No. 2018, § 1, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 2086, § 1.4, 7-14-2015) 
Sec. 52-253. - Permits to be specific to persons or property. 
    A specific use permit shall be applied to either a specific owner/operator or to a specific lot, group of lots or tract upon adoption. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 10, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 2009, § 3, 6-12-2012; Ord. No. 2018, § 1, 9-11-2012) 
Sec. 52-254. - Granting does not amend zoning ordinance. 
    A specific use permit granted under the provisions of this article shall not be considered an amendment to the zoning ordinance as applicable to such property. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 10, 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 2009, § 3, 6-12-2012; Ord. No. 2018, § 1, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 2086, §§ 1.1, 1.2, 7-14-2015) 
Sec. 52-255. - Rescind and termination of specific use permit. 
    After notice to the owner of record and a public hearing, city council may rescind and terminate a specific use permit if any of the following occur: 
(1)  One or more of the conditions imposed by the specific use permit has not been met or has been violated. 
(2)  Change of ownership/occupancy, if the original specific use permit was approved for sole and singular use, including those that permit a mobile home or manufactured home. 
(3)  The structure is an "unsafe building" pursuant to chapter 10, article II, division 4, section 10-113, Code of Ordinances, City of Yoakum, Texas. 
(4)  The specific use permit was obtained through fraud or deception. 
(5)  Abandonment of the structure, lease space, lot, or tract of land. "Abandonment" shall be determined if any of the following conditions are found to apply for 90 days or more: 
a.  The most current occupant surrenders occupancy by vacating or ceasing to operate or inhabit such property. 
b.  Ad valorem taxes on the property are delinquent. 
c.  Disconnection or discontinuance of water and/or electrical services to the property. 
(Ord. No. 2086, § 1.3, 7-14-2015) 
Secs. 52-256-52-271. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS 

Sec. 52-272. - Established. 
(a)  Appointment and removal of members; vacancies. A board of adjustments is hereby established which shall consist of five members to be appointed by the city council, each for a term of three years. Members of the board of adjustments may be removed from office by the city council for cause upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled by resolution of the city council for the unexpired term of the member affected. 
(b)  Rules; meetings. The board of adjustments shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs, and in keeping with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such times as the board may determine. The chairperson, or in his absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(c)  Minutes. The board of adjustments shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and be immediately filed in the office of the board. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 11, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-273. - Procedure for appeals. 
(a)  Any persons aggrieved, or any official or department of the city affected by any decision of judgment of the city inspector concerning interpretation or administration of this chapter, may appeal such decision or judgment to the board of adjustment. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, not to exceed ten days or such other period as may be provided by the rules of the board by filing with the city inspector and with the board of adjustments a notice of appeal accompanied by a fee as established by the city council specifying the grounds thereof. The city inspector shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(b)  The board of adjustments shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 11, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-274. - Stay of proceedings. 
    An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the city inspector from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustments after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order that may be granted by the board of adjustments or by a court of record on application, on notice to the city inspector from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 11, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-275. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The board of adjustments shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the city inspector in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  Exceptions or temporary use permits. To hear and decide only such exceptions or temporary use permits as the board of adjustments is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of this chapter; to decide such questions as are involved in determining whether exceptions should be granted; and to grant exceptions with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this chapter, or to deny exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(3)  Variances. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship. 
(b)  In granting any exception, the board of adjustments may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. Violation of such conditions and safeguards when made a part of the terms under which the exception is granted shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The board of adjustments shall prescribe a time limit within which the action for which the exception is required shall be begun or completed, or both. Failure to begin or complete, or both, such action within the time limit set shall void exception. 
(c)  The board of adjustments shall include a finding in all final decisions that it is empowered under this chapter to grant the exception, and that the granting of the exception will not adversely affect the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 11, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-276. - Temporary use permit procedure and requirements. 
(a)  An exception of temporary use permit shall not be granted by the board of adjustments unless and until a written application for an exception together with fee is submitted, accompanied by an accurate legal description, maps, site plans, drawings and any necessary data, indicating the section of this chapter under which the exception is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested. 
(b)  Notice shall be given of such public hearing to the owner of the property for which the exception is sought or his agent and to all owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the subject property, such notice to be given not less than ten days before the date set for hearing to all such owners who have rendered their the property for city taxes as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll. Such notice may be served by depositing same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the city post office. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall also be given by one publication in the official newspaper at least 15 days prior to such hearing. Failure of owners to receive notice of hearing shall in no way affect the validity of action taken. 
(c)  A public hearing shall be held on the application. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 11, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-277. - Variance procedure and requirements. 
(a)  A variance from the terms of this chapter shall not be granted by the board of adjustments unless and until a written application for variance together with fee is submitted, accompanied by an accurate legal description, maps, site plans, drawings, and any necessary data, demonstrating that: 
(1)  Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district. 
(2)  Literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this chapter. 
(3)  The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant. 
(4)  Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district. 
(b)  No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or building in the same district, and no permitted use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
(c)  Notice of public hearing shall be given in the same manner as required for temporary use permit applications. 
(d)  The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(e)  The board of adjustments shall make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure. The board of adjustments shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(f)  Under no circumstances shall the board of adjustments grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this chapter in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this chapter in the districts. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 11, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-278. - Decisions; required vote. 
(a)  In exercising its powers, the board of adjustments may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirements, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. 
(b)  The concurring vote of four of the members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the city inspector, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to effect any variation in the application of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 11, 1-10-1989) 
Secs. 52-279-52-304. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 52-305. - Initiation of amendment proceeding. 
    The city council may, from time to time, amend this chapter by changing the boundaries of districts or by changing any other provision thereof whenever the public necessity and convenience and general welfare require such amendment. In addition, an amendment proceeding may be initiated by the planning and zoning commission or by an application of one or more owners of property affected by the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 14, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-306. - Application fee required for property owner initiated proceedings. 
    Each application by a property owner shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule to cover administrative and processing costs. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 14, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-307. - Documentation to be submitted with application. 
    An application for an amendment shall be accompanied by an accurate legal description, maps, site plans, drawings and any data necessary to demonstrate that the proposed amendment is in general conformance with the comprehensive plan of the city and that public necessity, convenience and general welfare require the adoption of the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 14, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-308. - Public hearing before the planning and zoning commission. 
(a)  Required. Upon filing of the application, the planning and zoning commission shall call a public hearing on the application as provided herein. 
(b)  Notice of hearing. Written notice of such hearing shall be sent to the owners of property or their agents and to all owners of property lying within 200 feet of the property on which the change in classification is proposed. The notice to be given not less than ten days before the date set for the hearing, to all such owners who have rendered their property for city taxes as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll. Notice may be served by regular U.S. Mail. Where property lying within 200 feet of the property proposed to be changed is located in territory which was annexed to the city after the final date for making the renditions which are included on the last approved city tax roll, notice to such owners shall be given in one publication in the official newspaper appearing at least 15 days before the time of hearing. Failure of owners to receive notice of hearing shall in no way affect the validity of action taken. 
(c)  Recommendation of commission. If at the conclusion of the hearing, the planning and zoning commission decides to recommend amendment of this chapter to the city council, the recommendation shall be by resolution of the planning and zoning commission carried by the affirmative votes of not less than a majority of its total membership. A copy of any recommended amendment shall be submitted to the city council and shall be accompanied by a report of findings, summary of hearing and any other pertinent data. 
(d)  Recommendation of denial may be appealed to city council. In the event the planning and zoning commission recommends denial of an application after public hearing, the applicant may appeal the determination to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days after the determination of the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 14, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-309. - Review by and final decision of city council. 
(a)  Public hearing; notice. If the planning and zoning commission has recommended approval of an application, or if the planning and zoning commission has recommended denial of an application and a notice of appeal has been filed pursuant to this division, the city council shall set the application for public hearing and shall give notice of the time and place of the hearing by one publication in the official newspaper appearing at least 15 days prior to such hearing, and in addition shall send written notices to the owners of property lying within 200 feet of the subject property. 
(b)  Final action. The city council may, by simple majority vote, disapprove an application for amendment of this chapter, or in approving an amendment to this chapter, the city council may impose such requirements and conditions or changes as they deem necessary. 
(c)  Three-fourths vote of council required for certain actions. A vote of three-fourths of the city council is required in order to adopt proposed amendments that have been recommended for disapproval by the planning and zoning commission or to adopt proposed amendments that have been recommended for approval by the planning and zoning commission against which a written protest has been filed with the city clerk duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent of the land included in the proposed amendment or the owners of 20 percent of the land immediately adjacent to the land included in the proposed amendment and extending 200 feet therefrom. 
(d)  Reconsideration after denial. In case an application for an amendment to this chapter is denied by the city council, the application shall not be eligible for reconsideration for one year subsequent to such denial. A new application affecting or including all or part of the same property must be substantially different from the application denied, in the opinion of the planning and zoning commission, to be eligible for consideration, within one year of the denial of the original application. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 14, 1-10-1989) 
Sec. 52-310. - Joint public hearings authorized; procedure. 
    As an alternative to separate hearing before the planning and zoning commission and the city council, the city council may by three-fourths vote call for a joint public hearing with the planning and zoning commission and prescribe the type of notice to be given of the time and place of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1500, § 14, 1-10-1989) 
Secs. 52-311-52-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal planning and development generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 371.001 et seq.; municipal zoning boards of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.008; issuance of local permits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 245.001 et seq.; municipal and county authority to regulate subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 242.001 et seq.; municipal comprehensive plans, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 213.001 et seq.; authority for municipal regulation of signs, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.001 et seq.; municipal economic development programs, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 380.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 52-351. - Comprehensive plan adopted. 
    The city has adopted a comprehensive plan to serve as a guideline and the official plan of action of the city for effectively dealing with the problem of urban blight and slums. 
(Code 1973, § 17-1; Res. No. 1002, 4-7-1971) 
Secs. 52-352-52-380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 

Sec. 52-381. - Created, number and term of members. 
    A city planning and zoning commission is created, composed of seven members, who shall serve two-year terms. 
(Code 1973, § 17-2; Res. No. 889, 4-7-1966) 
Sec. 52-382. - Function. 
    The function of the city planning and zoning commission is to act as an advisory board to the city governing body relating to every nature of public improvements, civic improvements, city planning, opening, widening and drainage of streets, routing of public utilities, controlling and regulating traffic upon the public streets and ways of the city and such other matters relating to city improvements as the city may deem beneficial to the city. 
(Code 1973, § 17-3; Res. No. 889, 4-7-1966) 
Sec. 52-383. - Meetings; quorum. 
    The city planning and zoning commission will hold meetings with a majority of the commissioners being present to constitute a quorum. 
(Code 1973, § 17-4; Res. No. 889, 4-7-1966) 
Sec. 52-384. - Duties. 
    The city planning and zoning commission shall: 
(1)  Prepare a comprehensive master plan for the city. 
(2)  Prepare a city zoning ordinance and hold public hearings concerned with the amendments to the city zoning ordinance and shall make recommendations concerning such zoning amendments to the city council. 
(3)  Hold public hearings and pass on plats filed for the subdivision of all land within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(4)  Have the power to make its own rules in regard to public meetings. 
(Code 1973, § 17-4; Res. No. 889, 4-7-1966) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1973 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1973 Code, as supplemented through January 10, 2012, that are included herein. Sections of the 1973 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1973 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-4 1-3 1-2 1-4 1-11 1-5 1-16 1-6, 1-7 1-15 2-1-2-4 2-190-2-193 2-5, 2-6 2-225, 2-226 2-7 2-122 2-8 2-305 2-9 2-303 2-31, 2-32 2-382 2-33-2-46 2-383-2-396 3-1 6-1 4-1 8-1 4-2-4-5 8-31-8-34 4-6, 4-7 8-34, 8-35 4-20 8-1 4-21, 4-22 8-59, 8-60 4-23-4-25 8-4-8-6 4-26, 4-27 8-2, 8-3 5-1, 5-2 10-2 5-2.1 10-144 5-3-5-6 36-21-36-24 5-7 36-1 5-8 36-25 5-9 10-37 5-21-5-24 10-145 5-27 10-63 5-30, 5-31 10-65, 10-66 5-33-5-35 10-233- 
10-235 5-37 10-64 5-38 10-236 5-40-5-43 10-237- 
10-240 5-51 10-67 5-81, 5-82 10-146 5-83, 5-84 10-91, 10-92 5-85 10-92 5-90.04 10-113 5-90.06 10-114 5-91.00(a) 10-180 10-182 5-91.00(b)-(e) 10-181 5-91.00(f) 10-182 5-91.02(a) 10-183 5-91.02(b) 10-181 5-91.02(c), (d) 10-183 5-91.02(e), (f) 10-181 5-91.04 10-183 5-91.06 10-183 5-91.08- 
5-91.10 10-183 5-91.12 10-184 5-91.14 10-183 5-91.16 10-185 5-91.18 10-115 10-147 5-91.20 10-116 10-148 5-91.22 10-117 10-143 5-91.26 10-118 10-143 5-122-5-124 10-209- 
10-211 5-125 10-211 5-126(a) 10-212 5-126(b), (c) 10-214 5-126(d) 10-213 5-127(a) 10-211 5-127(b) 10-215 5-141 20-19 6-1-6-3 14-27 6-4, 6-5 14-28, 14-29 6-6 14-3 6-7 14-32 6-8, 6-9 14-1, 14-2 6-10 14-31 6-11 14-33 6-12 14-30 6-13 14-4 61/229 22-27 61/2-21-61/2-28 22-19-22-26 61/2-30 22-28 7-1 2-301 7-2-7-4 2-329-2-331 7-6, 7-7 2-351, 2-352 7-9 2-353 7-13 44-21 7-14 44-1 7-15 44-22 7-16-7-22 44-48-44-54 81/2-2-81/2-4 16-20-16-22 81/2-5 16-19 81/2-6-81/2-12 16-23-16-29 81/2-13, 81/2-14 16-47, 16-48 81/2-15, 81/2-16 16-50, 16-51 81/2-17-81/2-19 16-70-16-72 81/2-22 16-49 8-1 18-1 8-2, 8-3 18-47 8-4-8-7 18-21 9-1 20-51 9-3 20-51 9-5-9-13 20-52-20-60 9-15 20-55 9-16 20-61 10-1 38-1 10-2-10-4 38-21 10-5 38-22 10-7-10-10 38-23-38-26 10-11 38-25 10-12 38-27 10-13.1 38-27 10-14 18-46 10-25, 10-26 26-1, 26-2 10-27-10-31 26-23-26-27 13-1, 13-2 12-19, 12-20 13-50, 13-51 12-44, 12-45 13-51, 13-52 12-46, 12-47 13-53 12-74 12-76 13-54, 13-55 12-74, 12-75 13-56 12-75 13-57 12-48 13-58 12-77 13-59 12-49 13-59.1 12-50 13-59.2 12-78 13-60, 13-61 12-103 13-62, 13-63 12-104 13-64, 13-65 12-105, 
12-106 13-66 12-102 13-67 12-107 14-1 28-3 14-3 46-1 14-21-14-25 28-102- 
28-106 14-41 28-27 14-42 28-1 14-43-14-45 28-28-28-30 14-46 28-2 14-47 28-31 14-61-14-63 28-51-28-53 15-3 32-52 15-20 2-150 15-22-15-25 2-273-2-276 15-31 32-1 15-32-15-35 32-21-32-24 16-1-16-6 34-31-34-36 16-9 34-35 17-1 52-351 17-2-17-4 52-381- 
52-383 17-4 52-384 18-1-18-3 40-46-40-48 18-4 40-96 18-5 46-20 18-6, 18-7 40-97, 40-98 18-8 40-21 18-20 40-70 18-21, 18-22 40-72 18-23 40-71 40-76 18-24-18-27 40-73-40-76 18-28, 18-29 40-76 18-53 46-60, 46-61 18-54-18-56 46-62-46-64 18-57 46-64 18-81, 18-82 46-87, 46-88 18-82-18-85 46-89-46-92 18-101 46-114- 
46-117 18-102 46-115 18-103 46-113 19-1 42-1 19-2 42-3 19-3 42-2 19-4 42-33 19-6 42-35 19-7-19-11 42-59-42-63 19-12, 19-13 42-65, 42-66 19-14 42-34 19-15 42-64 19-16 42-67 19-18 42-4 19-19 42-68 19-20, 19-21 42-5, 42-6 20-1, 20-2 50-1, 50-2 20-3-20-6 50-48-50-51 20-6 50-52 20-7(a), 
20-7(b) 50-53, 50-54 20-8 50-82, 50-83 20-9 50-84 20-10 50-86 20-10(a) 50-85 20-11-20-13 50-116- 
50-118 21-1, 21-2 46-2, 46-3 21-3, 21-4 46-27 21-5 46-28 46-64 21-9 46-4 22-1, 22-2 48-2, 48-3 22-4 48-27 22-8, 22-9 48-28, 48-29 22-10 48-25 22-11 28-4 22-12 48-30 22-20, 22-21 48-49 22-22-22-30 48-50-48-58 22-40(a) 48-92 22-40(b) 48-94, 48-95 22-41 48-90 22-42(a) 48-96 22-42(b)(1) 48-97 22-42(b)(2) 48-103 22-42(b)(3), 
22-42(b)(4) 48-97, 48-98 22-42(b)(5) 48-98 22-42(b)(6) 48-99-48-101 22-42(b)(7) 48-102 22-42(b)(8) 48-93 22-42(b)(9) 48-104 22-43 48-91  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within this Code of ordinances included herein. Ordinances not listed have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Code 1071  3- 3-1913 1 46-20 2, 3 40-97, 40-98 1102 1 10-37 1121A  8- 4-1925 3 46-2 1124 10- 9-1925 1 40-96 1133  7- 5-27 13 10-92  7- 5-1927 13 10-146 14 10-91 107 12- 5-1929 1 46-3 283 12-31-1935 art. I, § 1 6-1 art. III, § 1 6-1 314  8- 5-1937 1, 2 40-46 3, 4 40-47, 40-48 470  7- 5-1946 1 38-1 3 38-22 5, 6 38-23, 38-24 8 38-26 11 38-25 12, 13 38-21 15 38-27 562 12- 8-1949 18-46 598  7- 5-1951 1-5 34-31-34-35 601 11- 7-1951 38-27 619  2- 5-1953 1-4 36-21-36-24 5 36-1 6 36-25 658  5- 4-1955 1 12-107 695  3-13-1957 I, II 48-2, 48-3 715  9-10-1957 3, 4 48-28, 48-29 5 48-25 719 11- 6-1957 1 40-70 2(a) 40-72 2(b) 40-71 40-76 3(a)-3(e) 40-72-40-76 3(f) 40-76 4(a) 40-76 763 10- 8-1959 1 34-36 4 34-35 769 11- 9-1959 11001 28-4 767  2- 1-1960 18-46 860 10-12-1964 1, 2 2-225, 2-226 889  4- 7-1966(Res.) 52-381- 
52-384 920 12-12-1966 2, 3 12-104 4 12-105 5 12-103 7 12-102 8 12-106 923  6-12-1967 1, 2 46-27 5 46-28 46-64 929-A  6-28-1967 1 48-27, 48-28 924  7-10-1967 1, 2 10-2 14 10-2 932  8-10-1967 1 10-2 949 12-10-1968 1 10-2 951  1- 9-1969 1 2-190 2, 3 2-192, 2-193 4 2-191 992 12- 8-1970 1 2-150 3 2-273, 2-274 4, 5 2-275, 2-276 1002  4- 7-1971(Res.) 52-351 1005  5-12-1971 1 10-2 1012  6- 8-1971 2, 3 12-19, 12-20 1014  8- 9-1971 1 46-4 1017  9- 8-1971 1 42-6 1, art. I 42-2, 42-3 1, art. II 42-1 1, art. III(A)- 
1, art. III(C) 42-33-42-35 1, art. IV(A)- 
1, art. IV(E) 42-59-42-63 1, art. IV(F) 42-65 1, art. V 42-66 1, art. VI(A), 
1, art. VI(B) 42-34, 42-35 1, art. VI(B) 42-64 1, art. VI(C) 42-67 1, art. VII 42-4 1, art. IX 42-68 1, art. X 42-5 17, art. VI(D) 42-7 1045  9-12-1972(Res.) 38-27 48-30 1063  4-10-1973 48-29 1086 10-11-1973 10-2 1143  8-12-1975 1-3 40-21 1169 10-12-1976 1 2-122 1171 11-25-1976 1 10-2 1184  4-12-1977 40-71 40-76 1197  8- 9-1977 1, 2 28-3 1202  9-13-1977 1-6 44-48-44-53 1241  4-10-1979 46-27, 46-28 46-64 1252 10- 2-1979 1 38-27 1257 12-11-1979 48-27 1266  6-10-1980 art I, § 3 30-1 art II, § 1- 
art II, § 13 30-91-30-103 art II, § 14 30-36 art II, § 15 30-114 art II, § 16 30-37 art II, § 17 30-113 40-1 art II, § 18- 
art II, § 25 30-104- 
30-112 art III, § 1, 
art III, § 2 30-25, 30-26 art III, § 3, 
art III, § 4 30-30 art III, § 5 30-27 art III, § 6 30-29 art III, § 7 30-28 art III, § 8 30-3 art III, § 9, 
art III, § 10 30-31 art III, § 11 30-34, 30-35 art III, § 12, 
art III, § 13 30-32, 30-33 art III, § 14 30-32 art IV, § 1- 
art IV, § 3 30-63-30-66 art V, § 1 30-2 1272  8-12-1980 1 10-2 1287  4-14-1981 44-51 1296  7-14-1981 1 38-27 1312 12- 8-1981 44-54 1316  3- 9-1982 5 14-29 6 14-3 7 14-32 8, 9 14-1, 14-2 10 14-31 11 14-33 12 14-30  3-19-1982 1, 2 14-27 4 14-27 1335 11- 9-1982 8-1-8-6 8-59, 8-60 1359  7-12-1983 1 38-27 1378  7-11-1984 1 38-27 1388 12-11-1984 48-27 48-29 1390 12-11-1984 8-60 1398  2-12-1985 20-51-20-61 1408  8-13-1985 38-27 1420 12-10-1985 1, 2 10-2 3 10-144 1431  6-10-1986 32-1 32-21-32-24 1433  7- 8-1986 48-27 1435  7- 8-1986 38-27 1439  8-12-1986 4 2-305 1450  1-13-1987 8-4 1474 10-13-1987 12-45-12-50 12-74-12-78 1494 10-11-1988 1, 2 2-303 1500  1-10-1989 1 52-1 3, 4 52-4, 52-5 4 52-6 52-39, 52-40 52-68-52-74 52-94-52-97 5, 6 52-7, 52-8 6 52-35-52-38 7 52-123 52-125- 
52-128 52-157- 
52-161 8 52-41-52-47 52-75 52-226 9 52-191 52-225 52-227, 
52-228 10 52-250- 
52-254 11 52-272- 
52-278 12 10-216 13 52-129 14 52-305- 
52-310 15 52-3 16, 17 52-192, 
52-193 18 52-2 19 52-124 1501  1-10-1989 I 38-21 38-25 1502  1-10-1989 A, B 48-49 C, D 48-50, 48-51 E 48-53 F 48-56 G 48-58 I 48-54, 48-55 J, K 48-57 1531  7-10-1990 1-3 20-51 1550  4- 9-1991 1 12-47 1578  9- 8-1992 1-5 28-102- 
28-106 1583 10-13-1992 4 38-27 1603  8-10-1993 2-301 2-329-2-331 2-352, 2-353 44-1 44-21, 44-22 1612 11- 9-1993 10-2 1613 11- 9-1993 1 28-27 2 28-1 3-5 28-28-28-30 6 28-2 7 28-31 1618  4-12-1994 10-113- 
10-118 10-143 10-147, 
10-148 10-180- 
10-185 1619  4-12-1994 1 28-27 1629 10-11-1994 1 50-1, 50-2 50-48-50-52 50-82-50-84 50-116- 
50-118 1662 12-12-1995 1-15 1667  1- 9-1996 10-2 1673  4- 9-1996 1 48-92 48-94, 48-95 2 48-90 3 48-93 48-96-48-104 1674  5-14-1996 I 10-209 II, III 10-210, 
10-211 IV, V 10-211, 
10-212 V 10-213, 
10-214 VI 10-215 1711 12- 9-1997 1-3 32-52 1719  5-12-1998 10-63-10-67 10-145 10-233- 
10-240 1749 11- 9-1999 10-2 1757  7-11-2000 48-50 48-55 48-58 1763 10-10-2000 26-1, 26-2 26-23-26-27 1795  4- 9-2002 1 2-352, 2-353 1798  5-14-2002 10-2 10-67 10-144 1799  5-14-2002 1 18-1 2, 3 18-47 4-7 18-21 1861 12-14-2004 1 26-26 1864  2- 8-2005 2-351 1868  2- 8-2005 8-1 8-31-8-35 1867  3- 8-2005 48-91 1869  3- 8-2005 1 10-236 1870  5-10-2005 1-10 22-19-22-28 1878  9-13-2005 14-4 1915 12-12-2006 3 46-60, 46-61 4-6 46-62-46-64 7 46-64 1921  5- 8-2007 1 48-50 48-55 1922  5-12-2007 1 20-19 1923  7-10-2007 1 46-1 1929 10- 9-2007 3 28-102 1933  1- 8-2008 1, 2 46-87, 46-88 2-5 46-89-46-92 1962 12- 8-2009 1 46-113- 
46-117 1964 12- 8-2009 40-48 1976 11- 9-2010 2-4 16-20-16-22 5 16-19 6-12 16-23-16-29 13, 14 16-47, 16-48 15, 16 16-50, 16-51 17-19 16-70-16-72 22 16-49 1977 11- 9-2010 1 28-51-28-53 1987  6-14-2011 1 12-45, 12-46 1990  9-13-2011 1       Dltd 2-273-2-276       Added 2-273-2-277 1997  1-10-2012 1 36-1 36-21 1999  1-10-2012 1-3 2-303 2000  1-10-2012 1, 2 2-382 3-16 2-383-2-396 2002  5- 8-2012 1-3 4-1-4-3 4-14 4-25-4-35 2003  5- 8-2012 1-8 12-128- 
12-135 2009  6-12-2012 1 52-74 52-96, 52-97 2 52-46 3 52-250- 
52-254 4 52-2 2018  9-11-2012 1 52-68-52-73 52-250- 
52-254 2034  2-12-2013 1 52-68-52-73 2 52-41 3 52-226 2037  3-12-2013 1, 2 48-122 2, 3 48-123, 
48-124 4 48-124 5 48-1 6 48-125 2039  4- 9-2013 1, 2 2-246, 2-247 3-6 2-246 2059  1-14-2014 1 2-329 2, 3 2-351, 2-352 5 2-353 2063  4- 8-2014 1-7       Added Adopting Ord., pg. xi 2075 12- 9-2014 1       Rnbd 10-118       as 10-119       Added 10-118 2084  4-14-2014 I 40-72 2086  7-14-2015 1.1, 1.2 52-254 1.3       Added 52-255 1.4 52-250 title 52-252(a) 2088  7-14-2015 1       Rpld 2-246, 2-247 2-6       Added 2-246-2-250 2090  7-14-2015 1.1 52-71 1.2 52-72 2110  5-10-2016 Ch. 20, Art. II title 20-19(a)       Added 20-20 2116 10-11-2016 28-102-28-106 2118 12-13-2016 1, 2       Added 36-2, 36-3 2119 12-13-2016 1       Added 10-115A 2121  3-14-2017 2-5       Added 12-86, 12-87 2141  4-10-2018 1       Added 10-114(1)g 2142  6-12-2018 1 52-39 2 52-42 3 52-71(2) 2146  7-10-2018 1       Added 10-118(d), (e)  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Texas state law. 
Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. 
Article Section 
this Code 6243h 34-31 34-35, 34-36  
V.A.T.S. Insurance Code 
Article Section 
this Code 2003.051 Ch. 18 (note)  
V.T.C.A. Agriculture Code 
Section Section 
this Code 141.001 et seq. Ch. 8 (note)  
V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1.01 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 11.38 Ch. 6 (note) 6-1 61.36 Ch. 6 (note) 109.31 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 251.71 et seq. Ch. 6 (note)  
V.T.C.A. Business and Commerce Code 
Section Section 
this Code 601.001 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. III  
V.T.C.A. Civil Practice and Remedies Code 
Section Section 
this Code 125.001 et seq. Ch. 26 (note)  
V.T.C.A. Election Code 
Section Section 
this Code 258.004 Ch. 22 (note)  
V.T.C.A. Family Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 51 28-106 51.03 28-105 ch. 52 28-106  
V.T.C.A. Government Code 
Section Section 
this Code 29.003 1-15 29.003(b) 1-3 Ch. 28 (note) 311.011 1-2 311.012 1-2 311.014 1-2 311.016(2) 1-2 311.024 1-4 311.027 1-4 311.030 1-12 311.032 1-16 312.003(b) 1-2 312.004 1-2 312.007 1-12 312.008 1-2 312.011(18) 1-2 312.013 1-16 323.007 1-2 418.001 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 418.101 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 418.101 14-27, 14-28 418.1015 Ch. 14, Art. II 418.102 14-28 418.103 Ch. 14, Art. II 418.104 14-28 418.105 14-28 418.111 Ch. 14 (note) 418.121 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 418.151 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 551.001 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 2 2-51 551.021 2-51 551.041 2-50 552.001 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 2-382 556.001 Ch. 2 (note) 571.001 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 601.001 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) Ch. 2, Art. III 2009.054(c) 2-382  
V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code 
Section Section 
this Code 121.001 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 122.006 Ch. 38 (note) 341.001 et seq. Ch. 38 (note) 341.013 Ch. 26 (note) 342.001 et seq. Ch. 26 (note) Ch. 38 (note) 342.008 26-24 361.001 et seq. Ch. 38 (note) 361.501 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 362.001 et seq. Ch. 38 (note) 363.001 et seq. Ch. 38 (note) 365.001 et seq. Ch. 38 (note) 382.001 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) Ch. 20, Art. II 382.018 Ch. 16 (note) 382.113 Ch. 20, Art. II 431.001 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) Ch. 20 (note) 437.004(d) Ch. 20 (note) 438.031 et seq. Ch. 20 (note) ch. 481 28-31 481.002(6) 28-27 481.1031 28-51 ch. 483 28-31 483.001(2) 28-27 ch. 485 28-31 485.001(1) 28-27 791.002 Ch. 18 (note) 821.001 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 821.002 8-6 822.001 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 823.001 et seq. 8-6 826.001 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 826.012 8-59 826.015 8-59 826.021 Ch. 8 (note) 826.031 Ch. 8 (note) Ch. 8, Art. III 826.033 Ch. 8 (note) Ch. 8, Art. III 8-4 8-6 826.042 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 826.051 8-6 829.001 8-2  
V.T.C.A. Human Resources Code 
Section Section 
this Code 102.003 Ch. 22 (note) 121.001 et seq. Ch. 22 (note) 131.001 et seq. Ch. 22 (note)  
V.T.C.A. Local Government Code 
Section Section 
this Code 5.001 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 5.004 Char. (note) Char. Art. I, § 1 9.001 et seq. Char. (note) 21.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 21.021 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 22.038 Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 2 2-50 2-76 22.077 Ch. 2, Art. III 23.052 Ch. 2, Art. III 25.001 et seq. 2-123 25.021 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 25.026 et seq. 2-123 25.029 2-123 25.051 Ch. 2, Art. III 26.021 Char. (note) Ch. 2, Art. II 2-1 26.041 et seq. 2-124 41.001 et seq. Char. Art. I, § 3 2-2 42.001 et seq. 2-2 43.001 et seq. 2-2 51.001 Char. Art. III, § 12 51.001 et seq. Char. (note) 51.072 Char. Art. III, § 12 53.001 et seq. Ch. 1 (note) 53.001 1-1 1-15 53.005 Ch. 1 (note) 53.006 Ch. 1 (note) 54.001 et seq. Ch. 1 (note) 54.001 1-15 54.001(b) Ch. 26 (note) 54.012 et seq. Ch. 1 (note) 54.033 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 101.021 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 101.042 2-301 ch. 102 2-329 102.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 103.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 105.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 201.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VII 2-384 2-388 201.003 2-382 201.005 2-383 203.021 2-384 203.022 2-389 203.023 2-388 203.025 2-385 203.026 2-387 203.041 et seq. 2-392 203.044 2-393 203.045 2-394 204.001 et seq. 2-396 205.001 et seq. 2-396 211.001 et seq. Ch. 42 (note) Ch. 52 (note) 211.008 Ch. 42 (note) Ch. 52 (note) Ch. 52, Art. V 213.001 et seq. Ch. 42 (note) Ch. 52 (note) Ch. 52, Art. V 214.001 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 214.001 Ch. 26 (note) 214.002 Ch. 10 (note) 214.011 Ch. 10 (note) 214.012 Ch. 10 (note) 214.211 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 214.906 Ch. 10 (note) 215.002 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) Ch. 12 (note) 215.004 Ch. 50 (note) 215.029 Ch. 50 (note) 215.031 Ch. 12, Art. III 215.074 Ch. 12, Art. IV 215.075 Ch. 4 (note) Ch. 12 (note) 216.001 et seq. Ch. 36 (note) Ch. 42 (note) Ch. 52 (note) Ch. 52, Art. V 216.004 Ch. 36 (note) 216.901 Ch. 36 (note) 216.903 Ch. 36 (note) 217.001 et seq. Ch. 26 (note) Ch. 28 (note) 229.001 Ch. 28 (note) 229.001(b) 1-3 229.002 Ch. 28 (note) 241.014 Ch. 2, Art. V, 
Div. 3 2-225 242.001 et seq. Ch. 42 (note) Ch. 52 (note) Ch. 52, Art. V 243.001 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) Ch. 12 (note) 245.001 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) Ch. 42 (note) Ch. 52 (note) Ch. 52, Art. V ch. 252 2-352, 2-353 281.001 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 301.001 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 302.101 12-19 306.001 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 312.201 et seq. Ch. 44 (note) 315.001 Ch. 32 (note) 331.001 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 331.007 Ch. 32 (note) 332.001 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 341.001 et seq. Ch. 20 (note) Ch. 24 (note) 341.905 Ch. 28 (note) Ch. 28, Art. III, 
Div. 2 342.001 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) 342.003 Ch. 18 (note) 344.001 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) 351.001 et seq. Ch. 44 (note) Ch. 44, Art. III 351.002 Ch. 44, Art. III 351.003 Ch. 44, Art. III 361.001 et seq. Ch. 24 (note) 361.061 et seq. Ch. 24 (note) 370.002 Ch. 28 (note) Ch. 28, Art. III, 
Div. 2 370.003 Ch. 28 (note) 371.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V Ch. 42 (note) Ch. 52 (note) Ch. 52, Art. V 371.042 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 380.001 et seq. Ch. 52, Art. V 418.001 et seq. 14-27 501.001 et seq. Ch. 44 (note) 551.001 et seq. Ch. 48 (note) 552.001 et seq. Ch. 48 (note) 552.903 Ch. 48 (note) 601.001 Ch. 46 (note)  
V.T.C.A. Natural Resources Code 
Section Section 
this Code 81.001 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) 89.043 Ch. 30 (note) 131.001 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) 141.001 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 153.047 Ch. 18 (note)  
V.T.C.A. Occupations Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1.001 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) 801.001 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 1951.001 et seq. Ch. 20 (note) 2001.001 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. IV 2154.001 et seq. Ch. 18 (note) 18-47 Ch. 26 (note) 2154.004 18-47 2154.253 18-47  
V.T.C.A. Parks and Wildlife Code 
Section Section 
this Code 64.002 et seq. Ch. 8 (note)  
V.T.C.A. Penal Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1.01 et seq. 1-3 12-129 1.08 1-3 Ch. 28 (note) 6.01 et seq. 1-3 12.01 et seq. 1-3 21.01 4-31 28.02 Ch. 18 (note) 42.09 Ch. 8 (note) 48.01 Ch. 20, Art. II  
V.T.C.A. Property Code 
Section Section 
this Code 41.001 Ch. 44 (note) 301.001 et seq. Ch. 22 (note)  
V.T.C.A. Tax Code 
Section Section 
this Code 11.01 Ch. 44 (note) 11.02 Ch. 44 (note) 101.008 Ch. 44 (note) 151.024 Ch. 12, Art. III 321.001 et seq. Ch. 44 (note) 44-1  
V.T.C.A. Transportation Code 
Section Section 
this Code 11.251 Ch. 44 (note) 22.081 Ch. 50 (note) 42.203 Ch. 46 (note) 254.001 et seq. Ch. 40 (note) 311.001 Ch. 40 (note) 311.004 Ch. 40 312.001 et seq. Ch. 40 Ch. 46 316.001 et seq. Ch. 40 391.031 36-3 391.031 et seq. Ch. 36 391.061 et seq. Ch. 36 393.0025 Ch. 36 471.001 et seq. Ch. 46 541.001 et seq. Ch. 46 542.202 Ch. 46 545.301 Ch. 46, Art. III 545.307 46-64 547.001 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. V 547.703 Ch. 46, Art. V 551.401 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. V 623.141 et seq. Ch. 30 681.001 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. III ch. 683 10-114 683.071 et seq. Ch. 26  
V.T.C.A. Water Code 
Section Section 
this Code 16.311 et seq. Ch. 16 16.315 Ch. 16 21.001 et seq. Ch. 48 26.001 Ch. 16 27.001 et seq. Ch. 30  
