CITY CODE
of
BLANDING CITY, UTAH
2007
Code current through:
Ord. 2020-1, passed 2-11-2020
Published by:
STERLING CODIFIERS
an
American Legal Publishing Company
525 Vine Street  *  Suite 310  *  Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This code of Blanding City, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and
including ordinance 2020-1, passed February 11, 2020.  Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Cincinnati, Ohio
PENDING ORDINANCES
Ordinance 2020-2
An Ordinance Regarding Purchasing
WHEREAS, Blanding City (the “City”) is a political subdivision of the State of
Utah, authorized and organized under the provisions of Utah law; and
WHEREAS, Blanding City has previously enacted an ordinance regarding purchasing
policies for the City; and
WHEREAS, the City desires to amend the City purchasing policy to reflect Utah
State code; and
   NOW, THEREFORE, it is hereby ordained by the Blanding City Council as
follows:
Title 1 Chapter 11-1-5: Circumstance Justifying Award Of Contract Without
Competition: A contract may be awarded for supply, service or construction
items without competition when the procurement officer determines by written
justification that there is only one source for the required supply, service or
construction item.
Ordinance Repealed: The language in Ordinance Title 1, Chapter 11, Article 1-
5 is hereby repealed and replaced by this Ordinance.
Replacement:
5. Circumstance Justifying Award of Contract Without Competition
The procurement officer may award a contract or authorize a purchase without
engaging in a standard procurement process if the procurement officer
determines in writing that:
There is only one source for the procurement item; or
Transitional costs are a significant consideration in selecting a procurement
item; and
The results of a cost-benefit analysis demonstrate that transitional costs are
unreasonable or cost-prohibitive and that the award of a contract without
engaging in a standard procurement process is in the best interest of the City;
or
The award of a contract or purchase is under circumstances that make purchasing
or awarding a contract through a standard procurement process impractical and
not in the best interest of the City.
The procurement officer who awards a contract or authorizes a purchase under
this section shall negotiate with the vendor or contractor to ensure that the
terms, including pricing and delivery, are in the best interest of the City.
   PASSED, ADOPTED and APPROVED this 28th day of April, 2020.
                     Signed ___________________________
                           Joe B. Lyman, Mayor
ATTEST:
      _______________________________
      Jeremy Redd, Recorder
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
BLANDING CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Alterations
1-1-5: Incorporation Of Statutes
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this city code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Blanding City. This
city code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the BLANDING CITY CODE and
is hereby published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented
to incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this city code by title in any legal documents. (1978 Code § 1-001, as amended;
amd. 2007 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of
this state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect,
except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2007 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the city code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this city code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this city code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the city code. (2007 Code)
1-1-4: ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this city code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
city council. The city recorder shall see that the replacement pages are
properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the city
recorder. Any person having custody of a copy of the city code shall make every
effort to maintain said code current as to the most recent ordinances passed.
Such person shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages
when such are delivered or made available to such person through the office of
the city recorder. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and
other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and
shall be returned to the office of the city recorder when directed so to do by
order of the city council. (2007 Code)
1-1-5: INCORPORATION OF STATUTES:
Any reference or citation to any statute shall not be interpreted or construed
to include, incorporate or make the citation or statute part of this code
unless the provisions of this code specifically include, incorporate or make
the citation or statute part of this code by reference or incorporation, and
any such reference or citation not specifically included or incorporated may be
changed, amended or deleted without publication upon an order of the city
council. (1978 Code § 1-009, as amended)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
   A.   Repealer; Exceptions: All general ordinances of the city passed prior
to the adoption of this city code are hereby repealed, except such as are
included in this city code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from
repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and
excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy
ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights
to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; fee
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the city; and all special ordinances. (1978 Code § 1-
002, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Effect Of Repealing Ordinances: The repeal of the ordinances provided
in subsection A of this section shall not affect any debt or fee which is
accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding
commenced under or by virtue of the ordinances repealed or the term of office
of any person holding office at the time these ordinances take effect; nor
shall the repeal of any ordinance have the effect of reviving any ordinance
heretofore repealed or superseded. (1978 Code § 1-003, as amended)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to streets and other public ways, or relating to the
conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by
virtue of the adoption of this city code or by virtue of the preceding section,
excepting as the city code may contain provisions for such matters, in which
case, this city code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or
ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2007 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as
to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Scope Of Section: This section shall extend to all repeals, either by
express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any
new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Actions Now Pending: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this city code. (2007 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this city code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this code, or any part thereof. The city council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1978 Code § 1-007, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the mayor and city council may be fully carried
out.
   B.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of any provision
of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. Where any provision
of a code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general
provision imposed by the code, the provision imposing the greater restriction
or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.
   C.   Additional Interpretations:
      1.   Computation Of Time: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an
act to be done in a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had,
the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted
in computing the time but the day on which such proceeding is to be held shall
be counted.
      2.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
      3.   Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and
be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
      4.   Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
      5.   May/Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is
mandatory.
      6.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but
technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such
meaning.
      7.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
      8.   Officers Generally: Whenever any officer is referred by title, such
as "recorder", "treasurer", "chief of police", etc., such reference shall be
construed as if followed by the words "of Blanding City".
      9.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present. (2007 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of Blanding City, Utah.
CODE: The city code of Blanding City.
COUNTY: San Juan County, state of Utah.
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation or other activity subject to city regulation,
authorization or limitation.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The state of Utah.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
paths, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (1978 Code § 1-005, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the city code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1978
Code § 1-106, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Sentencing
1-4-2: Offenses Designated; Classified
1-4-1: SENTENCING:
   A.   Penalty For Violation Of Ordinance 1 :
      1.   Criminal: The city council may impose a minimum criminal penalty for
the violation of any municipal ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum
class B misdemeanor fine under Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301 or by a
term of imprisonment up to six (6) months, or by both the fine and term of
imprisonment.
      2.   Civil:
         a.   Except as provided in subsection A2b of this section, the city
council may prescribe a minimum civil penalty for the violation of any
municipal ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum class B misdemeanor
fine under Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301.
         b.   A municipality may not impose a civil penalty and adjudication
for the violation of a municipal moving traffic ordinance. (1978 Code § 1-321,
as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Term Of Imprisonment For Misdemeanors 2 : A person who has been
convicted of a misdemeanor may be sentenced to imprisonment as follows:
      1.   In the case of a class B misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding six
(6) months;
      2.   In the case of a class C misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding
ninety (90) days. (1978 Code § 1-322, as amended)
   C.   Infractions 3 :
      1.   A person convicted of an infraction may not be imprisoned but may be
subject to a fine, forfeiture and disqualification, or any combination.
      2.   Whenever a person is convicted of an infraction and no punishment is
specified, the person may be fined as for a class C misdemeanor. (1978 Code
§ 1-323, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   Fines Of Persons 4 : A person convicted of an offense may, in addition
to any term of imprisonment imposed, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed:
      1.   Class B Misdemeanor: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) when the
conviction is of a class B misdemeanor conviction; and
      2.   Class C Misdemeanor; Infraction: Seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) when the conviction is of a class C misdemeanor conviction or
infraction conviction. (1978 Code § 1-331, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   E.   Fines Of Corporations 5 : The sentence to pay a fine, when imposed upon
a corporation, association, partnership or governmental instrumentality for an
offense defined in this code, or the ordinances of the city, or for an offense
defined outside of this code over which this city has jurisdiction for which no
special corporate fine is specified, shall be to pay an amount fixed by the
court, not exceeding:
      1.   Class B Misdemeanor: Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) when the
conviction is for a class B misdemeanor conviction; and
      2.   Class C Misdemeanor; Infraction: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
when the conviction is for a class C misdemeanor conviction or for an
infraction conviction. (1978 Code § 3-332, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 10-3-703.
2 2. UCA § 76-3-204.
3 3. UCA § 76-3-205.
4 1. UCA § 76-3-301.
5 2. UCA § 76-3-302.
1-4-2: OFFENSES DESIGNATED; CLASSIFIED:
   A.   Sentencing In Accordance With Chapter:
      1.   A person adjudged guilty of an offense under this code or the
ordinances of this city shall be sentenced in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
      2.   Ordinances enacted after the effective date hereof which involve an
offense should be classified for sentencing purposes in accordance with this
chapter, unless otherwise expressly provided. (1978 Code § 1-311, as amended)
   B.   Designation Of Offenses: Offenses are designated as misdemeanors or
infractions. (1978 Code § 1-312, as amended)
   C.   Misdemeanors Classified 1 :
      1.   Misdemeanors are classified into two (2) categories:
         a.   Class B misdemeanors;
         b.   Class C misdemeanors.
      2.   An offense designated as a misdemeanor or any act prohibited or
declared to be unlawful in this code or any ordinance of this city when no
other specification as to punishment or category is made, is a class B
misdemeanor. (1978 Code § 1-313, as amended)
   D.   Infractions:
      1.   Infractions are not classified.
      2.   Any offense which is made an infraction in this code or other
ordinances of this city, or which is expressly designated an infraction and any
offense designated by this code or other ordinances of this city which is not
designated as a misdemeanor and for which no penalty is specified, is an
infraction. (1978 Code § 1-314, as amended)
   E.   Continuing Violation: In all instances where the violation of this code
or any ordinance hereinafter enacted is a continuing violation, a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which the violation
occurs or continues to occur. (1978 Code § 1-315, as amended)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 76-3-104.
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Eligibility And Residency Requirements
1-5-2: Election, Terms; Vacancies
1-5-3: Mayor As Member Of City Council
1-5-4: Municipal Administration
1-5-5: Meetings; Procedure And Conduct
1-5-6: Ordinances And Resolutions; Procedures
1-5-1: ELIGIBILITY AND RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Declaration Of Candidacy: A person filing a declaration of candidacy
for a city office shall:
      1.   Have been a resident of the city in which the person seeks office
for at least three hundred sixty five (365) consecutive days immediately before
the date of the election; and
      2.   Meet the other requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 20A-9-
203.
   B.   Annexed Areas: A person living in an area annexed to the city meets the
residency requirement of this section if that person resided within the area
annexed to the city for at least three hundred sixty five (365) consecutive
days before the date of the election.
   C.   Registered Voter: Any person elected to city office shall be a
registered voter in the city.
   D.   Residency Maintained: Each elected officer of the city shall maintain
residency within the boundaries of the city during the officer's term of
office.
   E.   Residence Outside City: If an elected officer of the city establishes a
principal place of residence as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 20A-2-
105 outside of the city during the officer's term of office, the office is
automatically vacant.
   F.   Continuous Absence From City: If an elected city officer is absent from
the city any time during the officer's term of office for a continuous period
of more than sixty (60) days without the consent of the city council, the city
office is automatically vacant. (1978 Code § 3-301, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
1-5-2: ELECTION, TERMS; VACANCIES:
   A.   Election; Terms: The election and terms of office shall be as follows:
      1.   The offices of mayor and approximately half the council members
shall be filled in municipal elections held in 1977. The terms shall be for
four (4) years. These offices shall be filled every four (4) years in municipal
elections.
      2.   The offices of the remaining council members shall be filled in a
municipal election held in 1979. The terms shall be for four (4) years. These
offices shall be filled every four (4) years in municipal elections. (1978 Code
§ 3-205, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Vacancy In Office: Mayor or city council vacancies shall be filled as
provided in Utah Code Annotated section 20A-1-510. (1978 Code § 3-303, as
amended; amd. 2007 Code)
1-5-3: MAYOR AS MEMBER OF CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   Administration Vested In Mayor: The administrative powers, authority
and duties are vested in the mayor. (1978 Code § 3-808, as amended; amd. 2007
Code)
   B.   Presiding Officer; Mayor Pro Tempore: The mayor shall be the
chairperson and preside at the meetings of the city council. In the absence of
the mayor or because of his inability or refusal to act, the city council may
elect a member of the city council to preside over the meeting as mayor pro
tempore, who shall have all the powers and duties of the mayor during his
absence or disability. The election of a mayor pro tempore shall be entered in
the minutes of the meeting. (1978 Code § 3-403, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Voting; No Vote Except In Tie: The mayor may not vote, except in the
case of a tie vote of the city council or in the appointment or dismissal of a
city manager under Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-830. (1978 Code § 3-402, as
amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   The mayor is the chief executive officer to whom all employees of
the city shall report.
      2.   The mayor shall:
         a.   Keep the peace and enforce the laws of the city;
         b.   Remit fines and forfeitures;
         c.   Report remittances under subsection D2b of this section to the
city council at its next regular session;
         d.   Perform all duties prescribed by law, resolution or ordinance;
         e.   Ensure that all the laws and ordinances and resolutions are
faithfully executed and observed;
         f.   Report to the city council the condition of the city and
recommend for city council consideration any measures that the mayor considers
to be in the best interests of the city;
         g.   When necessary, call on the residents of the city over the age of
twenty one (21) years to assist in enforcing the laws of the state and
ordinances of the city;
         h.   Appoint, with the advice and consent of the city council, persons
to fill city offices or vacancies on commissions or committees of the city; and
         i.   Report to the city council any release granted under subsection
D3b of this section.
      3.   The mayor may:
         a.   At any reasonable time, examine and inspect the official books,
papers, records or documents of the city or of any officer, employee or agent
of the city; and
         b.   Release any person imprisoned for violation of any city
ordinance. (1978 Code § 3-809, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   E.   No Veto: The mayor shall have no power to veto any act of the city
council, unless otherwise specifically authorized by statute. (1978 Code § 3-
404, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
1-5-4: MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Prescribe Additional Powers And Duties: The city council may, by
resolution, prescribe additional duties, powers and responsibilities for any
elected or appointed official which are not prohibited by any specific statute,
except that the mayor may not serve as city recorder and neither the mayor nor
the city recorder may serve as city treasurer. A justice court judge may not
hold any other city office or position of employment with the city. (1978 Code
§ 3-810, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Members Of Council May Be Appointed To Administration: The mayor may,
with the advice and consent of the majority of the city council, assign or
appoint any member or members of the city council to administer one or more
departments of the city and shall by ordinance provide the salary of the
administrator. (1978 Code § 3-811, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Change Of Duties: The mayor may, with the concurrence of a majority of
the city council, change the administrative assignment of any member of the
city council who is serving in any administrative position in the city
government. (1978 Code § 3-812, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   General Administrative Powers: The city council shall, from time to
time, prescribe the powers and duties to be performed by the superintendents,
supervisors, department directors and all of its officers and employees. (1978
Code § 3-813, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   E.   Personnel Assigned To One Or More Departments: The city council may
assign any individual to one or more positions in one or more departments.
(1978 Code § 3-814, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   F.   Rules And Regulations For Administration: The city council shall
prescribe rules and regulations which are not inconsistent with the laws of
this state, as it deems best for the efficient administration, organization,
conduct and business of the city. (1978 Code § 3-815, as amended; amd. 2007
Code)
   G.   Appointed Officers; Residency Requirements: The city council may
require by ordinance that any or all appointed officers reside in the city.
(1978 Code § 3-816, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
1-5-5: MEETINGS; PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The city council shall hold two (2) regular meetings,
which shall be held on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month at the city
offices, which meetings shall begin promptly at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.,
unless otherwise set as provided below:
      1.   If the meeting date is a legal holiday, then the meeting shall be
held at the same time and place above described on the next following day which
is not a legal holiday.
      2.   The city council may by resolution provide for a different time and
place for holding regular meetings of the city council. (1978 Code § 3-502, as
amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Special Meetings: If at any time the business of the city requires a
special meeting of the city council, such meeting may be ordered by the mayor
or any two (2) members of the city council. The order shall be entered in the
minutes of the city council. The order shall provide at least three (3) hours'
notice of the special meeting and notice thereof shall be served by the city
recorder on each member who did not sign the order by delivering the notice
personally or by leaving it at the member's usual place of abode. The personal
appearance by a council member at any specially called meeting constitutes a
waiver of the notice required in this subsection. (1978 Code § 3-503, as
amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Open Meetings: All meetings of the governing body shall be held in
compliance with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 52, chapter 4,
relating to open and public meetings. (1978 Code § 3-601, as amended; amd. 2007
Code)
   D.   Quorum:
      1.   Defined: The number of members of the city council necessary to
constitute a quorum is three (3) or more. (1978 Code § 3-505, as amended; amd.
2007 Code)
      2.   Necessary: No action of the city council shall be official or of any
effect, except when a quorum of the members is present. Fewer than a quorum may
adjourn from time to time. (1978 Code § 3-504, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   E.   Voting:
      1.   How Vote Taken: A roll call vote shall be taken and recorded for all
ordinances, resolutions and any action which would create a liability against
the city and in any other case at the request of any member of the city council
by a "yes" or a "no" vote and shall be recorded. Every resolution or ordinance
shall be in writing before the vote is taken. (1978 Code § 3-507, as amended;
amd. 2007 Code)
      2.   Minimum Vote Required: The minimum number of yes votes required to
pass any ordinance, resolution or to take any action by the city council,
unless otherwise prescribed by law, shall be a majority of the members of the
quorum, but shall never be less than three (3).
         a.   Any ordinance, resolution or motion of the city council having
fewer favorable votes than required herein shall be deemed defeated and
invalid, except a meeting may be adjourned to a specific time by a majority
vote of the city council even though such majority vote is less than that
required herein.
         b.   A majority of the members of the city council, regardless of
number, may fill any vacancy in the city council. (1978 Code § 3-508, as
amended; amd. 2007 Code)
      3.   Reconsideration: Any action taken by the city council shall not be
reconsidered or rescinded at any special meeting unless the number of members
of the city council present at the special meeting is equal to or greater than
the number of members present at the meeting when the action was approved.
(1978 Code § 3-509, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   F.   Electronic Meeting Participation:
      1.   Definitions: The following terms are defined as follows for the
purpose of this section:
    ANCHOR LOCATION: The council chambers located in the city offices at 50
South 100 West, Blanding, UT 84511, in San Juan County, Utah, where interested
persons and the public may attend and monitor the open portions of the meeting.
   ELECTRONIC MEETING: A public meeting of the city council convened and
conducted by means of a telephonic conference device or other electronic means,
allowing each member of the city council to be in contact with the anchor
location and participate concurrently with all other members of the city
council in the conduct of such meeting.
   MEETING ADMINISTRATOR: The city recorder or another employee of the city
specifically assigned and designated to operate the electronic meeting
equipment at the anchor location to assure that all members of the city council
are continuously able to participate in the electronic meeting and to advise
the party conducting the meeting of the initiation, recess, if appropriate, or
adjournment of an electronic meeting.
      2.   Electronic Meetings: The city council may convene electronic
meetings when necessary pursuant to specific public notice of an electronic
meeting by posting written notice of the electronic meeting at the anchor
location and providing written or electronic notice to the media as otherwise
provided by law. Notice of the electronic meeting shall also be provided to
each member of the city council at least twenty four (24) hours before the
meeting, including a description of how members will be connected to the
electronic meeting. The notice to members of the city council shall indicate
the process including telephone numbers, access codes, internet addresses,
etc., in order to connect to the electronic meeting.
      3.   Quorum Verification: Before an electronic meeting may be called to
order, all members of the city council shall be given an opportunity to
participate in the meeting and no electronic meeting shall be convened unless
the quorum of the city council is physically present at the anchor location for
the meeting. However, if a proclamation of local, state or national emergency
is in effect, a majority of a quorum of the council need not be physically
present at the physical location from which the electronic meeting originates
or from which the council members are connected to the electronic meeting in
order for an electronic meeting to be held. Generally those attending the
meeting electronically should connect at least ten (10) minutes prior to the
beginning of the meeting to allow for any technical issues to be resolved. If a
participant cannot connect before the meeting, a brief recess may be called to
allow for the electronic connection of a participant.
      4.   Public Attendance: Each electronic meeting shall be convened by the
meeting administrator by announcing the parties present at the meeting and by
making available to members of the public at the anchor location an amplified
speaker enabling members of the public to hear the comments of city council
members and allowing the city council members to hear comments from the public
if and when appropriate.
      5.   Conduct Of The Meeting: Upon determining that a sufficient number of
the city council is present at the anchor location and members of the public
can adequately hear the comments of all members of the city council and
participate if appropriate, the chairman shall formally convene the meeting and
take or cause a roll call of those participating. The chairman shall provide
opportunity for each matter on the agenda to be presented and discussed, in an
order set forth in the agenda, as amended.
      6.   Compliance With Law: In all other respects, electronic meetings
shall be conducted, recorded, and minutes shall be kept as required by law.
(Ord. 2014-3, 11-11-2014)
1-5-6: ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS; PROCEDURES:
   A.   Power Exercised By Ordinance: The city council may pass any ordinance
to regulate, require, prohibit, govern, control or supervise any activity,
business, conduct or condition authorized by statute or any other provision of
law. An officer of the city shall not be convicted of a criminal offense where
he relied on or enforced an ordinance he reasonably believed to be a valid
ordinance. It shall be a defense to any action for punitive damages that the
official acted in good faith in enforcing an ordinance or that he enforced an
ordinance on advice of legal counsel. (1978 Code § 3-702, as amended; amd. 2007
Code)
   B.   Form Of Ordinance: Any ordinance passed by the city council shall
contain and be in substantially the following order and form:
      1.   A number;
      2.   A title which indicates the nature of the subject matter of the
ordinance;
      3.   A preamble which states the need or reason for the ordinance;
      4.   An ordaining clause which states "Be it ordained by Blanding City:";
      5.   The body or subject of the ordinance;
      6.   When applicable, a statement indicating the penalty for violation of
the ordinance or a reference that the punishment is covered by an ordinance
which prescribes the fines and terms of imprisonment for the violation of the
city ordinance; or, the penalty may establish a classification of penalties and
refer to such ordinance in which the penalty for such violation is established;
      7.   A statement indicating the effective date of the ordinance or the
date when the ordinance shall become effective after publication or posting as
required by this section;
      8.   A line for the signature of the mayor or acting mayor to sign the
ordinance;
      9.   A place for the city recorder to attest the ordinance and affix the
seal of the city. (1978 Code § 3-704, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Requirements As To Form; Effective Date:
      1.   Ordinances passed or enacted by the city council shall be signed by
the mayor, or if he is absent, by the mayor pro tempore, or by a quorum of the
city council, and shall be recorded before taking effect. No ordinance shall be
void or unlawful by reason of its failure to conform to the provisions of Utah
Code Annotated section 10-3-704(1), (2), (3) or (4). (1978 Code § 3-705, as
amended; amd. 2007 Code)
      2.   Ordinances shall become effective twenty (20) days after publication
or posting or thirty (30) days after final passage by the city council,
whichever is closer to the date of final passage, but ordinances may become
effective at an earlier or later date after publication or posting if so
provided in the ordinance. (1978 Code § 3-712, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
      3.   Ordinances which do not have an effective date shall become
effective twenty (20) days after publication or posting, or thirty (30) days
after final passage by the city council, whichever is sooner. (1978 Code § 3-
705, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   Publication And Posting Of Ordinances:
      1.   Before an ordinance may take effect, the legislative body of the
city adopting an ordinance, except an ordinance enacted under Utah Code
Annotated sections 10-3-706 through 10-3-710, shall:
         a.   Deposit a copy of the ordinance in the office of the city
recorder; and
         b.   (1) Publish a short summary of the ordinance at least once:
               (A)   In a newspaper published within the city; or
               (B)   If there is no newspaper published within the city, in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city; or
            (2)   Post a complete copy of the ordinance in three (3) public
places within the city.
      2.   a. Any ordinance, code or book, other than the state code, relating
to building or safety standards, municipal functions, administration, control
or regulations, may be adopted and shall take effect without further
publication or posting, if reference is made to the code or book and at least
three (3) copies have been filed for use and examination by the public in the
office of the city recorder prior to the adoption of the ordinance by the
governing body.
         b.   Any state law relating to building or safety standards, municipal
functions, administration, control or regulations, may be adopted and shall
take effect without further publication or posting if reference is made to the
state code.
         c.   The ordinance adopting the code or book shall be published in the
manner provided in this subsection. (1978 Code § 3-711, as amended; amd. 2007
Code)
   E.   Recording, Numbering And Certification Of Passage:
      1.   The city recorder shall record, in a book used exclusively for that
purpose, all ordinances passed by the city council. The city recorder shall
give each ordinance a number, if the city council has not already so done.
Immediately following each ordinance, or codification of ordinances, the city
recorder shall make or cause to be made a certificate stating the date of
passage and of the date of publication or posting, as required. The record and
memorandum, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the
contents, passage and publication or posting of the ordinance or codification.
(1978 Code § 3-713, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
      2.   The city recorder, insofar as possible, shall assign all ordinances
of a general nature a number, which shall conform to the numbering system used
in this code and shall indicate upon the face of the ordinance the date
adopted.
      3.   The city recorder shall keep all ordinances of a local, private or
temporary nature, including franchises, grants, dedication, bond issues and tax
levies, in a separate book of "special ordinances" properly indexed and
organized according to date adopted. The first number of such an ordinance
shall be the last two (2) digits of the year the ordinance is adopted, followed
by a dash which is followed by a number indicating the order in which such
special ordinance was adopted during the year.
      4.   Failure to comply with this subsection shall not affect or render
invalid any ordinance of the city. (1978 Code § 1-008, as amended)
   F.   Resolutions:
      1.   Purpose: Unless otherwise required by law, the city council may
exercise all administrative powers by resolution, including, but not limited
to: a) establishing utility rates; b) charges for garbage collection and fees
charged for city services; c) establishing personnel policies and guidelines;
and d) regulating the use and operation of the city property. Punishment, fines
or forfeitures may not be imposed by resolution. (1978 Code § 3-717, as
amended; amd. 2007 Code)
      2.   Form: Any resolution passed by the city council shall be in a form
and contain sections substantially similar to that prescribed for ordinances.
(1978 Code § 3-718, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
      3.   Publication; Effective Date: Resolutions may become effective
without publication or posting and may take effect on passage or at a later
date as the city council may determine, but resolutions may not become
effective more than three (3) months from the date of passage. (1978 Code § 3-
719, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 6
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Creating Offices; Filling Vacancies
1-6-2: Compensation
1-6-3: Bond Requirements
1-6-4: Oaths
1-6-5: Official Neglect And Misconduct
1-6-6: City Recorder And City Treasurer
1-6-1: CREATING OFFICES; FILLING VACANCIES:
   A.   Offices Created By Council: The City Council may create any office
deemed necessary for the government of the City and provide for filling
vacancies in elective and appointive offices. (1978 Code § 3-901, as amended;
amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Mayor To Appoint And Fill Vacancies: The Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the City Council, may appoint and fill vacancies in all offices
provided for by law or ordinance.
   C.   Continuation In Office: All appointed officers shall continue in office
until their successors are appointed and qualified. (1978 Code § 3-916, as
amended; amd. 2007 Code)
1-6-2: COMPENSATION:
   A.   Schedule Adopted: The salary and wage schedule on file in the City
office, as may be amended by ordinance from time to time, is hereby adopted as
the salary and wage schedule of the City. (1978 Code § 3-818, as amended; amd.
2007 Code)
   B.   Benefits: In addition to the salary paid the officers and employees of
the City, they shall receive the following benefits:
      1.   The employees' share of the Social Security Tax.
      2.   Health and accident insurance for themselves and their families on
such basis and cost to the employee or officer as the City Council may from
time to time establish by resolution.
      3.   Vacation and sick leave on such basis as the City Council may from
time to time establish by resolution.
      4.   Participation in the Utah State retirement program on such basis and
cost as the City Council may from time to time establish by resolution.
   C.   Serving Two Or More Positions: Whenever any person serves in two (2) or
more positions either as officers or employees of this City, unless otherwise
specifically provided in the employment agreement, by ordinance or by
resolution, that person shall receive the salary or compensation of the office
or employment paying the greater amount.
   D.   Reimbursement For Travel Expenses: In addition to all other
compensation or salaries, any officer or employee of the City may receive,
following the submission to the City Recorder of a claim, travel expenses and
per diem established by ordinance or resolution for expense actually incurred
by the person for attending any meeting, conference, seminar or training
session, provided attendance shall have been approved by the City Council.
(1978 Code § 3-818, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
1-6-3: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Amounts Required: Before entering upon the discharge of their
respective offices, the following officers shall execute bonds in the penal
amounts listed below, or be covered by theft or crime insurance with a per
occurrence limit of not less than the penal amounts required below or by State
law as follows:
 
Office Coverage
City Attorney                  $ 5,000.00
City Auditor                   5,000.00
City Clerk                     5,000.00
City Council                   5,000.00
City Recorder                  5,000.00
City Sheriff (Chief of Police) 20,000.00
City Treasurer                 (As set by the State Money Management Council)
 
   B.   Procedure: If the City elects to have City officials execute bonds, the
bonds shall meet the requirements of section 52-1-13 of the Utah Code, as the
same may be amended or renumbered, and if the City elects to have City
officials covered by theft or crime insurance, such coverage shall be provided
by an admitted or surplus lines insurance carrier or an interlocal cooperative
agency acting as a public agency insurance mutual, or Joint Reserve Fund. Any
required bonds shall be approved by the City Council, recorded by the City
Recorder, and filed and kept in the Office of the City Clerk, except that the
bond of the City Clerk shall be filed and kept by the City Treasurer. Any theft
or crime insurance shall be approved by the City Council.
   C.   Public Employees Faithful Performance Blanket Position Bond: City
officials and personnel of this City, except any officials who may be required
by State Statutes to give an individual bond or be covered by theft or crime
insurance to qualify for office, may be included in a faithful performance
blanket position bond or covered by theft or crime insurance. Said public
faithful performance blanket position bond or theft or crime insurance shall
provide a minimum coverage of the maximum coverage required by State Statute or
City ordinance of any person covered by such blanket position bond or theft or
crime insurance.
   D.   Payment Of Premiums: The premium of bonds or theft or crime insurance
referred to in this chapter, plus the bonds of the City Council, shall be paid
out of City funds. (Ord. 2019-1, 1-8-2019)
1-6-4: OATHS:
   A.   Constitutional Oath Of Office: All officers, whether elected or
appointed, before entering on the duties of their respective offices shall
take, subscribe and file the constitutional oath of office. (1978 Code § 3-827,
as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Filing: The oath of office required under this section shall be
administered by any Judge, notary public or by the City Recorder. Elected
officials shall take their oath of office at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the
first Monday in January following their election or as soon thereafter as is
practical. Appointed officers shall take their oath at any time before entering
on their duties. All oaths of office shall be filed with the City Recorder.
(1978 Code § 3-828, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Acts Of Officials Not Voided: No official act of any City officer shall
be invalid for the reason that he failed to take the oath of office. (1978 Code
§ 3-829, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
1-6-5: OFFICIAL NEGLECT AND MISCONDUCT:
In case any City officer shall at any time wilfully omit to perform any duty,
or wilfully and corruptly be guilty of oppression, malconduct, misfeasance or
malfeasance in office, the person is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, shall be
removed from office and is not eligible for any City office thereafter. (1978
Code § 3-826, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
1-6-6: CITY RECORDER AND CITY TREASURER:
   A.   Appointment: On or before the first Monday in February following a City
election, the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, shall
appoint a qualified person to each of the offices of City Recorder and City
Treasurer.
   B.   Ex Officio Auditor: The City Recorder is ex officio the City Auditor
and shall perform the duties of that office. (1978 Code § 3-916, as amended;
amd. 2007 Code)
ARTICLE A.  CITY ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-6A-1: Created
1-6A-2: Appointment, Term
1-6A-3: Powers And Duties
1-6A-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of city administrator. (1978 Code § 3-927,
as amended)
1-6A-2: APPOINTMENT, TERM:
The office of city administrator shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with
the advice and consent of the city council, for such term not to exceed three
(3) years as the mayor and city council may determine. (1978 Code § 3-928, as
amended)
1-6A-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The duties of such office, under the direction of the mayor and city council,
shall be as follows:
   A.   Manage and supervise the operation of the office of the city, including
the keeping of all records of receipts, disbursements and of all other
transactions of the city.
   B.   Supervise the construction, improvement, repairs and maintenance on the
streets, sidewalks, alleys, lanes, public buildings, parks, and all other
public grounds and property belonging to the city.
   C.   Supervise the operation of the electrical distribution system, the
water system, sewer system and natural gas system of the city.
   D.   Supervise the cleaning and sprinkling of the city streets and public
places.
   E.   Supervise the operation of the garbage collection system of the city.
   F.   Act as purchasing officer for the city and to see that all goods
purchased by or for the city are received as agreed upon.
   G.   Attend all meetings of the city council.
   H.   Prepare annual budget.
   I.   In the absence of a director of finance, perform all duties established
for the director of finance.
   J.   Responsible to establish and supervise a city recorder position
pursuant to city personnel requirements, or to personally perform such
responsibilities as established by city resolutions or state statutes.
   K.   Supervise and direct all of the city employees in the performance of
their duties as employees of the city; provided, that the administrator shall
not have authority to hire or discharge any employee of the city or determine
their rate of pay.
   L.   Do each and every other act which he should be lawfully directed to do
by the mayor and city council. (1978 Code § 3-927, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
ARTICLE B.  DIRECTOR OF FINANCE; FINANCIAL OFFICER
SECTION:
1-6B-1: Director Of Finance
1-6B-2: Mayor To Act As Financial Officer
1-6B-1: DIRECTOR OF FINANCE:
Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-6-157, and other pertinent
provisions of the laws of the state, there is hereby established a director of
finance position in city government, which shall be authorized to perform the
following financial administrative duties:
   A.   Supervise all financial accounting activities.
   B.   Advise all chief administrators on fiscal policy.
   C.   Manage city investments.
   D.   Handle debt administration.
   E.   Responsible for the preparation of internal and annual financial
reports.
   F.   Administer insurance programs.
   G.   Responsible for the preauditing of all financial claims made against
the city to determine if such claims were appropriately processed according to
city and state legal requirements.
   H.   Responsible to determine if proper approval is obtained before any
claim against the city is processed for payment.
   I.   Responsible to supervise the purchasing system as established by city
ordinance or resolution.
   J.   To perform such duties consistent with the above area of responsibility
as may be required by the city administrator, the city council or state
statutes. (1978 Code § 3-929, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
1-6B-2: MAYOR TO ACT AS FINANCIAL OFFICER:
Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated sections 10-6-122, 10-6-139, 10-6-158 and 10-6-
159, and other pertinent provisions of the laws of the state, there is hereby
provided for the authorization of the mayor to act as the city financial
officer, and the delegation to the mayor of claim approval financial authority
as authorized by state statutes and as defined as follows:
   A.   The mayor is hereby authorized to:
      1.   Approve any payroll checks prepared for an authorized city employee
hired in accordance with personnel policies established by city ordinance or
resolution. The amount paid to any such authorized employee shall also be in
agreement to a specific salary assigned to such employee pursuant to a salary
schedule adopted by the governing body or a salary amount assigned by
resolution of the city council.
      2.   Approve claims submitted for the payment of routine expenditures,
such as utility bills, payroll related expenses, supplies and materials, which
were purchased according to authorized purchasing procedures established by
ordinance or resolution.
      3.   Approve any submitted claim which is in accordance with an
authorized city contract.
      4.   Approve claims submitted for capital purchases, which were made
pursuant to established purchasing procedures, referenced in the budget
document and approved by an appropriation resolution adopted for the current
fiscal year budget.
   B.   Restrictions: The above claim approval authority delegated to the mayor
is hereby subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   No claim may be approved by the mayor which is not within the duly
and legally adopted or adjusted budget.
      2.   No claim may be approved which was not made in accordance with
personnel and purchasing procedures established by ordinance or resolution.
(1978 Code § 3-929)
      3.   All expenditures in excess of eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00)
shall be directly approved by the city council, excepting resale power and
maintenance-construction invoices from Utah Power and Light Company may be paid
without city council authorization. (1978 Code § 3-929; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Verified Claims: The above authorization shall not prevent the
governing body from approving all or part of a list of verified claims,
including a specific claim in an amount in excess of the stated maximum, where
certified by the financial officer.
   D.   Preaudit Of Claims: The city recorder or director of finance shall
preaudit all claims pursuant to state statute requirements and shall not
disburse any payments without appropriate approval. Procedures shall be
established whereby documented approval is obtained as authorized by this
article. Monthly detail expenditure reports shall also be prepared and made
available to the city council.
   E.   Procedures May Be Established: Specific budgetary and administrative
procedures consistent with this article may be established by resolution. (1978
Code § 3-929, as amended)
ARTICLE C.  CITY ENGINEER
SECTION:
1-6C-1: Created
1-6C-2: Appointment, Term
1-6C-3: Powers And Duties
1-6C-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of city engineer. (1978 Code § 3-930, as
amended)
1-6C-2: APPOINTMENT, TERM:
The office of city engineer shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the
advice and consent of the city council, for a term not to exceed two (2) years,
such term to be renewed effective the first Monday in February following
municipal elections. (1978 Code § 3-931, as amended)
1-6C-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The duties of such office, under the direction of the mayor, city council and
city administrator, shall be as follows:
   A.   Custodian Of Records Of Public Improvements: The city engineer's office
shall be an office of record for all maps, plans, plats, profiles, drawings,
final estimates, specifications and contracts which in any way relate to the
public improvements and engineering affairs of the city. The engineer shall be
custodian of and must keep all the drawings and documents above mentioned on
file and of record. (1978 Code § 3-930, as amended)
   B.   Books And Supplies; Recording, Filing, Inspection: The city engineer's
office shall be supplied with all necessary books, cases and supplies for
recording and filing as herein required. The city engineer shall record and
file all drawings and documents pertaining to public lands and improvements of
the city. Those made in his office shall be placed on record as soon as
completed and shall then be open for public inspection. He shall keep the
records and files in good condition and turn the same over to his successor in
office. He shall allow no alteration, mutilation or changes to be made in any
matter of record, and shall be held strictly accountable for the same. (1978
Code § 3-930, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Fees To Be Paid In Advance: The city engineer shall not record any
drawings or instruments, or file any papers or notices, or furnish any copies,
or render any service connected with his office, until the fees for the same
are paid or tendered as prescribed by law or ordinance.
   D.   Prepare Project Plans, Specifications And Documents: The city engineer,
when directed, shall prepare project plans, specifications and related
documents for improvement of city utilities, streets (inclusive of traffic
control), buildings and structures, drainage and flood control systems, parks
and playgrounds, landfill sites, and all city property requiring engineering
consideration. He shall do required land surveying and map preparation,
including, but not limited to, streets, utilities and zoning maps. He shall
perform such other duties and functions as may from time to time be prescribed
by those under whose direction he serves.
   E.   Seal: The city engineer shall be provided with a seal by the city for
use, containing the words, "Blanding City, Utah, Engineering Department". Such
seal shall be affixed to every certification or approval. (1978 Code § 3-930,
as amended)
CHAPTER 7
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Conduct
1-7-2: Primary Election; When Required
1-7-1: CONDUCT:
Election for mayor and council members shall be conducted according to the
municipal election section of Utah Code Annotated section 20A-9-404(1) and (2).
(Ord. 1995-1, 5-10-1995)
1-7-2: PRIMARY ELECTION; WHEN REQUIRED:
This section provides for the candidates for mayor and council members to be
nominated at a primary election if required. A primary election will be held
only when the number of candidates filing for an office exceeds twice the
number to be elected. The candidates nominated at the primary election, plus
candidates that were not required to run in the primary, are to be placed on
the November ballot. (Ord. 1995-1, 5-10-1995)
ARTICLE A.  CAMPAIGN FINANCE DISCLOSURE
SECTION:
1-7A-1: Compliance Required
1-7A-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
All candidates for elective municipal office shall comply with the campaign
finance disclosure requirements set forth in Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-
208. (2007 Code)
CHAPTER 8
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Request For Hearing
1-8-2: Form Of Request
1-8-3: Procedure
1-8-4: Not Additional Remedy
1-8-1: REQUEST FOR HEARING:
Unless otherwise specifically provided in any ordinance of the city or any code
adopted by reference, a hearing before the city council may be requested by any
person:
   A.   Who is denied or refused a permit or license by any officer, agent or
employee of this city.
   B.   Whose permit or license is revoked, restricted, qualified or limited
from that for which it was first issued. (1978 Code § 1-411, as amended)
1-8-2: FORM OF REQUEST:
The request for hearing must be made in writing to the mayor or city recorder
and made within thirty (30) days following the date notice denying, refusing,
revoking, qualifying or restricting the license or permit is mailed by the city
to the applicant or license holder at his address as it appears on the
application or license. (1978 Code § 1-412, as amended)
1-8-3: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Time And Place: Following receipt of a request for hearing, the city
council shall inform the person requesting a hearing of the time and place the
hearing is to be held.
   B.   Witnesses; Evidence: At the hearing, the aggrieved party shall have the
right to hear and examine any witnesses the city may produce to support its
decision and to present his own evidence in support of his contention.
   C.   Decision Of City Council: The city council shall, within ten (10) days
following the conclusion of the hearing, in writing, inform the person who
requested the hearing of the decision of the city council. (1978 Code § 1-413,
as amended)
1-8-4: NOT ADDITIONAL REMEDY:
This chapter shall not be construed so as to afford any aggrieved party more
than one hearing before the city council, nor shall the hearing provided in
this section apply to any criminal complaint or proceeding. (1978 Code § 1-414,
as amended)
CHAPTER 9
RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
1-9-1: Authority And Purpose
1-9-2: Definitions
1-9-3: Request For Access
1-9-4: Appeal
1-9-5: Fees
1-9-6: Forms
1-9-1: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
Under the authority of Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-701, this chapter
specifies how records in the custody of the City of Blanding may be accessed,
and where and to whom requests for access to records shall be directed. All
other regulations related to access to public records, including but not
limited to, standards for the classification and designation of records; the
standards for the management and retention of records; response times for
access requests; and time limits for appeals shall be as set forth in Utah Code
Annotated title 63G, chapter 2. (Ord. 2020-1, 2-11-2020)
1-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
Terms used in this chapter are defined in Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-
103. (Ord. 2020-1, 2-11-2020)
1-9-3: REQUEST FOR ACCESS:
   A.   A request for access to records shall be made in writing, include the
information required by Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-204, and be submitted
by first class mail; hand delivery; or electronically to the Records Officer.
   B.   Requests submitted in a manner other than set forth herein will not be
accepted. (Ord. 2020-1, 2-11-2020)
1-9-4: APPEAL:
   A.   An appeal of a decision of a Records Officer, shall be in writing,
comply with the information required by Utah Code Annotated 63G-2-401(2), and
be submitted by first class mail; hand delivery; or electronically to the
Office of the Blanding City Mayor, 50 W 100 S, Blanding, Utah.
   B.   Appeals submitted in a manner other than set forth herein will not be
accepted. (Ord. 2020-1, 2-11-2020)
1-9-5: FEES:
   A.   A schedule of fees that may be charged in response to a records request
may be obtained by contacting the Records Officer.
   B.   Fees for providing a record may be waived under certain circumstances
described in Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-203(4). A request for a fee
waiver shall be made in writing to the Records Officer as part of the records
request. (Ord. 2020-1, 2-11-2020)
1-9-6: FORMS:
   A.   Request forms are available at the Blanding City Website or from the
Records Officer.
   B.   These forms are provided as a convenience, and a requester is not
required to use these forms as long as the information required by the statute
is provided. (Ord. 2020-1, 2-11-2020)
CHAPTER 10
REVIEW OF CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS BY CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-10-1: Review Of Contracts And Agreements By City Attorney
1-10-1: REVIEW OF CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS BY CITY ATTORNEY:
   A.   In the event a written contract or agreement intending to bind the city
or for which the city may incur a financial liability is proposed for adoption,
said contract or agreement shall not be executed by the city without first
being reviewed by the city attorney for legality and potential city liability.
   B.   This will include the initial review of standard city contracts that
have been created for use multiple times. (Ord., 11-25-1997)
CHAPTER 11
PURCHASING
SECTION:
1-11-1: General Provisions
1-11-2: Administration
1-11-3: Interlocal Purchasing Agreements
1-11-4: Purchasing Procedures
1-11-5: Disposal Of Public Property
1-11-6: Personal Investments
1-11-7: Penalty; Illegal Activities
1-11-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Introduction: Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated title 11, chapter 39,
section
10-8-2 and other provisions of the laws of the state, a purchasing ordinance is
adopted and established for the city. The underlying purposes and policies of
the purchasing ordinance are to:
      1.   Simplify, clarify and modernize the procedure governing procurement
by the city;
      2.   Ensure the fair and equitable treatment of all persons who deal with
the procurement system of the city;
      3.   Provide increased economy in city procurement activities; and
      4.   Foster effective broad based competition within the free enterprise
system.
   B.   State Laws Applicable: This chapter includes the following Utah Code
Annotated citations either by reference, intent or both:
      1.   Rules And Regulations: Rules and regulations shall be adopted
governing the preparation and content of specifications for supplies, services
and construction required by the city. The rules shall determine the extent to
which nonemployees who have prepared specifications may participate in city
procurement using such rules and regulations.
      2.   Purpose Of Specifications: All specifications shall seek to promote
overall economy and best use for the purposes intended and encourage
competition, and shall not be unduly restrictive. The requirements of
subsections A1 and A2 of this section shall apply to all specifications.
      3.   Contracts Awarded By Sealed Bids:
         a.   Contracts shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding or
competitive sealed proposals, except for small purchases, emergency purchases,
or where there is only one source for the required supply, service or
construction item.
         b.   An invitation for bids shall be issued when a contract is to be
awarded by competitive sealed bidding. The invitation shall include a purchase
description and contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement.
         c.   Public notice of the invitation for bids shall be given a
reasonable time prior to the date set forth therein for the opening of bids.
The notice shall include publication in a newspaper of general circulation a
reasonable time prior to bid opening.
         d.   Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of two (2) or more
witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The
amount of each bid and any other relevant information, together with the name
of each bidder, shall be recorded. The record and each bid shall be open to
public inspection. Bidders shall be invited to the bid opening. The city
council shall be informed of the results.
         e.   Bids shall be unconditionally accepted without alteration or
correction. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the
invitation for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability,
such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery and suitability for
the particular purpose. Those criteria that will affect the bid price and be
considered in evaluation for award shall be objectively measurable.
         f.   Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before
or after award, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid
mistakes, shall be permitted in accordance with rules and regulations. After
bid opening, changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to
the interest of the city or fair competition shall not be permitted. Except as
otherwise provided, all decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of
bids or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes shall be supported
by a written determination made by the procurement officer. The city council
shall be informed.
         g.   The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by
written notice to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder whose bid meets
the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids.
      4.   Use Of Competitive Sealed Proposals In Lieu Of Bids; Procedure:
         a.   When the procurement officer determines in writing that the use
of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to
the city, a contract may be entered into by competitive sealed proposals. The
city council shall be informed.
            (1)   Competitive sealed proposals may be used for the procurement
of services of consultants, professionals and providers.
            (2)   The city shall assure maximum practicable competition in
those procurements, including the relative importance, if any, of the fee to be
charged by an offeror and the total cost.
         b.   Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals.
         c.   (1) Proposals shall be opened so as to avoid disclosure of
contents to competing offerors during the process of negotiation.
            (2)   A register of proposals shall be prepared and shall be open
for public inspection after the contract is awarded.
         d.   The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of
price and other evaluation factors.
         e.   As provided in the request for proposals, discussions may be
conducted with responsible offerors who submit proposals for the purpose of
assuring full understanding of, and responsiveness to, solicitation
requirements.
         f.   (1) Award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal
is determined, in writing, to be the most advantageous to the city, taking into
consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for
proposals.
            (2)   No other factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation.
            (3)   The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award
is made.
      5.   Circumstance Justifying Award Of Contract Without Competition: A
contract may be awarded for supply, service or construction items without
competition when the procurement officer determines by written justification
that there is only one source for the required supply, service or construction
item.
      6.   Emergency Procurements: Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, when there exists a threat to public health, welfare or safety under
"emergency conditions", as defined in the rules and regulations, the
procurement officer may make or authorize others to make emergency
procurements; provided, that emergency procurements shall be made with as much
competition as practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of
the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor
shall be included in the contract file. The city council shall be informed as
soon as possible.
      7.   Cancellation And Rejection Of Bids: An invitation for bids or a
request for proposals, or other solicitation, may be canceled, or any or all
bids or proposals may be rejected, in whole or in part, as may be specified in
the solicitation, when it is in the best interest of the city. The reasons
shall be made part of the contract file.
      8.   Determination Of Nonresponsibility Of Bidder: A written
determination of nonresponsibility of a bidder or offeror may be made. The
unreasonable failure of a bidder or offeror to promptly supply information in
connection with an inquiry with respect to responsibility may be grounds for a
determination of nonresponsibility with respect to the bidder or offeror.
Information furnished by a bidder or offeror shall not be disclosed without
prior written consent by the bidder or offeror.
      9.   Rules And Regulations To Determine Allowable Incurred Costs: Rules
and regulations may be made regarding the separate handling of small purchases.
However, purchases shall not be artificially divided up so as to qualify for
purchasing under the small purchases rules.
      10.   Cost Plus A Percentage Of Cost Contract: "Cost plus a percentage of
cost" contracts are prohibited.
      11.   Period Of Time For Contract Of Supplies: Contracts for supplies and
services may be entered into for any period of time deemed to be in the best
interest of the city. However, the contract should state that payment and
performance obligations for succeeding fiscal periods shall be subject to the
availability and appropriation of funds.
      12.   Right Of City To Inspect Place Of Business Of Contractor Or
Subcontractor: The city may, at reasonable times, inspect the part of the plant
or place of business of a contractor or any subcontractor which is related to
the performance of any contract awarded or to be awarded by the city.
      13.   Records Of Contracts Made: The procurement officer shall maintain a
record listing all contracts made and shall maintain the record in accordance
with Utah Code Annotated title 63, chapter 2, government records access and
management act. The record shall contain each contractor's name, the amount and
type of each contract, and a listing of the supplies, services or construction
procured under each contract.
      14.   Bid Security Requirements: Bid security in amount equal to at least
five percent (5%) of the amount of the bid shall be required for all
competitive sealed bidding for construction contracts, unless otherwise
approved by the city council.
      15.   Bonds: When a construction contract is awarded, the following bonds
or security shall be delivered to the city: a) a performance bond in an amount
equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the price specified in the contract; and
b) a payment bond in an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the price
specified in the contract for the protection of all persons supplying labor and
material to the contractor or its subcontractors for the performance of the
contract, unless otherwise approved by the city council.
   C.   Definitions: Unless the context requires otherwise, the terms as used
in this chapter and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter
shall have the following meaning:
ADEQUATE APPROPRIATION BALANCE: Sufficient fund balance which must exist in the
line item appropriation of the account number against which the purchase order
is to be charged.
BIDDING: The procedure used to solicit quotations on price and delivery from
various prospective suppliers of supplies, equipment and contractual services.
BUDGET OFFICER: The city administrator, as prescribed by city ordinance.
BUSINESS: Any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint
stock company, joint venture, or any other private legal entity.
CHANGE ORDER: A written order directing the contractor to suspend work or make
changes, which the appropriate clauses of the contract authorize without the
consent of the contractor, or any written alteration in specifications,
delivery point, rate of delivery, period of performance, price, quantity or
other provisions of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties
to the contract.
CONTRACT: Any agreement for the procurement or disposal of supplies, services
or construction.
CONTRACTUAL SERVICES: Public works projects and other professional services
such as auditing, architects, engineers or other consulting services.
DEPARTMENT HEAD: The individual who administers a department or his/her
designate as specified in writing to the purchasing agent, or in the absence of
a department head, the city administrator. The department head shall be
responsible for maintaining a system of inventory for his/her department.
ESTIMATES OF REQUIREMENTS: Forecasts of future requirements of supplies,
equipment or contractual services submitted by department heads.
INVITATION FOR BIDS: All documents, whether attached or incorporated by
reference, used for soliciting bids.
LOCAL BIDDER: A firm or individual who regularly maintains a place of business
and transacts business in, or maintains an inventory of merchandise for sale
in, or is licensed by or pays business taxes to Blanding City.
PAYMENT BOND: A contract of guaranty executed subsequent to full execution of a
construction contract to protect the city from loss due to the inability of the
bidder to complete and pay for all labor and materials and equipment furnished
for use in the performance of the construction contract.
PERFORMANCE BOND: A contract of guaranty executed subsequent to award by a
successful bidder to protect the city from loss due to the inability of the
bidder to complete the contract as agreed.
PERSON: Any business, individual, union, committee, club, other organization,
or group of individuals.
PROCUREMENT: Buying, purchasing, renting, leasing, leasing with an option to
purchase, or otherwise acquiring any supplies, services or construction.
PROCUREMENT OFFICER: Any person authorized to enter into and administer
contracts and make written determinations with respect thereto. It also
includes an authorized representative acting within the limits of authority.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any item of real or personal property owned by the city.
PURCHASE DESCRIPTION: The words used in a solicitation to describe the
supplies, services or construction to be purchased, and includes specifications
attached to or made a part of the solicitation.
PURCHASE ORDERS: The official document used in committing city funds toward the
purchase of supplies, equipment and contractual services.
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS: All documents, whether attached or incorporated by
reference, utilized for soliciting proposals.
REQUISITIONS: Standard forms used by departments providing detailed information
as to quantity, description, estimated price, recommended supplier and
signature authorization for requested purchases.
RESPONSIBLE BID: An offer, submitted by a responsible bidder to furnish
supplies, equipment or contractual services in conformity with the
specifications, delivery terms and conditions and other requirements included
in the invitation for bids.
RESPONSIBLE BIDDER: A bidder who submits a responsible bid, who has furnished,
when requested, information and data to prove that his financial resources,
production or service facilities, service reputation and experience are
adequate to make satisfactory delivery of the supplies, equipment or
contractual services on which he bids, and who has not violated or attempted to
violate any provisions of this chapter.
SERVICES: The furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor, not
involving the delivery of a specific end product, other than reports which are
merely incidental to the required performance. It does not include employment
agreements or collective bargaining agreements.
SPECIFICATION: Any description of the physical or functional characteristics,
or of the nature of a supply, service or construction item. It may include a
description of any requirement for inspecting, testing, or preparing a supply,
service or construction item for delivery.
SUPPLIES, MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT: Any and all articles or things which shall
be furnished to or used by any city department. (Ord., 2-23-2000; amd. 2007
Code)
1-11-2: ADMINISTRATION:
This chapter shall be implemented by the purchasing officer. The purchasing
officer shall have the authority to perform the following:
   A.   Administer and maintain the purchasing system and other rules and
regulations established by this chapter;
   B.   Recommend to the city and city council such new or revised purchasing
rules and regulations as deemed desirable and in conformance with other
statutory requirements and to interpret the provisions of this chapter and
applicable statutes;
   C.   Negotiate and recommended execution of contracts for the purchase of
supplies, equipment and contractual services;
   D.   With respect to public improvements, the purchasing officer shall work
with the engineer, attorney and other professional persons retained by the city
to assist in the preparation of plans and specifications, and to discharge
other related duties. The professional person may direct bid openings, conduct
investigations of lowest responsible bidders, supervise construction work and
perform such other tasks as are provided for by their prospective contracts;
   E.   Seek to obtain full and open competition on all purchases as possible;
   F.   Prescribe and maintain such forms as reasonably necessary to the
operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations;
   G.   Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing;
   H.   Supervise the inspection of all supplies and equipment to assure
conformance with specifications;
   I.   Maintain a bidder list, vendor catalog file and other records needed
for the efficient operation of the purchasing system;
   J.   Adopt office policies governing the internal functions of the
purchasing division;
   K.   Exercise general supervision and control over all inventories or
supplies belonging to the city;
   L.   Establish and maintain programs for the inspection, testing and
acceptance of supplies, services and construction;
   M.   Prepare statistical data concerning the procurement and usage of all
supplies, services and construction. (Ord., 2-23-2000)
1-11-3: INTERLOCAL PURCHASING AGREEMENTS:
The city shall have the power to enter into joint purchase agreements with the
state, or subdivision thereof, for the purchase of any commodity or service
wherein it is determined by the city council to be in the best interests of the
city. (Ord., 2-23-2000)
1-11-4: PURCHASING PROCEDURES:
   A.   General: Except as provided in this chapter, purchases of supplies,
equipment and letting of contracts shall follow one of the following
procedures:
   B.   Supplies, Materials And Equipment: "Supplies, materials and equipment"
means any and all articles or things which shall be furnished to or used by any
city department. This purchasing classification includes items ranging from
office supplies to motorized equipment.
      1.   Formal Bidding; Unit Or Project Cost In Excess Of Seven Thousand
Nine Hundred Ninety Nine Dollars:
Step 1. Budget Appropriation: Department receives appropriation for specific
item during budget development process.
Step 2. Purchase Initiation: Department determines time during fiscal year item
purchase is desired.
Step 3. Approval To Initiate Formal Process: Department head informs budget
officer that department desires to make purchase. Budget officer considers
budget and approves initiation of process if budget conditions allow. Budget
officer informs mayor and council of impending purchase.
Step 4. Development Of Bid Specifications: Department head works with
purchasing officer to determine and develop bid specifications.
Step 5. Request For Proposals: Department head and purchasing officer develop
request for proposal and mail or personally deliver to all qualified bidders on
bidder list.
Step 6. Formal Request For Bids: Department head and purchasing officer work
with city recorder to develop formal legal notice for newspaper. City recorder
places ad in newspaper of general circulation.
Step 7. Receipt Of Bids: City recorder receives sealed bids and records
receipt.
Step 8. Bid Opening: Formal public bid opening is held per legal notice. Bids
are read and recorded by city recorder.
Step 9. Bid Analysis: Department head and purchasing officer review and analyze
bid for accuracy and pertinency.
Step 10. Award Of Bid: Department head, budget officer or city attorney inform
successful bidder, prepare contract documents and initiate purchases. Budget
officer informs mayor and council.
Step 11. Consummation Of Purchase: Department head prepares requisition form
and submits to purchasing in the finance department. Purchase order is issued.
Once commodity is received, inspected and approved by department head, payment
is made.
      2.   Open Market Bids; Unit Or Project Cost From Five Hundred Dollars To
Seven Thousand Nine Hundred Ninety Nine Dollars:
Step 1. Budget Appropriation: Department receives general appropriations for
purchases during budget process.
Step 2. Purchase Initiation: Department determines specific needs and time
during fiscal year when purchase is desired.
Step 3. Bid Specification: Department head works with purchasing officer,
determines specific needs and develops bid specifications.
Step 4. Request For Proposals: Department head and purchasing officer develop
request for proposals.
Step 5. Request For Bids: Department head and/or purchasing officer solicit
bids from qualified bidders on bidders list either in writing or fax.
Step 6. Receipt Of Bids: Bids may be submitted either verbally or in writing by
bidder. Bids may be submitted to either department head or purchasing officer.
Step 7. Bid Analysis: Department head and/or purchasing officer review and
analyze bid for accuracy and pertinency.
Step 8. Award Of Bid: Department head and/or purchasing officer select
acceptable bid and contact selected bidder.
Step 9. Consummation Of Purchases: Department head prepares requisition and
submits to purchasing officer. Purchasing officer issues purchase order to
vendor. Once commodity is received, inspected and approved by department head,
payment is made. Purchase is listed on accounts payable and mayor and city
council are informed.
      3.   Open Market; No Bids; Unit Cost From One Dollar To Four Hundred
Ninety Nine Dollars:
Step 1. Budget Appropriation: Department receives general appropriation for
purchases during purchasing process.
Step 2. Purchase Initiation: Department determines time during fiscal year when
purchase is to be initiated.
Step 3. Purchase Specification: Department head and/or purchasing officer
determines specific needs and desired quality/characteristics of item.
Step 4. Price/Quality Checks: Department head working with purchasing officer
checks price and quality from available vendors.
Step 5. Consummation Of Purchase: Department head and/or purchasing officer
determines selected vendor. Department head prepares requisition and purchasing
officer issues purchase order to vendor. Once commodity is received, inspected
and approved by department, payment is made. Purchase is listed on accounts
payable for review by mayor and city council.
      4.   Exception: As an exception to subsections B1 and B2 of this section,
the city shall have the authority to purchase similar items that may be
available through the use of state procurement contracts.
   C.   Purchasing Procedure For Contract Services: "Contract services" are
services provided by a licensed contractor for capital construction projects
and/or professional services such as auditing, architects, engineering and
other professional services.
      1.   Formal Bidding; Capital Construction Projects In Excess Of Twenty
Five Thousand Dollars:
Step 1. Budget Appropriation: Department receives appropriation for specific
item during budget development process.
Step 2. Purchase Initiation: Department determines time during fiscal year item
purchase is desired.
Step 3. Approval To Initiate Formal Process: Department head informs budget
officer that department desires to initiate project. Department head seeks
approval from city council to initiate project. If council approves, process is
initiated.
Step 4. Development Of Bid Specifications: Department head works with
purchasing officer, determines specific needs and develops bid specifications.
Step 5. Request For Proposals: Department head and purchasing officer develop
request for proposals.
Step 6. Formal Request For Bids; Publish: Department head and/or purchasing
officer solicit bids via publication of request for proposal in newspaper of
general circulation, including references.
Step 7. Receipt Of Bids: Written sealed bids must be submitted in writing by
bidder. Bids shall be submitted to city recorder's office.
Step 8. Bid Opening: Formal public bid opening is held per legal notice. Bids
are read and recorded by city recorder.
Step 9. Bid Analysis: Department head and/or purchasing officer review and
analyze bid for accuracy and permanency.
Step 10. Award Of Bid: Department head and/or purchasing officer acceptable bid
and contact selected bidder.
Step. 11. Consummation Of Project/Contract Payments: Contract payment will be
made on a scheduled basis upon approval of purchasing offices head and pursuit
to finance department payment policy. City council will be advised of payments
via accounts payable listing.
Step 12. Report made to city council.
      2.   Open Market Bids; Capital Construction Project Two Hundred Dollars
To Twenty Four Thousand Nine Hundred Ninety Nine Dollars:
Step 1. Budget Appropriation: Department receives general appropriations for
purchases during budget process.
Step 2. Purchase Initiation: Department determines specific needs and time
during fiscal year that project should be initiated.
Step 3. Bid Specification: Department head works with purchasing officer,
determines specific needs and develops bid specifications.
Step 4. Request For Proposals: Department head and purchasing officer develop
request for proposals.
Step 5. Request For Bids: Department head and/or purchasing officer solicit
bids from qualified bidders on bidder list, either in writing or verbally.
Step 6. Receipt Of Bids: Bids may be submitted either verbally or in writing by
bidder. Bids may be submitted to either department head or purchasing office.
Step 7. Bid Analysis: Department head and/or purchasing officer review and
analyze bid for accuracy and pertinency.
Step 8. Award Of Bid: Department head and/or purchasing officer select
acceptable bid and contact selected bidder.
Step 9. Consummation Of Purchase: Department head prepares requisition and
submits to purchasing officer. Purchasing officer issues purchase order to
vendor. Once commodity is received, inspected and approved by department head,
payment is made. Purchase is listed on accounts payable roster and mayor and
council are informed.
      3.   Formal Bidding; Competitive Professional Services:
Step 1. Budget Appropriation: Department receives specific and general
appropriation for professional services during budget development process.
Step 2. Project Initiation: Department determines time during fiscal year that
professional services are needed.
Step 3. Approval To Initiate Acquisition Process: Department head informs
budget officer of desire to acquire professional services. Department head
seeks approval from city council to initiate acquisition process. If council
approves, process is initiated.
Step 4. Development Of Specifications: Department head works with purchasing
officer, determines specific needs and develops bid specifications.
Step 5. Request For Proposals: Department head and purchasing officer develop
request for proposals.
Step 6. Formal Request For Bids: Department head and/or purchasing officer
solicit bids for qualified bidders via publication of request for proposal in
newspaper of general circulation.
Step 7. Receipt Of Bids: Bids must be submitted in writing by bidder. Bids may
be submitted to either department head or purchasing officer.
Step 8. Bid Opening: Formal public bid opening is held per legal notice. Bids
are read and recorded by city recorder.
Step 9. Bid Analysis: Department head and/or purchasing officer review and
analyze bid for accuracy an pertinency.
Step 10. Award Of Bid: Department head, budget officer recommend, council
awards. Department head and/or purchasing officer contact selected bidder.
Step 11. Consummation of project/contract payments will be made on a scheduled
basis upon approval of department head and implementation of payment policy.
City council advised of payment via accounts payable listing.
      4.   Qualification Analysis; Single Source Professional Services:
Step 1. Budget Appropriation: Department receives general appropriation for
purchases during budget process.
Step 2. Project Initiation: Department determines time during fiscal year that
project should be initiated.
Step 3. Approval To Initiate Acquisition Process: Department head informs
budget officer that department desires to initiate project. Department head
seeks approval from city council to initiate project. If council approves,
process is initiated.
Step 4. Professional Services Specification: Department head works with
purchasing officer, determines specific needs and develops specifications.
Step 5. Review Of Professional Qualification: The department head and/or
purchasing officer will obtain and develop a statement of qualifications and
references from sole source provider. Qualified providers will continue to be
considered.
Step 6. Analysis Of Bid: Department head and/or purchasing officer review and
analyze bid for accuracy and pertinency.
Step 7. Award Of Bid: Department head, budget officer recommend. Council
awards, not to exceed, specific time period contract.
   D.   Emergency Purchases: "Emergency purchases" means purchase of supplies,
materials, equipment or services to mitigate a situation which creates a threat
to public health, welfare or safety.
Step 1. Purchase Needs Assessments: The emergency coordinator, department head
or others involved with the emergency will assess and recommend the purchase
need.
Step 2. Consummation Of Purchase: The emergency coordinator, department heads
or others will determine selected vendors. The mayor or his designated agent
will approve purchase.
Step 3. Inform Council: The city council will be informed of all major
emergency purchases as soon as possible. (Ord., 2-23-2000)
1-11-5: DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
All disposal, leases and/or subleases of public property of the city shall be
made, as nearly possible, under the conditions and limitations that follow:
   A.   Whenever property is surplus, unused, obsolete, unsuitable, or
otherwise no longer needed and the estimated reasonable value of the property
is less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), the city administrator may declare
the property surplus and may authorize the disposition of the property.
Property with an estimated reasonable value of five hundred dollars ($500.00)
or more must be declared as surplus property by the city council at a regular
council meeting.
   B.   The city shall advertise through public notice the sale of any personal
property prior to the sale of the property.
   C.   The disposition of city surplus property may be by public sale,
exchange, option to purchase, lease, lease with an option to purchase, trade
in, public auction, sale upon public advertisement by sealed bid, or by any
other lawful and reasonable means.
   D.   No disposition of surplus city property shall be made for less than a
fair market value and consideration unless the city council determines that it
is in the best public interest that disposition of city surplus property be
made for less than fair market value.
   E.   The city council shall designate that the city administrator shall
maintain records of the manner and date of the disposal of all city surplus
property as well as the amount and nature of consideration received for such
property.
   F.   The city, at the direction of the city council, may lease or sublease
any of the city property under fair and appropriate conditions, considering
intended use and value, and the best interests of the city. (Ord. 2014-2, 10-
14-2014)
1-11-6: PERSONAL INVESTMENTS:
   A.   Prohibition: No person involved in making procurement decisions on
behalf of the city may have personal investments in any business entity which
will create a substantial conflict between their private interests and their
public duties.
   B.   Violation: Any person involved in making procurement decisions on
behalf of the city is guilty of a criminal offense if the person asks, receives
or offers to receive any emolument, gratuity, contribution, loan or reward, or
any promise thereof, either for the person's own use or the use or benefit of
any other person or organization. (Ord., 2-23-2000; amd. 2007 Code)
1-11-7: PENALTY; ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Conflict Of Interest: No member of the city council or city employee
may be interested directly or indirectly in any contract entered into by the
city without first a declaration of the conflict of interest and approval of
the contract by the city council. A violation of this provision shall be cause
for removal or other disciplinary action.
   B.   Collusion Among Bidders: Any agreement or collusion among bidders or
prospective bidders in restraint of freedom of competition by agreement to bid
a fixed price, or otherwise, shall render the bids of such bidders void.
   C.   Advance Disclosures: Any disclosure in advance of the opening of bids,
whether in response to advertising or any informal request for bids, made or
permitted by a member of the city council or city employee shall render void
the advertisement or request for bids.
   D.   Gifts Or Loans: No employee, officer, elected officials or board
members shall knowingly receive, accept, take, seek or solicit, directly or
indirectly, any gift or loan for himself/herself or for another person, if the
gift or loan tends to influence the employee in the discharge of his or her
official duties, except under the following circumstances:
      1.   An occasional nonpecuniary gift having a value of less than fifty
dollars ($50.00);
      2.   An award publicly presented;
      3.   Any bona fide loan made in the ordinary course of business; or
      4.   Political campaign contributions actually used in a political
campaign.
Violation of these provisions may subject an employee, officer, elected
official or board member to termination and/or criminal charges. Individuals
desiring more information about these provisions may contact the city
administrator or the city attorney's office. (Ord., 2-23-2000)
   E.   Procurement Officer:
      1.   Any person acting as a procurement officer for the city or who in
any official capacity participates in the procurement of supplies, services,
construction or real property, is guilty of a criminal offense if the person
asks, receives or offers to receive any emolument, gratuity, contribution, loan
or reward, or any promise thereof, from any person interested in the sale of
such supplies, services, construction or real property, either for the person's
own use or the use or benefit of any other person or organization.
      2.   A person who is interested in any way in the sale of any supplies,
services, construction or real property is guilty of a criminal offense if the
person gives or offers to give any emolument, gratuity, contribution, loan or
reward, or any promise thereof, to any person acting as a procurement officer,
or who in any official capacity participates in the procurement of such
supplies, services, construction, real property or insurance, whether it is
given for his own use or for the use or benefit of any other person or
organization. (Ord., 2-23-2000; amd. 2007 Code)
   F.   Employee Or Official Violating: Any employee or official of the city
who shall purchase any goods or services in violation of the procedures set
forth in this chapter shall be subject to penalties up and to possible
termination. (Ord., 2-23-2000)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Reserved
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUSINESS LICENSE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Definitions
3-1-2: License Assessor And Collector
3-1-3: Business License Required; Penalty
3-1-4: Application For License
3-1-5: Fee For License
3-1-6: Payment Dates
3-1-7: Certificate Of License
3-1-8: Transfer Of License Prohibited
3-1-9: Branch Establishments
3-1-10: Joint Business Licenses
3-1-11: Reciprocal Recognition; Delivery Of Goods
3-1-12: Exemptions To License
3-1-13: Revocation Or Denial Of License
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title:
BUSINESS: Includes all activities engaged in within the city carried on for the
purpose of gain or economic profit, except that the acts of employees rendering
service to employers shall not be included in the term "business", unless
otherwise specifically provided.
EACH SEPARATE PLACE OF BUSINESS: Each separate establishment or place of
operation, whether or not operating under the same name, within the city,
including a home or other place of lodging if the same is held out by
advertisements, listings or otherwise as the establishment or place of
operation of a person engaging in the business of selling tangible, personal
property at either retail or wholesale, or both, in the city.
EMPLOYEE: The operator or manager of a place of business and any persons
employed in the operation of said place of business in any capacity and also
any salesperson, agent or independent contractor engaged in the operation of
the place of business in any capacity.
ENGAGING IN BUSINESS: Includes, but is not limited to, the sale of tangible
personal property at retail or wholesale, the manufacturing of goods or
property and the rendering of personal services for others for a consideration
by persons engaged in any profession, trade, craft, business, occupation or
other calling, except the rendering of personal services by an employee to his
employer under any contract of personal employment.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Each separate location maintained or operated by the
licensee within the city from which business activity is conducted or
transacted.
WHOLESALE: A sale of tangible personal property by wholesalers to retail
merchants, jobbers, dealers or other wholesalers for resale, and does not
include a sale by wholesalers or retailers to users or consumers not for
resale, except as otherwise specified.
WHOLESALER: A person doing a regularly organized wholesale or jobbing business
and selling to retail merchants, jobbers, dealers or other wholesalers, for the
purpose of resale. (1978 Code § 9-111, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
3-1-2: LICENSE ASSESSOR AND COLLECTOR:
The city recorder is designated and appointed as ex officio assessor of license
fees for the city. Upon receipt of any application for a license, the city
treasurer shall assess the amount due thereon and shall collect all license
fees based upon the rate established by resolution. He shall enforce all
provisions of this title, and shall cause to be filed complaints against all
persons violating any of the provisions of this title. (1978 Code § 9-113, as
amended; amd. 2007 Code)
3-1-3: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED; PENALTY:
It shall be a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for any person to transact, engage in or carry on any
business, trade, profession, calling or to operate a vending, pinball or coin
operated machine without first receiving the class or type of license required
by the city. (1978 Code § 9-112, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
3-1-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Contents: All applications for license shall include:
      1.   The name of the person desiring a license.
      2.   The kind of license desired, stating the business, calling, trade or
profession to be performed, practiced or carried on.
      3.   The class of license desired, if such licenses are divided into
classes.
      4.   The place where such business, calling, trade or profession is to be
carried on, giving the street number if the business calling, trade or
profession is to be carried on in any building or enclosure having such number.
      5.   The period of time for which such license is desired to be issued.
   B.   Coin Operated Machine Or Device: In the event that the license
application relates to a coin operated machine or device, the application shall
identify the machine or device to which it applies and the location thereof.
(1978 Code § 9-116, as amended)
3-1-5: FEE FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Schedule: The license fees shall be in such amounts as established by
resolution of the city council. (Res. 1986-12, 7-9-1986, eff. retroactive to 7-
1-1986; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Interstate Commerce: None of the license fees provided for by this
section shall be applied as to occasion an undue burden on interstate commerce.
In any case, where a license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for
license to place an undue burden upon such commerce, he may apply to the
license assessor and collector for an adjustment of the fee so that it shall
not be discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair as to such commerce. Such
application may be made before, at or within six (6) months after payment of
the prescribed license fee. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting
testimony, show his method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross
volume of business and such other information as the license assessor and
collector may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such
undue burden on such commerce. The license assessor and collector shall then
conduct an investigation, comparing applicant's business with other businesses
of like nature and shall make findings of fact from which he shall determine
whether the fee fixed by this section is discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair
as to applicant's business and shall recommend to the city council a license
fee for the applicant in an amount that is nondiscriminatory, reasonable and
fair, and if the city council is satisfied that such license fee is the amount
that the applicant should pay, it shall fix the license fee in such amount. If
the regular license fee has already been paid, the city council shall order a
refund of the amount over and above the fee fixed by the city council. In
fixing the fee to be charged, the license assessor and collector shall have the
power to base the fee upon a percentage of gross sales, or employees, or may
use any other method which will assure that the fee assessed shall be uniform
with that assessed on businesses of like nature. (1978 Code § 9-125, as
amended; amd. 2007 Code)
3-1-6: PAYMENT DATES:
All license fees shall be due and payable as follows, except as may be
otherwise provided:
   A.   Payable: Annual fees shall be payable before each calendar year, in
advance. The annual license shall date from January 1 of each year and shall
expire on December 31 of the following year.
   B.   Due: Annual fees shall be due on the first day of each calendar year
and shall become delinquent if not paid by February of each year. (1978 Code
§ 9-114, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Penalty For Late Payment: If any license fee is not paid within thirty
(30) days of the due date, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of such
license fee shall be added to the original amount thereof. No license shall be
issued until all penalties legally assessed have been paid in full. (1978 Code
§ 9-115, as amended)
3-1-7: CERTIFICATE OF LICENSE:
   A.   Contents: All certificates of license shall be signed by the mayor,
attested by the city recorder, and shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name: The name of the person to whom such certificate has been
issued.
      2.   Amount: The amount paid.
      3.   Type: The type of license and the class of such license, if licenses
are divided into classes.
      4.   Term: The term of the license with the commencing date and the date
of its expiration.
      5.   Location: The place where such business, calling, trade or
profession is to be conducted. (1978 Code § 9-117, as amended)
   B.   Display:
      1.   Required: Every certificate of license issued under this chapter
shall be posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place upon the wall of the
building, room or office of the place of business so that the same may be
easily seen. When such certificate of license has expired, it shall be removed
by the licensee from such place in which it has been posted, and no certificate
of license which is not in force and effect shall be permitted to remain posted
upon the wall or any part of any room within the place of business. If the
licensee's business is such that a license cannot be displayed due to the
transient or mobile nature of the business, then the licensee shall carry the
license on his person, ready to be shown upon request by an authorized officer
during all such time or times while the licensee is engaged in or pursuing the
business for which a license is granted.
      2.   Coin Operated Machine: In the event the license is for a coin
operated machine or device, the certificate shall be attached or displayed in
the immediate vicinity of the machine for which it has been issued. (1978 Code
§ 9-118, as amended)
3-1-8: TRANSFER OF LICENSE PROHIBITED:
No license granted or issued under any ordinance of the city shall be assigned
or transferred to any other person. It shall not be deemed to authorize any
person other than therein named to do business or to authorize any other
business, calling, trade or profession than is therein named, unless by
permission of the city council. (1978 Code § 9-119, as amended)
3-1-9: BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS:
A separate license must be obtained for each separate place of business in the
city and each license shall authorize the licensee to engage only in the
business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such
license; provided, that warehouses and distributing places used in connection
with or incident to a business licensed under this chapter shall not be deemed
to be separate places of business or branch establishments. (1978 Code § 9-121,
as amended)
3-1-10: JOINT BUSINESS LICENSES:
Whenever any person is engaged in two (2) or more businesses at the same
location within the city, such person shall not be required to obtain separate
licenses for conducting each of such businesses, but shall be issued one
license which shall specify on its face all such businesses. The license fee to
be paid shall be computed at the highest license fee applicable to any of the
businesses being conducted at such location. The sale of beer or any other
product or service requiring an additional license shall be subject to such
additional licensing requirement. Where two (2) or more persons conduct
separate businesses at the same location, each such person shall obtain a
license for such business and pay the required license fee for such business.
(1978 Code § 9-122, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
3-1-11: RECIPROCAL RECOGNITION; DELIVERY OF GOODS:
   A.   Exceptions: No license shall be required for operation of any vehicle
or equipment in the city when:
      1.   Such vehicle is merely passing through the city.
      2.   Such vehicle is used exclusively in intercity or interstate
commerce.
   B.   Delivery Of Property: No license shall be required by this chapter of
any person whose only business activity in the city is the mere delivery in the
city of property sold by him at a regular place of business maintained by him
outside the city where:
      1.   Such person's business is at the time of such delivery licensed by
the Utah municipality or county in which such place of business is situated;
and
      2.   The authority licensing such business grants to licensees of the
city making deliveries within its jurisdiction the same privileges, upon
substantially the same terms, as are granted by this section; and
      3.   Neither the property delivered nor any of the facilities by which it
was manufactured, produced or processed are subject to inspection by authority
of the city for compliance with health or sanitary standards prescribed by the
city; and
      4.   The truck or other conveyance by which such delivery is made
prominently displays at all times a license plate or symbol issued by the said
licensing authority to evidence such business license. Such plate or symbol
shall identify the licensing authority by which it is issued, shall indicate
that it evidences a license issued thereby, and shall specify the year or term
for which it is effective.
   C.   Certification Of Section: The city recorder shall, at the request of
any person, certify a copy of this section to any municipality or county of the
state to which a copy has not previously been certified. (1978 Code § 9-123, as
amended)
3-1-12: EXEMPTIONS TO LICENSE:
   A.   Tax Exempt Businesses: No license fee shall be imposed under section
3-1-4 of this chapter on any person engaged in business for solely religious,
charitable, eleemosynary or other types of strictly nonprofit purpose which is
tax exempt in such activities under the laws of the United States and the
state, nor shall any license fee be imposed on any person engaged in a business
specifically exempted from municipal taxation and fees by the laws of the
United States or the state; nor shall any license fee be imposed upon any
person not maintaining a place of business within the city who has paid a like
or similar license tax or fee to some other taxing unit within the state and
which taxing unit exempts from its license tax or fee, by reciprocal agreement
or otherwise, businesses domiciled in the city and doing business in such
taxing unit.
   B.   Reciprocal Agreements With Other Agencies: The license assessor and
collector may, with approval of the city council, enter into reciprocal
agreements with the proper officials of other taxing units, as may be deemed
equitable and proper in effecting the exemption provided for in subsection A of
this section. (1978 Code § 9-124, as amended)
3-1-13: REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Failure To Comply; Unlawful Activities: Any license issued pursuant to
the provisions of this code or of any ordinance of the city may be revoked and
any application denied by the city council because of:
      1.   The failure of the licensee or applicant to comply with the
conditions and requirements of this code or any ordinance of the city.
      2.   Unlawful activities conducted or permitted on the premises where the
business is conducted.
   B.   Notice To Licensee: Prior to the revocation of a license or denial of
an application to renew business license, the licensee or applicant shall be
given a notice which shall state in substance that the city council intends to
revoke the business license or deny the application to renew, together with the
reason or reasons therefor, at a regular or special meeting of the city council
(which shall be at least 10 days and not more than 30 days from the date notice
is sent), and that the licensee or applicant has a right to appear, to be
represented by counsel, to hear the evidence against him, to cross examine
witnesses and to present evidence as to why the license should not be revoked
or the application denied.
   C.   Not Applicable To Businesses Not Previously Licensed: The preceding
subsection shall not apply to applications for licenses for businesses which
have not previously been licensed by the city, and such applicants need only be
informed that their application has been denied. (1978 Code § 9-120, as
amended)
CHAPTER 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Sale Of Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited
3-2-1: SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages within the
city. (1978 Code § 9-411, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 3
TAXES
ARTICLE A.  SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-3A-1: Title
3-3A-2: Purpose
3-3A-3: Effective Date
3-3A-4: Tax Imposed
3-3A-5: Penalty
3-3A-1: TITLE:
This article shall be known as the SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCEOF BLANDING CITY.
(Ord. 1990-1, 1-24-1990)
3-3A-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   Authorization Of Tax: The forty eighth session of the Utah legislature
authorized the counties and municipalities of the state to enact sales and use
tax ordinances imposing a one percent (1%) tax.
   B.   Tax Established: It is the purpose of this article to conform the sales
and use tax of the city to conform to the requirements of the sales and use tax
act, Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, as currently amended. (Ord.
1990-1, 1-24-1990)
3-3A-3: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This article shall become effective as of one minute after twelve o'clock (12:
01) A.M., retroactive to January 1, 1990. (Ord. 1990-1, 1-24-1990)
3-3A-4: TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   Imposed:
      1.   From and after the effective date hereof, there is levied and there
shall be collected and paid a tax upon every retail sale of tangible personal
property, services and meals made within the city at the rate of one percent
(1%).
      2.   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other
consumption in the city of tangible personal property from any retailer on or
after the operative date hereof at the rate of one percent (1%) of the sales
price of the property.
      3.   For the purposes of this article, all retail sales shall be presumed
to have been consummated at the place of business delivered by the retailer or
his agent to an out of state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to
an out of state destination. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of
business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall
be as determined under the rules and regulations prescribed and adopted by the
state tax commission. "Public utilities", as defined by Utah Code Annotated
title 54, shall not be obligated to determine the place or places within any
county or municipality where public utilities are rendered, but the place of
sale or the sales tax revenue arising from such service allocable to the city
shall be as determined by the state tax commission pursuant to an appropriate
formula and other rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by it.
   B.   Adoption Of State Codes; Provisions:
      1.   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of the sales and use tax act, all of the
provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, as amended, insofar as
they relate to sales taxes, excepting sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof,
are hereby adopted and made a part of this article as though fully set forth
herein.
      2.   Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code Annotated title 59,
chapter 12, the state of Utah is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the
name of this city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection
shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the city for the word
"state" when the word is used as part of the title of the state tax commission,
or of the constitution of the state of Utah, nor shall the name of the city be
substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the state tax
commission in performing the functions incident to the administration or
operation of this article.
      3.   If an annual license has been issued to a retailer under Utah Code
Annotated section 59-12-106, an additional license shall not be required by
reason of this section.
      4.   There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or charged by
which the tax is measured:
         a.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a
retailer or consumer.
         b.   The gross receipts from the sale of or the cost of storage, use
or other consumption of tangible personal property upon which a sales or use
tax has become due by reason of the sales transaction to any other municipality
and any county in the state under the sales or use tax ordinance enacted by
that county or municipality in accordance with the sales and use tax act. (Ord.
1990-1, 1-24-1990)
3-3A-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1990-1, 1-24-1990; amd. 2007 Code)
ARTICLE B.  TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
SECTION:
3-3B-1: Definitions
3-3B-2: Tax Assessment
3-3B-3: Curtailment
3-3B-4: Application Of Revenues
3-3B-5: Sales Tax License
3-3B-6: Remittances And Collection
3-3B-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this article shall have the following
meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or entity of
any kind.
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION: A place providing temporary sleeping accommodations to
the public and includes:
A. A motel;
B. A hotel;
C. A motor court or recreational vehicle park;
D. An inn;
E. A bed and breakfast establishment;
F. A condominium;
G. A campground operated by a nongovernmental entity;
H. A resort home; and
I. A transient apartment rental.
RENTS: Includes:
A. All room charges, exclusive of charges for food and beverages or related
items subject to sales taxation;
B. Fees for the occupancy of a dwelling or site;
C. Timeshare fees and dues.
TRANSIENT: A person who occupies a public accommodation for thirty (30)
consecutive days or less. (Ord., 7-8-1998, eff. retroactive to 7-1-1998)
3-3B-2: TAX ASSESSMENT:
   A.   There is hereby levied against the purchaser a transient room tax on
the rents charged for transient occupancy of public accommodations within the
city in an amount equal to one percent (1%) of the gross rents charged.
   B.   The transient room tax levied by this article is in addition to all
other taxes or fees imposed by the state, county or the city. (Ord., 7-8-1998,
eff. retroactive to 7-1-1998)
3-3B-3: CURTAILMENT:
The tax imposed by this article shall continue until the governing body repeals
it. (Ord., 7-8-1998, eff. retroactive to 7-1-1998)
3-3B-4: APPLICATION OF REVENUES:
Revenues generated by the tax under this chapter shall be used for general
municipal revenue purposes, including the servicing of bonded indebtedness.
(Ord., 7-8-1998, eff. retroactive to 7-1-1998)
3-3B-5: SALES TAX LICENSE:
Every person or entity collecting rents from public accommodations subject to
this chapter shall obtain a sales tax license, as is required by this code and
Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-106. Persons or entities already having a
valid sales tax license issued by the state tax commission pursuant to those
sections need not obtain any additional license. (Ord., 7-8-1998, eff.
retroactive to 7-1-1998)
3-3B-6: REMITTANCES AND COLLECTION:
   A.   The city shall contract with the state tax commission for assessment,
administration and enforcement services for all taxes assessed under this
chapter. Sums collected shall be remitted to the city in accordance with that
agreement.
   B.   All persons subject to this chapter shall make remittances in
accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the commission and as is
otherwise mandated by state law.
   C.   The tax enacted under this article shall be paid quarterly, on January
1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each calendar year, unless the licensee is
required to submit monthly remittances pursuant to state law or regulations
promulgated by the commission.
Quarterly payments under this chapter are timely, provided all sums owing are
paid in full no later than thirty (30) days from the quarterly payment date.
   D.   Licensees and all vendors or other persons subject to this article,
including persons acquiring a business or its assets, are liable for all
penalties, interest, costs of collection, statutory liens, and related remedies
available to the commission for collection of unpaid taxes under the state
sales and use tax act, which remedies are hereby incorporated by reference.
(Ord., 7-8-1998, eff. retroactive to 7-1-1998)
CHAPTER 4
SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS, PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definitions
3-4-2: Prohibitions
3-4-3: Exceptions
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
CANVASSER OR SOLICITOR: Any individual, whether or not a resident of the city,
traveling either by foot, wagon, motor vehicle or other type of conveyance from
place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or
attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise,
personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services
to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has,
carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether
he is collecting advance payments on such sales; provided, that such definition
shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, firm or
corporation, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent,
railroad boxcar, hotel or motel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any
other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and
taking orders for future delivery.
PEDDLER: Shall include any person, whether or not a resident of the city
traveling by foot, wagon, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from
place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying,
conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables,
fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the
same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who,
without traveling from place to place, shall see or offer the same for sale
from a wagon, motor vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance; and
further provided, that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction
makes deliveries to purchasers as part of a scheme or design to evade the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions
of this chapter. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and
"huckster".
TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT OR ITINERANT VENDOR: Any person, firm or
corporation, whether as owner, agent, cosignee or employee, whether or not a
resident of the city, who engages in a temporary business of selling and
delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city, and who in furtherance
of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor
vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, public room in any hotel, motel, lodging house,
apartment, shop or any street, alley, or other place within the city, for the
exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or
at public auction. The person, firm or corporation so engaged shall not be
relieved from complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by reason of
associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer,
or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or
in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. (1978 Code
§ 9-451, as amended)
3-4-2: PROHIBITIONS:
The practice of going in and upon private residences by solicitors, peddlers,
hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of merchandise who have not
been requested or invited so to do by the owner or occupant of the private
residence for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and
merchandise, or disposing of or peddling or hawking the same, is hereby
declared to be a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1978 Code § 9-452, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
3-4-3: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to the sale of or soliciting of an order for the
sale of milk, dairy products, vegetables, poultry, eggs and other farm and
garden produce when the sale of or orders for the sale of are made or taken by
the producer of the product involved. (1978 Code § 9-453, as amended)
CHAPTER 5
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Defined
3-5-2: License Required; Fee
3-5-3: Bond Required
3-5-4: Records Requirements
3-5-5: Receipt Of Altered Items Prohibited
3-5-6: Hours Of Business
3-5-7: Connection With Other Business Prohibited
3-5-8: Liability Of Licensee
3-5-1: DEFINED:
"Pawnbroker" is defined to be any person who loans money or deals in the
purchase or exchange of personal property, on condition of selling the same
back again to the pledgor or depositor; or who loans or advances money on
personal property by taking a chattel mortgage or security thereon, and takes
or receives such personal property or other indicia of title into his
possession; or any person who sells unredeemed pledges with or without the
contemporary sale of new merchandise to facilitate the sale of merchandise.
(Document, 1984)
3-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in the business of pawnbroker
in the city without having previously obtained a license to operate as a
pawnbroker in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The license fee for a pawnbroker shall be set by city resolution.
   C.   Each license shall be good for the calendar year in which it was
issued.
   D.   The license, after being issued, shall be displayed prominently in the
place of business, and a copy of all ordinances pertaining to the conduct or
transaction of a pawnbroker business shall be posted in a conspicuous place in
the place of business in such a way that it can be easily perused by all who do
business with the pawnbroker. (Document, 1984; amd. 2007 Code)
3-5-3: BOND REQUIRED:
Before any license is issued to a pawnbroker under the provisions of this
chapter, the applicant for such license shall execute and deliver to the city a
bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) executed by a corporate
surety authorized to do business in the state and conditioned upon the faithful
performance of such licensee of all ordinances of the city respecting
pawnbrokers. (Document, 1984; amd. 2007 Code)
3-5-4: RECORDS REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Records Maintained:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person licensed by this chapter to fail
to keep upon the licensed premises a substantial and well bound book in which
he shall enter in the English language at the time of receiving any goods,
including those on consignment and including coins and currency, which coins
and currency are obtained at a price other than face value:
         a.   An accurate account and description of each item received.
         b.   The amount of money paid or value of property traded.
         c.   The date, both day and hour, of receiving said items.
         d.   The name, address and description of the person making the
transaction. The description shall include such items as may be required by the
police department in bulletins given to the licensee from time to time.
         e.   A numerical identifier obtained from identification containing a
photograph of the person making the transaction. The person presenting the
identification must be the same person whose photograph appears on the
identification.
         f.   The date of sale, disposal or scrapping of the item shall be
added when the item is sold, scrapped or otherwise disposed of.
      2.   Each licensee shall also keep a separate record which shall be sent
to the police department and which shall be cross referenced to the book
referred to in subsection A1 of this section and which shall contain, in
addition to the requirements of subsection A1 of this section:
         a.   A certificate, accompanied by the signature of the person
delivering said item that he/she has the legal right to pawn or sell said item.
         b.   A legible fingerprint of the person making the transaction,
preferably the right thumbprint.
         c.   A legible signature of the person receiving the item at the time
of transaction of each item.
      3.   No entries on any record shall be erased, obliterated or defaced,
and the receiving licensee shall keep the record available during business
hours for inspection by any police officer.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of or alter any items
received for a period of thirty (30) days from date of receiving said items,
except to return to the person originally pawning the item. Said items shall be
available for inspection by any police officer during reasonable business hours
while in licensee's possession or control.
      5.   If required to do so by a peace officer of the police department,
any item delivered to the licensed business must be retained and held, until
released by the police department or placed in the custody of a police agency
to be held as evidence.
      6.   The records required to be maintained by this chapter shall be
maintained by the business for a period of two (2) years from date of
transaction.
   B.   Legibility Of Records; Inspection Of Premises: All entries shall be
made with nonerasable ink in a legible manner. The police department shall also
be permitted to have access, during business hours, to all premises licensed
under this chapter for the purpose of the inspection of said premises and
records.
   C.   Copies To Police Department: It shall be unlawful for any person
licensed by this chapter to fail to submit a copy of all entries required to be
maintained by this chapter to the police department upon request by said
agency. (Document, 1984)
3-5-5: RECEIPT OF ALTERED ITEMS PROHIBITED:
No business licensed pursuant to this chapter shall receive any item which has
obviously had the manufacturer's serial number or any owner's personal
identification mark altered, defaced or obviously mutilated or removed.
(Document, 1984)
3-5-6: HOURS OF BUSINESS:
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to receive any goods by way of pawn or
pledge or to keep his place of business open before the hour of seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M., or after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.; provided, however, that on
Saturday of each week and on days preceding legal holidays and the last fifteen
(15) days of December of each year, it shall be lawful for said pawnbroker to
keep his place of business open until eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. (Document,
1984)
3-5-7: CONNECTION WITH OTHER BUSINESS PROHIBITED:
A pawnbroker licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall be exempt from
the licensing ordinances pertaining to a general secondhand dealer, secondhand
previous metal and/or gem dealer and numismatic dealer, which right shall be
included under the pawnbroker's license. A pawnbroker engaged in said
businesses shall comply with all other ordinances pertaining to such
businesses. (Document, 1984)
3-5-8: LIABILITY OF LICENSEE:
The holder of a license, under this chapter, is strictly liable for any and all
acts of his own employees or any violation by them of any provisions of this
chapter. (Document, 1984)
CHAPTER 6
SECONDHAND AND JUNK DEALERS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definitions
3-6-2: Fee For License
3-6-3: Records Requirements
3-6-4: Receipt Of Altered Items Prohibited
3-6-5: Receiving Items From Proscribed Persons
3-6-6: Liability Of Licensee
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning as
herein defined:
ANTIQUE DEALER: Any person engaging in the business of purchasing, bartering,
exchanging or selling old or archaic items which are indicative of an older
culture, excluding numismatic items and precious metals and/or precious gems.
Any dealer who receives antique items that contain precious metals and/or
precious gems must also obtain a secondhand precious metal and/or precious gem
dealer's license. Any dealer who receives numismatic items must also obtain a
numismatic dealer's license.
GENERAL SECONDHAND DEALER: Any person engaging in the business of purchasing,
bartering, exchanging or selling of any secondhand merchandise of value. For
the purpose of this chapter, a "general secondhand dealer" shall not include
any person who: a) deals solely in the purchasing, bartering, exchanging or
selling of used motor vehicles or trailers; b) a store, office or place of
business operated by a charitable organization which acquires secondhand goods
or merchandise exclusively by donation; c) engages in business which requires a
license pursuant to this chapter; and d) a person who deals solely in the
consignment sale of used clothing, provided such clothing does not include
jewelry or furs.
NUMISMATIC DEALER: Any person engaging in the business of purchasing,
bartering, exchanging or selling for a value, other than its face value, any
coins or any currency of the world which, in its original form, was minted or
manufactured for the purpose or use as legal tender in the nation or country of
origin, including those coins and currency which are or were minted or
manufactured for commemorative purposes, providing the commemorative coins were
made for use as legal tender in the nation or country of origin, but shall
exclude gold and silver marketed as commodity items.
SECONDHAND JUNK DEALER: Any person engaging in the business of purchasing,
bartering, exchanging or selling: a) secondhand metals other than precious
metals; or b) glass, rags, rubber, paper or other articles commonly known as
junk, from a fixed place of business. For the purposes of this chapter, a "junk
dealer" shall not include a scrap metal processor licensed under this title.
SECONDHAND PRECIOUS METAL AND/OR PRECIOUS GEM DEALER: Any person engaging in
the business of purchasing, bartering, exchanging or selling, in any form: a)
secondhand gold, silver, platinum or other precious metals or secondhand
articles containing any of such metals; or b) secondhand precious gems or any
secondhand articles containing any precious gems. (Document, 1984; amd. 2007
Code)
3-6-2: FEE FOR LICENSE:
The license fee for each of the businesses defined in this chapter shall be set
from time to time by the city council, and shall include the following:
   A.   General secondhand dealer.
   B.   Secondhand precious metal and/or precious gem dealer.
   C.   Antique dealer.
   D.   Secondhand junk dealer.
   E.   Numismatic dealer. (Document, 1984; amd. 2007 Code)
3-6-3: RECORDS REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Records Maintained:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person licensed by this chapter to fail
to keep upon the licensed premises a substantial and well bound book, in which
he shall enter in the English language at the time of receiving any goods,
including those on consignment, and including coins and currency, which coins
and currency are obtained at a price other than face value:
         a.   An accurate account and description of each item received.
         b.   The amount of money paid or value of property traded.
         c.   The date, both day and hour of receiving said items.
         d.   The name, address and description of the person making the
transaction. The description shall include such items as may be required by the
police department in bulletins given to licensees from time to time.
         e.   A numerical identifier obtained from identification containing a
photograph of the person making the transaction. The person presenting the
identification must be the same person whose photograph appears upon the
identification.
         f.   The date of sale, disposal or scrapping of the item shall be
added when the item is sold, scrapped or otherwise disposed of.
      2.   Each licensee shall also keep a separate record which shall be sent
to the police department and which shall be cross referenced to the book
referred to in subsection A1 of this section and which shall contain, in
addition to the requirements of subsection A1 of this section:
         a.   A certificate, accompanied by the signature of the person
delivering said item, that he/she has the legal right to sell said item.
         b.   A legible fingerprint of the person making the transaction,
preferably the right thumbprint.
         c.   A legible signature of the person receiving the item at time of
transaction of each item.
      3.   No entries on any record shall be erased, obliterated or defaced,
and the receiving licensee shall keep the record available during business
hours for inspection by any police officer.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of or alter any items
received for a period of thirty (30) days from date of receiving said items,
unless expressly permitted to do so by the police department's designated
representative, prior to the expiration of said thirty (30) day period. Said
items shall be available for inspection by any police officer during reasonable
business hours while in licensee's possession or control.
      5.   If requested to do so by a peace officer of the police department,
any item delivered to the licensed business must be retained and held until
released by the police department or placed in the custody of a police agency
to be held as evidence.
      6.   The records required to be maintained by this chapter shall be
maintained by the business for a period of two (2) years from date of
transaction.
   B.   Legibility Of Records; Inspection Of Premises: All entries shall be
made with nonerasable ink in a legible manner. The police department shall also
be permitted to have access, during business hours, to all premises licensed
under this chapter for the purpose of the inspection of said premises and
records.
   C.   Copies To Police Department: It shall be unlawful for any person
licensed by this chapter to fail to submit a copy of all entries required to be
maintained by this chapter to the police department upon request by such
agency. (Document, 1984)
3-6-4: RECEIPT OF ALTERED ITEMS PROHIBITED:
No business licensed pursuant to this chapter shall receive any item which has
obviously had the manufacturer's serial number or an owner's personal
identification mark altered, defaced or obviously mutilated or removed.
(Document, 1984)
3-6-5: RECEIVING ITEMS FROM PROSCRIBED PERSONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed pursuant to this chapter or any
employee of any person licensed pursuant to this chapter to receive any items
from a person who is under eighteen (18) years of age or who is either
intoxicated or obviously mentally deficient. (Document, 1984)
3-6-6: LIABILITY OF LICENSEE:
The holder of a license, under this chapter, is strictly liable for any and all
acts of his own employees for any violation by them of any provisions of this
chapter. (Document, 1984)
TITLE 4
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
4-1-1: Established
4-1-2: Fire Chief Position Created
4-1-3: Powers And Duties Of Fire Chief
4-1-4: Designation Of Emergency Vehicles
4-1-5: Responsibilities, Rights And Restrictions
4-1-1: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby created a fire department to be known as the Blanding City
volunteer fire department. (1978 Code § 10-111, as amended)
4-1-2: FIRE CHIEF POSITION CREATED:
There is hereby created the position of chief of the fire department. (1978
Code § 10-121, as amended)
4-1-3: POWERS AND DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF:
   A.   Supervision Of Department: The fire chief shall have responsibility for
the general supervision of the department.
   B.   Control And Extinguish Fire: During a fire, the fire chief shall have
full authority to take all measures as he shall deem necessary, subject to
state law, to control and extinguish the fire and for that purpose he is hereby
made a special peace officer.
   C.   Report Information To City Council: The fire chief shall, at least
quarterly, report to the city council the condition of the fire equipment, the
number of fires and their causes and the estimated loss therefrom, together
with such other information as the city council may request or as he shall deem
appropriate.
   D.   Enforce Fire Protection And Prevention: The fire chief shall strictly
enforce all of the provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to the
protection against and prevention of fire.
   E.   Maintain Equipment: The fire chief shall maintain the equipment of the
department in good repair and order and ready for use.
   F.   Establish Rules And Regulations: The fire chief, subject to the
approval of the mayor and city council, shall establish rules and regulations
for the operation of the department.
   G.   Delegate Duties: The fire chief may delegate his duties to any person
employed by the department, but such delegation shall not relieve the fire
chief of his responsibility for the performance thereof.
   H.   Investigation Of Fires: The fire chief shall cause all fires to be
promptly investigated to determine the cause of the fire and report the cause
of the fire, the time originated and such other information as may be relevant
to prevent other fires. (1978 Code § 10-122, as amended)
   I.   Employ Firefighters And Personnel: The fire chief may make
recommendations to the mayor relating to the employment of firefighters and
such other personnel as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this
chapter. The fire chief may employ such additional personnel as the mayor and
city council may direct or authorize. (1978 Code § 10-123, as amended)
4-1-4: DESIGNATION OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
Fire trucks and other motor vehicles used to transport fire equipment or fire
personnel are hereby designated authorized emergency vehicles. (1978 Code § 10-
131, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
4-1-5: RESPONSIBILITIES, RIGHTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Removal Of Obstructions At Fire: The officer in charge at any fire may
order the removal or destruction of any fence, building or structure, or that
any utility be closed, cut or removed when deemed necessary to control,
extinguish or prevent the spread of fire. (1978 Code § 10-132, as amended)
   B.   Control Of Persons: All persons present at a fire shall obey the lawful
orders of any firefighters. (1978 Code § 10-133, as amended)
   C.   Interference With Firefighters In Discharge Of Duties: Every person at
the scene of any fire who wilfully disobeys the lawful orders of any public
officer or firefighter, or offers any resistance to or interference with the
efforts of any firefighter, or company of firefighters to extinguish the same,
or engages in any disorderly conduct calculated to prevent the same from being
extinguished, or who forbids, prevents or dissuades others from assisting to
extinguish the same, is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1978 Code § 10-134, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   Unlawful Interference: Any person who shall wilfully hinder any officer
or firefighter in the discharge of his duty at a fire, or in any manner injure,
deface or destroy any engine, hose or other fire apparatus belonging to the
city or who shall interfere with any fire company or person, or who shall
wilfully break or injure any water pipe or interfere with the water or its
source of supply, shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1978 Code § 10-135, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   E.   Investigation After Fire Report: The fire chief, or such other persons
as he shall designate, shall, after extinguishing a fire, make a prompt and
thorough investigation of the cause of the fire, the time the fire began, the
amount of loss and insurance, a description of the affected buildings and
premises, and shall secure all other useful information available, and record
the same in a record book kept for that purpose in the office of the department
and shall report the same to the city council at such time as it may direct.
(1978 Code § 10-136, as amended)
   F.   Right To Enter And Inspect: The fire chief or his deputies, upon
presentation of proper credentials, shall have the right to enter upon any
premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of making inspections. (1978
Code § 10-137, as amended)
   G.   Persons Present Subject To Orders: Every capable person eighteen (18)
years or older present at a fire shall be subject to the orders of the officer
in command and shall render assistance in the manner directed by the officer in
command. (1978 Code § 10-138, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   H.   False Alarm: It shall be unlawful for any person to turn in or report
to the fire department a false alarm or report of a fire or to tamper or remove
any part of the fire alarm system. (1978 Code § 10-139, as amended)
CHAPTER 2
NUISANCES AND WEED CONTROL
SECTION:
4-2-1: Definitions
4-2-2: Declaration Of Nuisance
4-2-3: Toilet Or Sewer Facilities
4-2-4: Restrictions On Blocking Water
4-2-5: Weeds And Deleterious Objects
4-2-6: Nuisances On Property (Rep. by Ord. 2013-1, 8-13-2013)
4-2-7: Abatement Procedure
4-2-8: Penalty For Failure To Comply
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
AUTHOR: Where a nuisance exists upon property and is the outgrowth of the
usual, natural or necessary use of the property, the landlord or his agent, the
tenant or his agent, and all other persons having control of the property on
which such nuisance exists, shall be deemed to be the authors thereof and shall
be equally liable and responsible. Where any such nuisance shall arise from the
unusual or unnecessary use of such property or from the business thereon
conducted, then the occupants and all other persons contributing to the
continuance of such nuisance shall be deemed the authors.
NUISANCE: Whatever is dangerous to human life or health and whatever renders
soil, air, water or food impure or unwholesome is declared to be a nuisance and
unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person either as an owner, agent or
occupant to create or aid in creating or contributing to or maintaining a
nuisance. (1978 Code §§ 10-311, 10-312, as amended)
4-2-2: DECLARATION OF NUISANCE:
   A.   Statement: Every act or condition made, permitted, allowed or continued
in violation of section
4-2-1 of this chapter, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated
and punished as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Specified: Nuisances include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Befouling Water: Befouling water in any spring, stream, well or
water source supplying water for culinary purposes.
      2.   Privies, Cesspools: Allowing any privy vault or cesspool, or other
individual wastewater disposal system, to become a menace to health or a source
of odors or contamination to air or water.
      3.   Garbage Containers, Offensive: Permitting any garbage container to
remain on premises when it has become unclean and offensive.
      4.   Garbage Accumulation: Allowing vegetable waste, garbage, litter,
filth or refuse of any nature to accumulate within or upon any private alley,
yard or area, except when it is temporarily deposited for removal within one
week.
      5.   Manure Accumulation: Permitting the accumulation of manure in
excessive amounts in any stable, stall, corral, feed yard, yard or in any other
building or area in which any animals are kept.
      6.   Slaughterhouses, Feed Yards: Permitting any slaughterhouse, market,
meat shop, stable, feed yard or other place or building wherein any animals are
slaughtered, kept, fed or sold to remain unclean or in any state or condition
detrimental to health or creating a nuisance because of odors, or in which
flies or rodents breed.
      7.   Discharging Offensive Water Or Liquid Waste: Discharging or placing
any offensive water, chemical spray, liquid waste or refuse of any kind into
any street, alley, sidewalk, gutter, stream, wash, natural watercourse, ditch,
canal or any vacant lot or which, as the result of continued discharge, will
render the place of discharge offensive or likely to become so.
      8.   Collecting Grease, Offensive Matter: Keeping or collecting any stale
or putrid grease or other offensive matter longer than necessary to dispose of
according to current health and safety codes.
      9.   Flies And Mosquitoes: Having or permitting upon any premises any fly
or mosquito producing condition after being notified by the local authority
having jurisdiction.
      10.   Public Drinking Vessels: Keeping any drinking vessel for public use
without providing a method of decontamination between uses.
      11.   Public Bathing In Or Near Drinking Fountain: Permitting or
performing any public bathing in or near any public drinking fountain.
      12.   Boarding House Or Factory, Sanitary Condition: Failing to furnish
any dwelling house, boarding house or factory or other place of employment with
such temporary toilet facilities, water closets, sinks or other facilities as
may be required to maintain the same in sanitary condition.
      13.   Stagnant Water; Offensive Substances: Permitting any lot or
excavation to become the repository of stagnant water or any decaying or
offensive substances.
      14.   Obstructing Public Ways, Watercourses, Parks: Obstructing or
tending to obstruct or interfere with or render dangerous for passage any
street or sidewalks, lake, stream, drainage, canal or basin, or any public park
without first obtaining the written permission of the city council. (1978 Code
§ 10-313, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Enumeration: The types of nuisances above stated shall be deemed in
addition to and in no way a limitation of the nuisances subject to this
chapter. (1978 Code § 10-314, as amended)
4-2-3: TOILET OR SEWER FACILITIES:
All toilet or sewer facilities shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with state law and city ordinances. All such facilities that do not
comply with such provisions are hereby declared to be a nuisance and are
subject to abatement as herein prescribed. (1978 Code § 10-315, as amended;
amd. 2007 Code)
4-2-4: RESTRICTIONS ON BLOCKING WATER:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any drainage system,
canal, ditch, conduit or other watercourse of any kind or nature, natural or
artificial, to become so obstructed as to cause the water to back up and
overflow therefrom, or to become unsanitary.
   B.   Maintenance of any such watercourse in such condition shall constitute
a nuisance and the same shall be subject to abatement. (1978 Code § 10-316, as
amended)
4-2-5: WEEDS AND DELETERIOUS OBJECTS:
   A.   Weeds Defined: Weeds shall include any vegetation commonly referred to
as a weed or which shall have been designated a noxious weed by the state
commissioner of agriculture. (1978 Code § 10-322, as amended)
   B.   Standard Of Weed Control: It is hereby declared that the above stated
weeds constitute a nuisance when they create a fire hazard, a source of
contamination or pollution of the water, air or property, a danger to health, a
breeding place or habitation for insects or rodents or other forms of life
deleterious to humans or are unsightly or deleterious to their surroundings.
(1978 Code § 10-323, as amended)
   C.   Penalty: It shall be an infraction and, upon conviction, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for any person owning or occupying real property to allow
weeds to grow higher than twelve inches (12") on such property or not to remove
from such property any cuttings of such weeds or any refuse, unsightly or
deleterious objects after having been given notice from the city official.
(1978 Code § 10-321, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
4-2-6: NUISANCES ON PROPERTY:
(Rep. by Ord. 2013-1, 8-13-2013)
4-2-7: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Nuisance Inspector:
      1.   Established: There is hereby established the position of nuisance
inspector, whose duties it shall be to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Until another person is designated, the chief of police shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter. More than one person may be appointed to act as
nuisance inspector under this section. (1978 Code § 10-351, as amended)
      2.   Complaint: Upon the receipt of a written complaint by two (2) or
more persons an agent of the city designated as the nuisance inspector shall
investigate the complaint to determine whether a nuisance exists according to
the definition in section
4-2-1 of this chapter. To file a complaint, a person must claim to have an
affected personal or property interest. (Ord. 2013-1, 8-13-2013)
      3.   Existence Of Objectional Condition: If he concludes there exists an
objectionable condition in violation of this chapter, the nuisance inspector
shall:
         a.   Ascertain the names of the owners and occupants and descriptions
of the premises where such objects and conditions constituting a nuisance
exist.
         b.   Serve notice in writing upon the owner and occupant of such
premises, either personally or by mailing notice prepaid, addressed to the
owner and occupant at their last known post office addresses as disclosed by
the records of the county assessor, or as otherwise ascertained, requiring such
owner or occupant, or both, as the case may be, to eradicate or destroy and
remove the nuisance within such time as the nuisance inspector may designate;
provided, that any person notified pursuant to this subsection shall be given
at least ten (10) days, but not more than twenty (20) days, as determined by
the nuisance inspector following the date of service of such notice, to correct
the objectionable condition.
         c.   The notice shall:
            (1)   Contain a specific statement of the nature of the violation
and generally describe the premises on which the violation exists.
            (2)   Inform the owner, occupant or other person that in the event
he disagrees with the determination of the nuisance inspector and does not wish
to comply with the provisions of the notice, or that he objects to the factual
or legal basis for the notice, he may request in writing a hearing before the
city council at a time and place to be set by the city council. A written
application for a hearing shall state the time within which the person must
conform to the provisions of the notice.
            (3)   Inform the person that in the event he fails or neglects to
correct the objectionable condition, the city will correct the objectionable
condition and will collect the costs of so correcting the objectionable
condition by either a court action, in which case he will be assessed such
costs, together with reasonable attorney fees and court costs, or will charge
the cost of correcting the violation against the property as a tax. (1978 Code
§ 10-351, as amended)
         d.   In the event the owner or occupant makes such request for a
hearing, the city council shall set the time and place for hearing objections,
and the city recorder shall notify the owner, occupant or other persons having
an interest in said property of the condition thereof in writing of the time
and place at which they may appear and be heard. The hearing shall be heard
within less than twenty five (25) days from the date of service or mailing of
the notice of hearing. (1978 Code § 10-351, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Hearing:
      1.   Informal Hearing; Written Decision: At the written request of an
owner, occupant or other person having an interest in property which is the
subject of a notice to remove or abate weeds, objectionable conditions or
objects from the property, the city council shall conduct an informal hearing
(which need not be reported), wherein such persons may present such evidence
and argument as is pertinent to the question of whether or not the removal or
abatement of the objects or conditions is properly within the purview of this
chapter. The city council shall also permit the presentation of evidence and
argument by the nuisance inspector and other interested parties. Thereafter,
within not less than five (5) nor more than twenty five (25) days, the city
council shall, over the signature of the mayor, or such other member of the
city council as it may designate, render its written decision, a copy of which
shall be mailed to or served upon the owner or any other person to whom the
original notice was given by the nuisance inspector. (1978 Code § 10-352, as
amended; amd. 2007 Code)
      2.   Notice Of Decision; Abatement By Owner Or Occupant: In the event the
decision of the city council upholds the determination of the nuisance
inspector, the notice originally given by the nuisance inspector as above
provided shall be deemed to be sufficient to require the owner or occupant to
remove or abate the objectionable objects or conditions, and he shall have up
to ten (10) days from the date of notice of the decision within which to
conform thereto, unless additional time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, is
authorized by the nuisance inspector.
      3.   Time Period For Compliance: In the event that the decision of the
city council either overrules or modifies the determination of the nuisance
inspector, the written decision of the city council shall apprise the owner or
occupant of that fact and set forth the details and extent to which the owner
or occupant must make removal or other abatement of the objectionable objects
or conditions, if any. The owner or occupant shall be required to conform to
the decision of the city council within ten (10) days after service or mailing
of a copy of the decision, and the decision shall be deemed to be the modified
decision of the nuisance inspector, unless additional time is authorized by the
city council.
      4.   Filing Of Amended Notice: The nuisance inspector shall file an
amended notice and proof of service of notice and file the same in the office
of the county treasurer. (1978 Code § 10-352, as amended)
   C.   Failure To Comply; Abatement By City: If any owner, occupant or other
person having an interest in land described in such notice of decision to whom
the notice was given shall fail or neglect to conform to the requirements
thereof relating to the eradication, destruction or removal of such weeds,
garbage, refuse, objects or structures, the nuisance inspector shall employ all
necessary assistance to cause such objectionable objects or conditions to be
removed or destroyed at the expense of the city. (1978 Code § 10-353, as
amended)
   D.   Itemized Statement: The nuisance inspector shall prepare an itemized
statement of all expenses incurred in the removal and destruction of nuisances,
and shall mail a copy thereof to the owner or occupant or both or to persons
having an interest in the property, demanding payment within twenty (20) days
of the date of mailing. The notice shall be deemed delivered when mailed by
registered mail, addressed to the last known address of the property owner,
occupant or persons having an interest in the property. (1978 Code § 10-354, as
amended)
   E.   Failure To Make Payment: In the event the owner, occupant or person
having an interest in the property fails to make payment of the amount set
forth in the statement to the city treasurer within the twenty (20) days, the
nuisance inspector may either cause suit to be brought in an appropriate court
of law or may refer the matter to the county treasurer as provided in this
chapter. (1978 Code § 10-355, as amended)
   F.   Collection:
      1.   Lawsuit: In the event collection of expenses of destruction and
removal are pursued through the courts, the city shall sue and receive judgment
for all of said expenses of destruction and removal, together with reasonable
attorney fees, interest and court costs, and shall execute upon such judgment
in the manner provided by law. (1978 Code § 10-356, as amended)
      2.   Taxes: In the event that the nuisance inspector elects to refer the
expenses of destruction or removal to the county treasurer for inclusion in the
tax notice of the property owner, he shall make in triplicate an itemized
statement of all expenses incurred in the destruction and removal of the same,
and shall deliver three (3) copies of the statement to the county treasurer
within ten (10) days after the completion of the work of destroying or removing
such weeds, refuse, garbage, objects or structures. Thereupon, the costs of the
work shall be pursued by the county treasurer in accordance with the provisions
of Utah Code Annotated section 10-11-4, as amended, and the recalcitrant owner
shall have such rights and shall be subject to such powers as are thereby
granted. (1978 Code § 10-357, as amended)
   G.   Criminal Proceedings: The commencement of criminal proceedings for the
purpose of imposing penalties for violations of this chapter shall not be
conditioned upon prior issuance of a notice or the granting to the defendant an
opportunity to abate or remove the nuisance. The provisions of this chapter
relating to notice and abatement shall be deemed merely alternative and
additional methods of securing conformity to the provisions of this chapter.
(1978 Code § 10-358, as amended)
4-2-8: PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO COMPLY:
   A.   Class C Misdemeanor: Any owner, occupant or person having an interest
in property subject to this chapter who shall fail to comply with the notice or
order given pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense and further sum of two hundred ninety nine
dollars ($299.00) for each and every day such person fails to comply beyond the
date fixed for compliance.
   B.   Criminal Proceedings: Compliance by any owner, occupant or person to
whom a notice has been given subsequent to the commencement of criminal
proceedings as provided in this chapter shall not be admissible in any criminal
proceeding brought pursuant to this section. (1978 Code § 10-359, as amended;
amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 3
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: Disposal Of Community Waste
4-3-3: Collection Of Garbage
4-3-4: Service Charge
4-3-5: Method Of Payment
4-3-6: Containers
4-3-7: Time And Place Of Pick Up
4-3-8: Rules, Regulations And Requirements
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
COMMERCIAL GARBAGE: Refers to garbage produced in commercial establishments,
public or quasi-public institutions or establishments, including restaurants,
hotels, motels and similar establishments.
COMMUNITY WASTE: Lawn cuttings, clippings from bushes and shrubs, leaves and
trees and tree branches.
CONTAINER OR REGULATION CONTAINER: A type of garbage or trash container of
plastic or other approved material and having a tight fitting lid or properly
and sufficiently treated weather resistant paper bags manufactured specifically
for use in garbage and refuse collection.
GARBAGE: Waste from the preparation, handling, storing, cooking or consumption
of food and food products.
REFUSE: All waste matter, except garbage, attending or resulting from the
occupancy of residences, apartments, hotels or other places of dwelling and
from the operation of a business. Refuse shall not be deemed to include
industrial waste or waste matter resulting from the construction, demolition or
repair of a building or other structure.
RESIDENTIAL GARBAGE: Garbage produced in places of private residence and dining
halls not open to the public. (1978 Code § 10-411, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
4-3-2: DISPOSAL OF COMMUNITY WASTE:
   A.   Community waste may be disposed of by residents and business
establishments in vehicles provided by them subject to regulation by the city
council as to the places of disposal and as to the type of vehicle used to
avoid spillage upon public ways of the municipality, hazards to safety and the
prevention of nuisances.
   B.   The city council from time to time may provide for the collection and
disposal of such types of community waste as it may decide to collect and haul
in connection with its regular garbage, waste collection and disposal service.
In the event community waste disposal service should require a charge to be
made by the municipality, the determination of the charge will be made by
negotiation with the residents or business enterprises, and the residents or
business enterprises will be given an opportunity to choose from among services
offered by persons other than the municipality. (1978 Code § 10-419, as
amended)
4-3-3: COLLECTION OF GARBAGE:
   A.   The city or its agent shall collect, remove and dispose of all
residential garbage, the removal of which is not otherwise provided for by the
establishment or institution as herein provided. All garbage and refuse shall
be collected, removed and disposed of with such frequency and in such manner as
the city council may from time to time establish by regulation.
   B.   Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, no garbage or
refuse shall be moved or hauled away or transported upon the streets or public
ways of the city, except by the city or its agent and except by authorized
persons hauling commercial garbage or refuse as hereinafter provided. It is
hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, except as permitted in this
chapter, to haul or remove garbage or refuse in the city.
   C.   Commercial establishments, public or quasi-public, institutions and
establishments creating commercial garbage, may remove commercial garbage
themselves or may employ the services of authorized contractors to remove
commercial garbage. Authorized garbage haulers must apply for and receive
permission to do so from the city recorder. Haulage of refuse must be done in
the manner, at such times and in such vehicles as may be approved for such
purposes as the city council may from time to time by regulation provide.
   D.   Nothing contained in this section shall preclude persons from hauling
their own garbage, trash or community waste over the streets and alleys of the
city in vehicles and containers.
   E.   Nothing in this section shall be construed as eliminating the charge
made for garbage service. (1978 Code § 10-412, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
4-3-4: SERVICE CHARGE:
   A.   All residents and all business establishments within the city shall pay
the city garbage service charges in such amounts as established by resolution
of the city council.
   B.   Charges shall apply to all residences whether or not they have also
elected to haul their own garbage or employ the services of authorized garbage
haulers.
   C.   If a dwelling unit or a place of business has become vacant, the owner
or possessor of the site may make arrangements with the city recorder for no
garbage collection charges during the continued vacancy of the premises.
   D.   The mayor, with the consent of the governing body, may excuse needy
widows and elderly persons who are not reasonably capable of paying the monthly
charge for residential collection of garbage from the payment of the
residential rate for such period of time as may be deemed proper or necessary.
(1978 Code § 10-413, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
4-3-5: METHOD OF PAYMENT:
The garbage service charges imposed by this chapter shall be added to the
charge made for utilities furnished through the utility system of the city, and
shall be billed and collected in the same manner as other utility service
charges are billed and collected. (1978 Code § 10-414; amd. 2007 Code)
4-3-6: CONTAINERS:
   A.   Requirements: All garbage and refuse shall be placed in suitable and
sufficient garbage receptacles as provided by the city, either receptacles with
tight fitting lids or properly and sufficiently treated water resistant paper
bags manufactured specifically for use in garbage and refuse collection, or
plastic bags manufactured specifically for use in garbage and refuse
collection.
   B.   Size: Except for containers provided by the city, containers shall not
exceed a thirty (30) gallon capacity for receiving and holding garbage, market
waste or other refuse which may accumulate. (1978 Code § 10-416, as amended;
amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Closing Of Containers Required: All garbage and market waste must be
placed in rainproof and flyproof receptacles of the type herein required and
the receptacle shall be tightly closed in such manner as to prevent offensive
odors or flies. (1978 Code § 10-417, as amended)
4-3-7: TIME AND PLACE OF PICK UP:
   A.   All garbage and refuse subject to garbage collection by the city shall
be placed at a pick up point at or near the premises designated from time to
time by regulations adopted by the city council and at such time or times as
shall be designated by regulations of the city council.
   B.   Until otherwise provided by regulation, garbage and refuse must not be
set out upon the street for collection prior to the evening of the day before
collection and must be set out on the day of collection before the hour of
collection designated by regulations of the city council.
   C.   All empty receptacles must be removed from the street as soon as
practicable after being emptied, and in every case, must be removed from the
street the same day they are emptied. Receptacles shall not be permitted to
remain on any street longer than may be necessary for the removal of the
contents. (1978 Code § 10-418, as amended)
4-3-8: RULES, REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Accumulation Of Garbage: It shall be unlawful for any person to
accumulate garbage or refuse or cause garbage or refuse to be deposited upon
any street or alley or upon any premises in the city without express permission
from the city administrator. The city administrator may permit the feeding or
processing of garbage or refuse upon premises properly equipped and maintained
so as to prevent the creation of a nuisance or a hazard to health, or permit
the depositing of ashes and other dry material for filling purposes at such
places as the city administrator may designate and under such restrictions as
the city council may by regulation impose. Additionally, the city planner, in
accordance with land use laws, may grant to any person permission for sorting,
bailing and marketing trade waste upon premises properly equipped and
maintained. (1978 Code § 10-415, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Burning Of Refuse Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
burn garbage, market waste, manure or other refuse in the open air or in any
furnace or stove within the city. (1978 Code § 10-420, as amended)
   C.   Dumping Refuse Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
place, deposit, or dump garbage, ashes, market waste, paper boxes, cartons,
trade waste, manure or human excrement, or any other refuse upon any lot within
the city, whether such lot is occupied or vacant, and whether such person so
placing, depositing or dumping such refuse is the owner, tenant, occupant or
lessor thereof or has the same under his jurisdiction and control. (1978 Code
§ 10-421, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   Limitations Upon Dumping: Dumping waste and garbage shall be permitted
only in such places as are designated by the city council. Dumping shall be
subject to such rules and regulations as may be formulated by the city council.
(1978 Code § 10-422, as amended)
   E.   Regulations Adopted By City Council: The city council may adopt such
regulations as in its opinion are necessary to implement this chapter and its
objectives. (1978 Code § 10-423, as amended)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL HEALTH REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Unwholesome Food
4-4-2: Removal Of Garbage
4-4-3: Discharge Of Sewage Pollution
4-4-4: Inadequate Plumbing
4-4-1: UNWHOLESOME FOOD:
It is a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for any person to sell or offer for sale any unwholesome
food or beverage which has been condemned by any government food inspector.
(1978 Code § 10-223, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
4-4-2: REMOVAL OF GARBAGE:
   A.   Upon Vacating Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person, upon
vacating or moving from any dwelling, storeroom or other building, to fail to
remove all garbage, rubbish or ashes from such building or premises and the
grounds appurtenant thereto, or to fail to place the same in a thoroughly
sanitary condition within twenty four (24) hours after the premises are
vacated.
   B.   Rental Property: In situations where rental property is so vacated, the
owner of the property shall be concurrently responsible with the tenant thereof
for compliance with this section. (1978 Code § 10-224, as amended)
4-4-3: DISCHARGE OF SEWAGE POLLUTION:
   A.   Conform To Standards: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge
or permit the discharge of any sewage or filth from any premises into and upon
any public highway, stream, watercourse or public place, or into any drain,
cesspool or private wastewater disposal system which does not conform to
standards established by the state division of health or by the city.
   B.   Connection To Public Sewer System: The building inspector may order a
connection for sewage disposal to be made with the public sewer system provided
by the city if such is available; provided, that the public sewer system is
within three hundred feet (300') 1  of the premises (based on gravity flow).
   C.   Prevention: The building inspector shall use all due measures to
prevent the fouling of any streams, watercourses, reservoirs or any source
furnishing water to any of the inhabitants of the city. (1978 Code § 10-225, as
amended; amd. 2007 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 8-3-5D of this code.
4-4-4: INADEQUATE PLUMBING:
The building inspector shall have power to require the prompt repair of all
leaks or other defects in plumbing throughout the city. He shall have power to
condemn and abate all plumbing which is deficient under the plumbing
ordinances. When, in the opinion of the building inspector, a change in
occupants, type of business or other cause requires changes in plumbing, he
shall have the power to compel the installation of an increased number of
plumbing fixtures and a change in their type or capacity, and to make such
other alterations or increases as may be necessary for the health and safety of
the occupants of the building and of the public generally. (1978 Code § 10-226,
as amended)
CHAPTER 5
LITTER; HANDBILLS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Definitions
4-5-2: Handbills And Posters; Restricted Activity
4-5-3: Litter Regulations
4-5-4: Handbill Regulations
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter:
AUTHORIZED RECEPTACLE: A public or private litter storage and collection
receptacle.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature:
A. Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
B. Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest in sales thereof;
C. Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit. However, the terms of this
clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is
taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting,
theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the
same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of
information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good
morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, that nothing contained
in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place
of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind without
a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state,
or under any ordinance of the city, or;
D. Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any
person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
GARBAGE: Waste from the preparation, cooking or consumption of food, condemned
food products and all refuse and waste from the handling, storage, preparation
and sale of produce. Garbage originates primarily in kitchens, stores, markets,
restaurants, hotels and other places where food is handled, stored, sold,
cooked and consumed.
LITTER: "Garbage", "refuse" and "rubbish", as defined herein, and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety, welfare or appearance of the city.
NEWSPAPER: Any newspaper of general or local circulation or any periodical or
current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per
year and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or
literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill
or newspaper.
PARK: A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other
public area in the city, owned or used by the city.
REFUSE: Putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes),
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals and solid
market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible waste, such as paper, wrapping, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans,
yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
VEHICLE: Every device in, on or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively on
stationary rails or tracks. (1978 Code § 10-431, as amended)
4-5-2: HANDBILLS AND POSTERS; RESTRICTED ACTIVITY:
No person or business shall post, stick, stamp, paint or otherwise fix, or
cause the same to be done by any person, any notice, placard, bill, card,
poster, advertisement or other paper or device calculated to attract the
attention of the public, or upon any sidewalk, curb or any other portion or
part of any public way or public place or any lamppost, electric light,
telegraph, telephone or railway structure, hydrant, shade tree or tree box, or
upon the columns, trusses, girders, railings, gates or other parts of any
bridge or other public structure or building, or upon any pole, box or fixture
of the fire alarm or police telegraph system, except such as may be authorized
or required by the laws of the United States or state, and the ordinances of
the city. (1978 Code § 10-449, as amended)
4-5-3: LITTER REGULATIONS:
   A.   Public Places: No person shall throw or deposit litter in or on any
street, sidewalk or other public place except:
      1.   In authorized receptacles for collection or in official city garbage
dumps; or
      2.   For collection as authorized by the city council. (1978 Code § 10-
432, as amended)
   B.   Placement In Receptacles: Persons placing litter in authorized
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or
deposited by the elements on any street, sidewalk or other public place or on
private property. (1978 Code § 10-433, as amended)
   C.   Sweeping Into Gutters Prohibited: No person shall sweep into or deposit
in any gutter, street or other public place the accumulation of litter from any
building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway, except as
authorized by the city council. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep
the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. (1978 Code § 10-434, as
amended)
   D.   Merchants' Duty To Keep Sidewalks Clear: No person owning or occupying
a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other
public place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any
public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of
business shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of
litter. (1978 Code § 10-435, as amended)
   E.   Thrown From Vehicle: No person, while a driver or passenger in a
vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter on any street or other public place, or
on private property. (1978 Code § 10-436, as amended)
   F.   Loads Causing Litter: No person shall drive or move any truck or other
vehicle unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited on any street, alley or other
public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck, the
wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other
public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any
kind. (1978 Code § 10-437, as amended)
   G.   Parks: No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park, except in
authorized receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements on any part of the park or on
any street or other public place. Where authorized receptacles are not
provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided
herein. (1978 Code § 10-438, as amended)
   H.   Lakes And Fountains: No person shall throw or deposit litter in any
fountain, pond, lake, stream or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere
within the city. (1978 Code § 10-439, as amended)
   I.   Occupied Private Property: No person shall throw or deposit litter on
any occupied private property, whether owned by such person or not, except that
the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements on any street,
sidewalk or other public place or on any private property. (1978 Code § 10-447,
as amended)
   J.   Vacant Lots: No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or
vacant private property, whether or not owned by such person. (1978 Code § 10-
448, as amended)
4-5-4: HANDBILL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Throwing Or Distributing In Public Places; Penalty: No person shall
throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any
sidewalk, street or other public place within the city. Unless otherwise
authorized by the city administrator, it is an infraction and, upon conviction,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for any person to hand out, distribute or sell any
commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not
be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place for any person to
hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any
noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. (1978 Code § 10-440,
as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Placing On Vehicles: Unless otherwise authorized by the city
administrator, no person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or on any vehicle; provided however, that it shall not be unlawful
in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to
the receiver thereof a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who
is willing to accept it. (1978 Code § 10-441, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Depositing On Uninhabited Or Vacant Premises: No person shall throw or
deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any private premises
which is temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. (1978 Code § 10-
442, as amended)
   D.   Prohibiting Distribution Where Properly Posted: No person shall throw,
deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill on any private
premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on
said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign being
the words "no trespassing", "no peddlers or agents", "no advertisements", or
any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises
do not desire to be molested or to have their right of privacy disturbed or to
have any such handbills left on such premises. (1978 Code § 10-443, as amended)
   E.   Distributing At Inhabited Private Premises: No person shall throw,
deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on private
premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such
handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or on
such private premises. However, in case of inhabited private premises which are
not posted, as provided in this section, such person, unless requested by
anyone on such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in
or on such inhabited private premises if such handbill is so placed or
deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted
about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except
that mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by federal postal law or
regulations. (1978 Code § 10-444, as amended)
   F.   Exception For Mail And Newspapers: The provisions of this chapter shall
not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers,
except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner so
as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements on any street,
sidewalk or other public place or on private property. (1978 Code § 10-445, as
amended)
   G.   Posting Notice Prohibited: No person shall post or affix any notice,
poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the
public, to any lamppost, public utility pole or shade tree, or on any public
structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. (1978
Code § 10-446, as amended)
CHAPTER 6
OFFENSIVE BUSINESSES AND FACILITIES
SECTION:
4-6-1: Defined
4-6-2: Permit Required
4-6-3: Application For Permit
4-6-4: Issuance Of Permit
4-6-5: Control Of Animal And Fowl Facilities
4-6-6: Existing Businesses And Facilities
4-6-1: DEFINED:
"Offensive businesses", within the meaning of this chapter, shall include, but
not be limited to, packing houses, dairies, tanneries, canneries, renderies,
junk or salvage yards, bone factories, slaughter houses, butcher shops, soap
factories, foundries, breweries, distilleries, livery stables, blacksmith
shops, or any other enterprise or establishment which creates excessive odors,
fumes, smoke, gases or noises. (1978 Code § 10-241, as amended)
4-6-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall commence or change the location of an offensive business or
establishment in or within one mile of the limits of the city without first
filing an application for a permit to do so with the city recorder. (1978 Code
§ 10-241, as amended)
4-6-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
The application for a permit shall specify the location at which the business
or establishment is to be operated and maintained or the new location to which
it is to be moved. The application shall describe the type of activity which
will be conducted and describe the manner in which the business or
establishment shall eliminate, control, or modify the emission by the business
of the undesirable odors, fumes, noises, and other noisome features and the
manner in which it shall be screened from public view, if its appearance is
offensive. (1978 Code § 10-241, as amended)
4-6-4: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
   A.   Report And Recommendation: The city recorder shall cause a study to be
made of the proposed business or relocation of any offensive business or
establishment by the board of health and by personnel engaged in the inspection
of buildings and other facilities. A report and recommendation shall be made to
the city council. The city council, after review, may grant to the applicant an
opportunity to be heard and present additional facts. Thereafter the city
council may:
      1.   Deny the application.
      2.   Recommend a modification thereof.
      3.   Grant a limited permit to enter into the business or make the change
of location subject to the requirement that the business or facility conform to
standards established by the city council with reference to controlling the
offensive features of the business.
   B.   Revocation Of Permit: In the event a permit is granted, it shall be
subject to revocation either upon failure of the operator or owner to conduct
his business in the manner specified by the city council at the time of the
granting of the permit, or because a change of circumstances makes the
continued operation or maintenance of the business or facility a public
nuisance.
   C.   Modification Of Permit: The city council shall have power to revoke or
modify the permission to operate and maintain the business in such a manner as
it deems necessary for the public good. (1978 Code § 10-242, as amended)
4-6-5: CONTROL OF ANIMAL AND FOWL FACILITIES:
   A.   Location And Management: The city council shall have the power to
prohibit or control the location and management of any offensive, unwholesome
business or establishment in or within one mile of the city and may compel the
owner of any pigsty, privy, barn corral, fur bearing animal farm, feed yard,
poultry farm, or other unwholesome or nauseous house or place to cleanse, abate
or remove the same.
   B.   Examination Of Operation: The city council may, on its own initiative
and shall, on complaint of a member of the public, examine the operation,
control or location of any business or facility for the purpose of determining
whether or not the operation of such business or facility should be improved so
as to minimize the offensive and unwholesome characteristics or whether the
business or activity should be moved or abated.
   C.   Notification Of Abatement: In the event that the city council decides
that the business or facility should be abated, removed, or controlled, it
shall notify the owner or operator of the business or facility of such fact.
   D.   Hearing; Limited Permit: After a hearing, the city council may issue a
limited permit wherein it may prescribe the specifications and standard which
must be followed by the business or facility in order to be permitted to
continue in operation.
   E.   Abatement Or Removal: Upon a determination by the city council that the
business or facility is a nuisance, it shall have power to order the abatement
or removal of the facility or establishment. If the owner fails to conform to
such order, the city council shall have power to bring all necessary legal
proceedings to force removal, abatement or adherence to standards. (1978 Code
§ 10-244, as amended)
4-6-6: EXISTING BUSINESSES AND FACILITIES:
   A.   Investigation By City Council: The city council may require an
investigation of any existing offensive business or facility to determine
whether or not it should be permitted to remain in existence in or within one
mile of the city limits. If the city council determines that the continuation
of the business or facility has become a nuisance to persons situated within
the city limits or that ample control is not being exercised to minimize the
creation of excessive odors, fumes, smoke, gases, and noise, it shall notify
the owner or operator thereof that the city council is considering revoking or
modifying the operator's permit.
   B.   Conform To Standards And Specifications: If the city council decides to
require a modification of the manner in which the business or facility is to be
maintained, it shall specify the standards or specifications to which the
enterprise must conform or otherwise lose its permit to engage thereafter in
the business or activity. (1978 Code § 10-243, as amended)
TITLE 5
PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Established
5-1-2: Chief Of Police
5-1-3: Powers And Duties
5-1-1: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a regularly constituted police force to be known as
the police department, which shall consist of a chief of police and such other
police officers as shall be employed by the city. (1978 Code § 13-111, as
amended)
5-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
The chief of police shall:
   A.   Responsible For Department: Organize, supervise and be responsible for
all the activities of the police department and shall define and assign the
duties of the different police officers.
   B.   Attend City Council Meetings: When required, attend meetings of the
city council to consult with and advise them on matters of public safety. He
shall execute all lawful orders of the mayor and city council and see that all
orders and judgments of the justice of the peace are carried into effect. (1978
Code § 13-112, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
5-1-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The chief of police and all police officers of the city shall have the
following powers and duties in addition to those that may be assigned to them
as provided above:
   A.   Suppress Riots: To suppress riots, disturbances, and breaches of the
peace, and to apprehend all persons committing any offense against the laws of
the state or ordinances of the city.
   B.   Execute And Serve Warrants: To execute and serve all warrants,
processes, commitments, and writs whatsoever issued by the justice of the
peace.
   C.   Preserve Public Peace: To preserve the public peace, prevent crime,
detect and arrest offenders, protect persons and property, remove nuisances
existing in the public streets, roads, highways and other public places,
enforce every law relating to the suppression of offenses, render such
assistance in the collection of licenses as may be required by the license
collector and perform all duties enjoined upon them by law and ordinance. (1978
Code § 13-113, as amended)
   D.   Maintain Register Of Arrests: The chief of police shall provide and
cause to be kept a register of arrest. Upon such register shall be entered a
statement showing the date of such arrest, the name of the person arrested, the
name of the arresting officer, the offense charged and a description of any
property found upon the person arrested. (1978 Code § 13-114, as amended)
   E.   Stolen Property Disposition: It shall be the duty of the chief of
police to keep all lost or stolen property that comes into the possession of
the police department or to any of its members. He shall make all reasonable
efforts to discover the owners thereof. (1978 Code § 13-117, as amended)
   F.   Register Of Property: The chief of police must enter or cause to be
entered in a suitable book a description for every article of property alleged
to be stolen or embezzled and brought into his office or taken from the person
or the prisoner and must attach a number to each article and make a
corresponding entry thereof. (1978 Code § 13-116, as amended)
   G.   Property Taken From Person Arrested: When money or other property is
taken from a person arrested upon a charge of a public offense, the officer
taking it must at the time issue triplicate receipts therefor, specifying
particularly the amount of money or kind of property taken. One of the receipts
he must deliver to the person arrested. Another he must forthwith file with the
clerk of the court to which the complaint and other papers in the case are
required by law to be sent. The third receipt must be sent at once to the
office of the police department. (1978 Code § 13-115, as amended)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL 1
SECTION:
5-2-1: Poundmaster
5-2-2: Care And Keeping Of Animals
5-2-3: Rabies Control
5-2-4: Dogs
5-2-5: Impounding
5-2-6: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 10, chapter 15 of this code for zoning provisions relative
  to the keeping of animals.
5-2-1: POUNDMASTER:
   A.   Office Created: The position of poundmaster is hereby created. Until
such time as a poundmaster is appointed, the chief of police shall be
poundmaster ex officio.
   B.   Duties: The poundmaster shall perform the following duties:
      1.   Carry out and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Take into his possession and impound all strays running at large and
dispose of the same as hereinafter provided.
      3.   Enforce the licensing and control of all dogs within the city as
hereinafter provided.
      4.   File complaints in the courts against any person, firm or
corporation failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
      5.   Capture and secure all dogs found running at large contrary to the
provisions of this chapter and impound such dogs in a humane manner.
      6.   Maintain a sanitary pound in which all animals duly committed to his
charge or otherwise impounded by him will be properly fed, watered, and
protected from injury.
      7.   Enter a description thereof in records kept for that purpose stating
the kind of animal, the circumstances under which received or impounded, and a
description thereof sufficient to provide identification, the costs expended
for the maintenance of the animal and amounts received arising out of the
maintenance or sale of animals.
   C.   Interference With Poundmaster Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person to hinder, delay, interfere with or obstruct the poundmaster or any of
his assistants while engaging in capturing, securing or taking to the dog pound
any dogs liable to be impounded, or to break open or in any manner directly or
indirectly aid, counsel or advise the breaking open of any dog trap, pound or
ambulance, or other vehicle used for the collecting or conveying of dogs to the
dog pound. A violation of this provision is a class C misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   D.   Fees For Services Of Poundmaster: The poundmaster shall charge, and the
owners of animals taken into his possession for impound, disposal or other
services shall pay, such fees and charges for services performed by the pound
or poundmaster as the governing body shall establish from time to time by
resolution. All fees shall be paid to the city treasurer and proof of payment
shall be presented to the poundmaster. (Ord. 2016-1, 6-28-2016)
5-2-2: CARE AND KEEPING OF ANIMALS:
   A.   Abandonment: It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or turn out
at large any animal.
   B.   Trespassing Animals And Fowl: It shall be unlawful for any owner or
caretaker of any domestic fowl or animal to permit such fowl or animal to
trespass upon the premises of another person.
   C.   Killing Or Poisoning Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person
wilfully to kill any domestic animal, or to administer poison to any such
animal or to expose any poisonous substance with the intent that it shall be
taken by any such animal. A violation of this provision is a class C
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   D.   Dead Animals: The owner of any animal or fowl that has died or been
killed shall remove or bury the carcass of such animal within ten (10) hours
after its death; provided, that no horse, cow, ox or other animal shall be
buried within the closely inhabited portions of the city.
   E.   Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Overdrive, overload, drive when overloaded, overwork, torture,
cruelly beat, mutilate, or needlessly kill, or carry or transport in any
vehicle or other conveyance in a cruel and inhuman manner, any animal, or cause
any of these acts to be done. A violation of this provision is a class C
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
      2.   Fail to provide any animal in his charge or custody with necessary
sustenance, drink and protection from the elements, or cause any of these acts
to be done. A violation of this provision is a class C misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
      3.   Maintain any place where fowl or any animals are suffered to fight
upon exhibition or for sport upon any wager. A violation of this provision is a
class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2016-1, 6-28-2016)
5-2-3: RABIES CONTROL:
   A.   Reporting Of Rabid Animals: Anyone having knowledge of the whereabouts
of an animal known to have or suspected of having rabies shall report the fact
immediately to the poundmaster. The county health officer shall likewise be
notified of any person or animal bitten by a rabid or suspected rabid animal.
   B.   Biting Animal Quarantined For Observation: Any dog or other animal of a
species subject to rabies causing an abrasion of the skin shall be placed in
confinement under observation of a veterinary hospital or the city pound, and
shall not be killed or released until at least fourteen (14) days after the
biting or injury has occurred in order to determine whether or not the animal
has rabies. If the animal dies or has been killed, its head shall be removed
and immediately taken to the state health laboratory to be examined for rabies.
   C.   Rabies Contacts Quarantined: Any animal of a species subject to rabies
which has been bitten by a known rabid animal or has been in intimate contact
with a rabid animal shall be isolated in a suitable place approved by the
poundmaster for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days or destroyed.
   D.   Dogs Required To Have Rabies Shots: It shall be unlawful for the owner
of any dog to suffer, allow or permit such dog to be or go upon any sidewalk,
street, alley, public place or square within the city without first having had
such dog vaccinated against rabies, as above provided, within the past two (2)
years, and without there being on such dog a collar or harness with a license
tag thereon showing that such dog has been so vaccinated. (Ord. 2016-1, 6-28-
2016)
5-2-4: DOGS:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise
indicates, the following words shall mean:
AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner
or a member of his immediate family either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise.
DOG: Any male, female or spayed female dog of any age.
IMPOUNDED: Having been received into the custody of the city pound or into the
custody of any authorized agent or representative of the city.
OWNER: When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, shall mean any person or
persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping or harboring a dog.
POUND: An animal shelter, lot, premises or buildings maintained by or
authorized or employed by the city for the confinement or care of dogs seized
either under the provisions of this chapter or otherwise.
POUNDMASTER: The custodian selected by the Governing Body to be responsible for
the operation of the dog pound.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE: Any individual who works as a law enforcement officer,
emergency medical responder, City or County employee, or City or County
contractor including, but not limited to, a utility meter reader.
UNLICENSED DOG: A dog for which the license for the current year has not been
paid, or to which the tag provided for in this section is not attached.
VICIOUS DOG: A dog that has attacked, bitten, mauled or threatened immediate
harm to a person or animal, without provocation, or a dog that has a known
propensity to attack, bite or maul human beings or animals.
   B.   License And Registration Required:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or maintain any dog
six (6) or more months old unless such dog has been registered and licensed in
the manner herein provided.
      2.   Before an animal may be licensed, proof must be presented that the
animal has received a rabies shot and the tag must be attached to the collar.
      3.   Application for registration and licensing shall be made to the
poundmaster, or such other person as the Governing Body may authorize to
receive such applications.
      4.   A dog license shall be issued by the poundmaster, or such other
person as the Governing Body may authorize.
      5.   No dog license shall be issued by the City until the fee required
herein is paid. Said fees shall be in such amounts as established by resolution
of the City Council. (Ord. 2016-1, 6-28-2016)
      6.   The fee due and payable pursuant to this section shall be due June
30 and shall be delinquent after September 1 of each year. (Ord. 2017-3, 12-12-
2017)
      7.   The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age, or of any dog
which attains licensing age, shall make an application for registration and
license within thirty (30) days after such acquisition or dog attaining the
above stated age; provided, that the license fee shall be one-half (1/2) of
that above required for new applications received after January 1 of any year.
      8.   The provisions of this section shall not be intended to apply to
dogs whose owners are nonresidents temporarily within the City, nor to dogs
brought to the City for the purpose of participating in any dog show, nor to
commercial kennels.
      9.   If sufficient proof is provided, the fee provisions of subsection B5
of this section shall not apply to:
         a.   Seeing eye dogs properly trained to assist blind persons, if such
dogs are actually being used by blind persons to assist them in moving from
place to place.
         b.   Hearing dogs properly trained to assist deaf persons, if such
dogs are actually used by deaf persons to aid them in responding to sounds.
         c.   Dogs especially trained to assist officials of government
agencies in the performance of their duties and which are owned by such
agencies.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as to exempt any dog from having
a current rabies vaccination.
   C.   Tag And Collar: Upon payment of the license fee or proof provided of
compliance with subsection B of this section, the City Recorder shall issue to
the owner a metallic tag for each dog so licensed. The tag shall be changed
every year and shall have stamped thereon the year for which it was issued and
the number corresponding with the license issued. Every dog owner, except those
operating a kennel, shall provide each dog with a collar to which the license
tag shall be affixed, and shall see that the collar and tag are constantly
worn. In case a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issued by the
City Recorder upon presentation of a receipt showing the payment of the license
fee for the current year and the payment of a replacement fee as may be
established by the Governing Body. Dog tags shall not be transferable from one
dog to another, and no refunds shall be made on any dog license fee because of
death of the dog, or the owner leaving the City before expiration of the
license period. It shall be unlawful to deprive a registered dog of its collar
and/or tag.
   D.   Running At Large Prohibited; Vicious Dogs And Animals At Large:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog to permit
such dog to run at large.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dog to permit such dog to go
upon or be upon the private property of any person without the permission of
the owner or person entitled to the possession of such private property.
      3.   The owner of any dog running at large shall be deemed in violation
of this subsection regardless of the precautions taken to prevent the escape of
the dog and to prohibit it from running at large.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or possess a vicious dog
within the city. The owner of any vicious dog or animal which causes injury to
another animal or to any human being while at large or while not kept with
ordinary care is guilty of a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. The dog shall be impounded and shall not be redeemed
pending disposition under subsection D6 of this section.
      5.   It shall be unlawful for a dog, even on its owner's own property, to
unprovoked bite a public employee while lawfully present in their official
capacity. A violation of this section is a class C misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
      6.   Upon the trial of any offense under subsection D4 or D5 of this
section, the court may, upon conviction, order the poundmaster or other
authorized personnel of the city to put the dog to death or may order such
other disposition of the dog as will protect the inhabitants of the city and
its environs.
   E.   Female In Heat: The owner of a female dog in heat shall cause such dog
to be penned or enclosed in such a manner as to preclude other dogs from
attacking such female dog or being attracted to such female dog so as to create
a public nuisance.
   F.   Strays: It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep within
the city any lost or strayed dog. Whenever any dog shall be found which appears
to be lost or strayed, it shall be the duty of the finder to notify the city
recorder or poundmaster, who shall impound for running at large contrary to the
terms of this section. If there shall be attached to such dog a license tag for
the then current fiscal year, the poundmaster shall notify the person to whom
such license was issued at the address given in the license. If the dog does
not have a license, the poundmaster may make reasonable efforts to find the
dog's owner through the city website, social media accounts, or other available
means.
   G.   Dogs Which Disturb Neighborhood: No person, persons, firm or
corporation shall own, keep or harbor any dog which by loud, continued or
frequent barking, howling, yelping, or by noxious or offensive odors, shall
annoy, disturb or endanger the health and welfare of any person or
neighborhood. A violation of this subsection is punishable as an infraction,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, and such is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and each day
a violation is permitted to exist or continue shall constitute a separate
offense. This section shall not apply to the city dog pound, veterinary
hospitals or medical laboratories. (Ord. 2016-1, 6-28-2016)
5-2-5: IMPOUNDING:
   A.   Dog Pound: The governing body may contract with some humane person as
poundmaster, with an adjoining city, or with the county for the purpose of
providing suitable premises and facilities to be used by the city as the dog
pound. It shall be maintained in some convenient location and shall be sanitary
and so operated as to properly feed, water and protect the dogs from injury.
   B.   Duty To Impound: Every police officer or other designated official may
apprehend any dog found running at large, not wearing his tag, or which is in
violation of this chapter, and impound such dog in the pound or other suitable
place. The poundmaster, or some other designated official, upon receiving any
dog, shall make a complete registry, entering the breed, color and sex of such
dog and whether licensed. If licensed, he shall enter the name and address of
the owner and number of the license.
   C.   Record Of Impounded Animals: The poundmaster shall keep a record of
each animal impounded by him, the date of receipt of such animal, the date and
manner of its disposal, and if redeemed, reclaimed or sold, the name of the
person by whom redeemed, reclaimed or purchased, the address of such person,
the amounts of all fees received or collected for or because of the impounding,
reclaiming or purchasing thereof, together with the number of any tag and the
date of any tag exhibited or issued upon the redemption or sale of such animal.
   D.   Redemption Of Impounded Dogs: Any dog impounded as a licensed or
unlicensed dog may be redeemed and taken from such pound by the owner or any
authorized person, upon exhibiting to the supervisor or person having charge of
said pound, a certificate of registry as provided in subsection B of this
section, showing that the license imposed by this chapter has been paid for
such dog and paying the person in charge of the pound all impound fees. All
impounded dogs not redeemed within five (5) days shall be sold for the best
price obtainable at either private or public sale, and all monies shall be paid
to the city treasurer. All dogs that are not sold or redeemed in the required
time shall be disposed of in a humane manner.
   E.   Impound Fee Schedule:
      1.   The owner of an impounded animal will be subject to payment of
impound fees in such amounts as established by resolution of the city council.
   F.   Disposition Of Unclaimed, Infected Or Injured Dogs: All impounded dogs
not redeemed within five (5) days of the date of impounding may be destroyed or
sold to the person first making written request for purchase at such price as
may be deemed agreeable. In the case of dogs severely injured or having
contagious disease other than rabies and which in the poundmaster's judgment
are suffering and recovery is doubtful, the poundmaster may destroy the dog
without awaiting the five (5) day period. (Ord. 2016-1, 6-28-2016)
5-2-6: PENALTY:
All violations of this chapter shall be punishable as an infraction and subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code unless otherwise stated herein. (Ord. 2016-1, 6-28-2016)
CHAPTER 3
CRIMES AND OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-3-1: Criminal Code Adopted By Reference
5-3-2: Discharge Of Weapons
5-3-1: CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Except as the application thereof is clearly impractical or inappropriate, in
view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all of the definitions,
requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and sections of the Utah
criminal code, Utah Code Annotated title 76, as amended, with a corresponding
penalty of infraction, class C misdemeanor or class B misdemeanor, are hereby
adopted by the city. Any and all violations thereof shall be considered
violations of this chapter and each such violation shall be subject to the
penalties as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2007 Code)
5-3-2: DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge within the city limits any
firearm of any description, including, but not limited to, shotguns, rifles,
and handguns; provided, that this section shall not apply to the use of
firearms by persons described in Utah Code Annotated section 76-10-523; also,
that the city council may authorize firing on designated target ranges; also
that it shall not apply to bureau of land management owned land zoned open
space. An offense under this section is a class B misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, with confiscation of the device used or carried being
mandatory. (Ord. 2008-1, 3-11-2008)
ARTICLE A.  MINORS; CURFEW
SECTION:
5-3A-1: Curfew Established
5-3A-2: Responsibility Of Parents, Guardians
5-3A-1: CURFEW ESTABLISHED:
No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be or remain upon any of
the streets, alleys or public places or vacant lots at night between the hours
of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. following, unless
such person is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person having legal
custody of such minor person, or unless the employment or lawful business of
such minor makes it necessary to be upon the streets, alleys or public places
between such specified hours. On any night when school, civic or church
functions are taking place, the hours of curfew shall be one minute past twelve
o'clock (12:01) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) A.M. following, in order to provide
adequate time to attend such functions provided for minor persons. (1978 Code
§ 13-312, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
5-3A-2: RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS, GUARDIANS:
No person, guardian or other person having legal charge or custody of any
person under eighteen (18) years of age shall allow or permit any such person
or child, ward or other person under such age, while in such legal custody, to
go or be in or upon any of the streets, alleys or public places when such going
or being in or upon such streets, alleys or public places would be a violation
by such minor person of any provision of section
5-3A-1 of this article. (1978 Code § 13-313, as amended)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Traffic Code Adopted By Reference
6-1-2: Prima Facie Speed; Designated Streets
6-1-1: TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or
inappropriate, in view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all
of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and
sections of the Utah traffic code, Utah Code Annotated title 41, as amended,
are hereby adopted by the city. Any and all violations thereof shall be
considered violations of this chapter, and each such violation shall subject
the violator thereof to penalty provisions as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, unless otherwise provided by state statute. (2007 Code)
6-1-2: PRIMA FACIE SPEED; DESIGNATED STREETS:
   A.   Streets With Signs: When appropriate street signs giving notice of the
maximum permitted speed thereon are erected, the prima facie speed limits
designated upon said signs shall apply to the appropriate streets or portions
of streets so posted.
   B.   Streets Not Posted: Unless otherwise provided in this chapter or in any
other ordinance of the city, the prima facie speed limit on the streets of the
city shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour. (1978 Code § 11-323, as amended;
amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 2
ALL-TERRAIN AND OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Definitions
6-2-2: Street Legal All-Terrain Vehicles
6-2-3: Terms And Conditions Of Off Highway Vehicle Use
6-2-4: Off Highway Implement Of Husbandry
6-2-5: Protective Headgear Requirements
6-2-6: Operation Of Off Highway Vehicles On Nondesignated City Streets Or State
Highways In City Limits
6-2-7: No Liability
6-2-8: Insurance Requirements
6-2-9: Authority To Enforce
6-2-10: Penalties Imposed
6-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
ALL-TERRAIN TYPE I VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle fifty inches (50") or less in
width, having an unladen dry weight of eight hundred (800) pounds or less,
traveling on four (4) or more low pressure tires, having a seat designed to be
straddled by the operator, and designed for or capable of travel over
unimproved terrain.
ALL-TERRAIN TYPE II VEHICLE: Any other motor vehicle, not defined in the
definition of All-Terrain Type I Vehicle, Motorcycle, or Snowmobile of this
section, designed for or capable of travel over unimproved terrain. Does not
include golf carts, any vehicle designed to carry a disabled person, any
vehicle not specifically designed for recreational use, or farm tractors as
defined under Utah law section 41-1a-102.
LEGAL ROUTE: Any public street within the city of Blanding except for Main
Street and Center Street.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the operator and
designed to travel on not more than two (2) tires.
OFF HIGHWAY IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY: Every all-terrain type I vehicle,
motorcycle, or snowmobile that is used by the owner or his agent for
agricultural operations.
OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLE (OHV): Any snowmobile, all-terrain type I vehicle, all-
terrain type II vehicle, or motorcycle.
OPERATE: To control the movement of or otherwise use an off highway vehicle or
street legal all-terrain vehicle.
OPERATOR: The person who is in actual physical control of an off highway
vehicle or street legal all-terrain vehicle.
OWNER'S OR OPERATOR'S SECURITY, OWNER'S SECURITY, OR OPERATOR'S SECURITY: Any
of the following:
   A.   An insurance policy or combination of policies conforming to state law
section 31A-22-302, which is issued by an insurer authorized to do business in
Utah;
   B.   A surety bond issued by an insurer authorized to do a surety business
in Utah in which the surety is subject to the minimum coverage limits and other
requirements of policies conforming to state law section 31A-22-302, which
names the department as a creditor under the bond for the use of persons
entitled to the proceeds of the bond;
   C.   A deposit with the state treasurer of cash or securities complying with
state law section 41-12a-406;
   D.   Maintaining a certificate of self-funded coverage under state law
section 41-12a-407;
   E.   A policy conforming to state law section 31A-22-302 issued by the risk
management fund created in section 63A-4-201.
SNOWMOBILE: Any motor vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice and steered
and supported in whole or in part by skis, belts, cleats, runners, or low
pressure tires.
STREET LEGAL ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE (STREET LEGAL ATV): Has the same meaning as
defined in state law section 41-6a-102 and meets all state law requirements.
(Ord. 2008-6, 12-9-2008)
6-2-2: STREET LEGAL ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES:
An all-terrain type I or type II vehicle that meets the requirements of the
state of Utah may be operated as a street legal ATV on any city street or state
highway in city limits that is at least one lane in each direction under the
following terms and conditions:
   A.   Said allowance must be in accordance with state law 41-6a-1509.
   B.   Street legal ATV is legally licensed and registered.
   C.   Street legal ATV is in a safe running condition.
   D.   Street legal ATV is being operated in a safe manner.
   E.   Street legal ATV operator is obeying all state and city traffic laws.
   F.   Street legal ATV operator holds a legal driver's license. (Ord. 2008-6,
12-9-2008)
6-2-3: TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLE USE:
Blanding City streets except for Main Street and Center Street (hereinafter
called legal route) are hereby declared open for off highway vehicle use under
the following conditions and/or restrictions:
   A.   The OHV operator is using a legal route to gain direct access to or
from a private or public area open for off highway vehicle use.
   B.   The OHV operator is using a legal route to go to or from an operating
hotel, motel, restaurant, gas station, convenience store, grocery store, retail
store, trading post, visitor center or financial institution.
   C.   An OHV is not being used for general transportation unassociated with
preparing for or returning from a recreational ride of the OHV that same day.
   D.   OHV is legally licensed and registered.
   E.   OHV is in a safe running condition.
   F.   OHV is being operated in a safe manner.
   G.   OHV operator is obeying all state and city traffic laws.
   H.   OHV is not driven down any street within city limits that borders
school grounds while school is in session.
   I.   An OHV operator holds a legal driver's license.
   J.   The OHV when driven day or night must have working headlights and
taillights. The headlights must be on at all times the OHV is being driven on
any legal route.
   K.   No three (3) wheel ATV or OHV type vehicles are allowed on city
streets. (Ord. 2008-6, 12-9-2008)
6-2-4: OFF HIGHWAY IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY:
Restrictions do not apply to off highway implements of husbandry used in
accordance with state law section 41-22-5.5. (Ord. 2008-6, 12-9-2008)
6-2-5: PROTECTIVE HEADGEAR REQUIREMENTS:
A person under the age of eighteen (18) may not operate or ride on an OHV in
city limits unless the person is wearing a properly fitted and fastened, United
States department of transportation safety rated protective headgear designed
for motorized vehicle use, and must comply with state law section 41-22-10-
8 regarding protective headgear.
An operator and passenger(s) of off highway implements of husbandry operated in
the manner prescribed by state law subsections 41-22-5.5(3) and (4) are exempt
from the requirements of this requirement. (Ord. 2008-6, 12-9-2008)
6-2-6: OPERATION OF OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLES ON NONDESIGNATED CITY STREETS OR STATE
HIGHWAYS IN CITY LIMITS:
An operator may not operate an OHV upon any city street or state highway within
city limits not designated as open to off highway vehicle use except:
   A.   When crossing said street or highway and the operator comes to a
complete stop before crossing, proceeds only after yielding the right of way to
oncoming traffic, and crosses at a right angle;
   B.   When loading or unloading an off highway vehicle from a vehicle or
trailer, which shall be done with due regard for safety, and at the nearest
practical point of operation;
   C.   When an emergency exists, during any period of time and at those
locations when the operation of conventional motor vehicles is impractical or
when the operation is directed by the city police chief or city mayor; or
   D.   When operating a street legal all-terrain vehicle on a highway in
accordance with state law section 41-6a-1509. (Ord. 2008-6, 12-9-2008)
6-2-7: NO LIABILITY:
In accordance with state law section 41-22-10-1, liability may not be imposed
on any federal, state, county, or municipality relating to the designation or
maintenance of any land, trail, street, or highway open for off highway vehicle
use. (Ord. 2008-6, 12-9-2008)
6-2-8: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
In accordance with state law section 41-12a-301 owner's or operator's security
is not required for off highway vehicles registered under state law section 41-
22-3 when operated either:
   A.   On a highway (includes legal route) designated as open for off highway
vehicle use; or
   B.   In the manner prescribed by state law subsection 41-22-10.3. (Ord.
2008-6, 12-9-2008)
6-2-9: AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE:
The police department or other legal policing authority is given all rights to
write citations to those individuals breaking laws as outlined in this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-6, 12-9-2008)
6-2-10: PENALTIES IMPOSED:
A person violating this chapter is guilty of a class C misdemeanor and will be
penalized in accordance with Blanding City ordinances governing the same. (Ord.
2008-6, 12-9-2008)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Department Of Streets
7-1-2: Removal Of Snow
7-1-3: Obstructions In Streets
7-1-4: Discharge Of Water
7-1-5: Sidewalk Regulations
7-1-6: Removal Of Weeds And Trash Trees In Public Ways
7-1-1: DEPARTMENT OF STREETS:
   A.   Creation: There is hereby created a department of streets, which shall
have general supervision of streets, sidewalks, bridges and other public ways.
   B.   Superintendent Of Streets: The department shall be under the direction
and control of the superintendent of streets. (1978 Code § 11-311, as amended)
   C.   Powers And Duties: The department shall:
      1.   Have charge of the construction, maintenance and repair of streets,
sidewalks, bridges, curbs, gutters, culverts, drains, waterways and other
public ways. It shall have control of all waters flowing on the streets,
sidewalks and public ways, whether originating from storm, flood, drainage or
irrigation waters.
      2.   Keep a record of and promptly investigate all complaints of
defective streets, culverts, drains, ditches, sidewalks and other public ways
and, when proper, repair, replace or take such action as deemed best, and shall
record the action taken on each complaint.
      3.   Enforce the provisions of this chapter and all other ordinances
relating to the maintenance and use of streets, culverts, drains, ditches,
waterways, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and other public ways.
      4.   Repair, or cause to be repaired, all defects coming to the
department's attention and take reasonable precautions to protect the public
from injuries due to such defects pending their repair. (1978 Code § 11-312, as
amended)
7-1-2: REMOVAL OF SNOW:
   A.   Failure To Remove Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for the owner,
occupant, lessor or agent of any property, abutting on a paved sidewalk, to
fail to remove, or have removed from such paved sidewalk, all hail, snow, or
sleet thereon within a reasonable time after such snow, hail or sleet has
fallen. In the case of a storm between the hours of five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., such sidewalks shall be cleaned before nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. of the same day.
   B.   Depositing In Gutter Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any person
removing snow from the sidewalk, to deposit snow, dirt, leaves, or any other
material, in the gutter so as to clog or prevent the free flow of water
therein. (1978 Code § 11-361, as amended)
7-1-3: OBSTRUCTIONS IN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having control of any
premises to place or permit to be placed upon or in the sidewalk, parking area,
gutter or on the half of the street next to such premises:
   A.   Refuse: Any broken ware, glass, filth, rubbish, sweepings, refuse
matter, ice, snow, water, garbage, ashes, tin cans or other like substances.
   B.   Building Materials: Any wagons, lumber, wood boxes, fencing, building
material, dead trees, tree stumps, merchandise or other thing which shall
obstruct such public street, gutter, parking area or sidewalk, or any part
thereof, or the passage over and upon the same, or any part thereof, except as
expressly authorized by ordinance, without the permission of the city council
first had and obtained.
   C.   Permanent Or Temporary Structures: Any permanent or temporary
structure, mechanism, device, vehicle or other thing of any kind or character,
except trees planted pursuant to the provisions of applicable ordinances. (1978
Code § 11-362, as amended)
7-1-4: DISCHARGE OF WATER:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having control of any
premises to fail, refuse or neglect to prevent water from the roof or eaves of
any house, building or other structure, or from any other source under the
control of such person, to be discharged upon the surface of any sidewalk.
(1978 Code § 11-365, as amended)
7-1-5: SIDEWALK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Driving Or Parking: It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or
park a self-propelled vehicle or lead, drive or ride any animal upon any
sidewalk, except across a sidewalk at established crossings. (1978 Code § 11-
366, as amended)
   B.   Businesses To Keep Clean: It shall be unlawful for any owners or
occupants of any place of business to refuse, neglect or fail to cause the
sidewalk abutting thereon to be swept or cleaned each morning before the hour
of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. (1978 Code § 11-367, as amended)
   C.   Placing Goods For Sale Or Show: No goods, wares or merchandise shall be
placed, maintained or permitted for sale or show in or on any parking area,
street or sidewalk beyond two feet (2') from the front line of the lot, without
first obtaining the written approval of the city council. Such approval shall
be granted only when such sale or show shall be a promotional activity not
exceeding forty eight (48) hours and when participated in by a majority of
firms seeking approval in their business areas. The city council's written
approval shall specifically provide that no goods, wares or merchandise shall
be placed in such a manner as to leave less than a six foot (6') passageway for
pedestrians. (1978 Code § 11-368, as amended)
   D.   Placing Goods For Receipt Or Delivery: It shall be unlawful for any
person to place, or suffer to be placed or kept upon any sidewalk, any goods,
wares or merchandise which such person may be receiving or delivering, without
leaving a foot passageway upon such sidewalk. It shall be unlawful for any
person receiving or delivering such goods, wares or merchandise to suffer the
same to be or remain on such sidewalk for a longer period than two (2) hours.
(1978 Code § 11-369, as amended)
   E.   Playing: Every person who obstructs the sidewalk or street by playing
any game or engaging in any activity which obstructs the free travel thereon is
guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1978 Code § 11-370, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   F.   Congregating: It is an infraction and, upon conviction, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for any person to congregate about or upon any sidewalks,
stairway, doorway, window or in front of any business or dwelling house,
theater, lecture room, church or elsewhere and by so doing to obstruct or
interfere with the free passage of persons entering, leaving or occupying such
building or premises. (1978 Code § 11-371, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
7-1-6: REMOVAL OF WEEDS AND TRASH TREES IN PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, lessor, or agent of any
property, abutting on a paved roadway or right of way improved with curb,
gutter or sidewalk to fail to remove, or have removed all weeds and trash
trees, that are unsightly and/or that are causing damage to the public way
improvements, from the sidewalk or the roadway to the curb line of the street.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person removing weeds or trash trees from
the sidewalk or roadway to deposit the same or any other material in the gutter
so as to clog or prevent the flow of water therein. (Ord. 2007-5, 1-8-2008)
CHAPTER 2
STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
7-2-1: Permit Required; Inspection
7-2-2: Conform To Established Specifications
7-2-3: Changing Existing Construction
7-2-4: Building Materials In Street; Permit
7-2-5: Mixing Concrete On Paved Streets Or Sidewalks; Permit
7-2-6: Overflowing Of Water
7-2-7: Irrigation Ditches
7-2-8: Removal Of Sod Or Earth
7-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; INSPECTION:
   A.   Required: No person, either as owner, agent, servant, contractor or
employee, shall construct any permanent sidewalk for public use without first
obtaining from the proper city official a permit to do so. The permit shall
specify that the sidewalk be constructed of cement, the character and quality
of the cement, the consistent parts of the mixture, and the thickness of the
sidewalk. (1978 Code § 11-352, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Unlawful Violation Of Specifications: It shall be unlawful to construct
a sidewalk in violation of the specifications given by a proper city official.
   C.   Inspection: All sidewalks shall be inspected by the superintendent of
streets or his duly authorized representative. (1978 Code § 11-352, as amended)
7-2-2: CONFORM TO ESTABLISHED SPECIFICATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person either as owner, agent, servant, contractor
or employee to construct a street or sidewalk which does not conform to
specifications established by the city engineer or other authorized
representative of the city unless special permission to deviate from such
specification is first obtained from the city council. (1978 Code § 11-351, as
amended)
7-2-3: CHANGING EXISTING CONSTRUCTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a driveway across a sidewalk
or cut or change the construction of sidewalk, curb or gutter without first
making written application and obtaining from the proper city official a permit
to do so. The acceptance of such permit shall be deemed an agreement on the
part of such person to construct said driveway in accordance with
specifications furnished by the city. (1978 Code § 11-353, as amended; amd.
2007 Code)
7-2-4: BUILDING MATERIALS IN STREET; PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or use any portion of the public
streets when erecting or repairing any building upon land abutting thereon,
without first making application to and receiving from the proper city official
a permit for the occupation or use of such portions of streets for such periods
of time and under such limitations and restrictions as may be required by the
city council. Any such permit may be revoked by the city at any time when the
holder thereof fails to comply with any rule or regulation under which it is
granted, or when, in the opinion of the city, the public interest requires such
revocation. (1978 Code § 11-354, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
7-2-5: MIXING CONCRETE ON PAVED STREETS OR SIDEWALKS; PERMIT:
Unless a permit from the proper city official has been obtained, it shall be
unlawful to:
   A.   Place, Pile Or Permit: Place or pile or permit to be placed or piled,
any sand, gravel, lime, cement, mortar, plaster, concrete or any like substance
or mixture, or allow the same to remain on any portion of any paved street or
sidewalk.
   B.   Make, Mix Or Permit: Make or mix or permit to be made or mixed any
mortar, plaster, concrete or any like substance or mixture on any portion of
any paved street or sidewalk. (1978 Code § 11-355, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
7-2-6: OVERFLOWING OF WATER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow water to overflow from any ditch,
canal, well or irrigation stream onto the streets, sidewalks or property of the
city. (1978 Code § 11-356, as amended)
7-2-7: IRRIGATION DITCHES:
All owners or occupants of lots in the city who require water from a ditch for
irrigation or other purposes shall dig ditches, erect flumes, lay pipes and
install culverts, as needed, and maintain the same to convey water under
sidewalks to or from their respective lots. All culverts, ditches, pipes and
flumes conveying water under sidewalks shall meet such reasonable standards and
specifications as may be established by the superintendent of streets. (1978
Code § 11-357, as amended)
7-2-8: REMOVAL OF SOD OR EARTH:
No person shall dig, cut or remove any sod or earth from any street or other
public place without a permit from the proper city official. (1978 Code § 11-
358, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 3
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Permit Requirements
7-3-2: Bond Required
7-3-3: Subject And Excluded Excavations
7-3-4: Standards
7-3-5: Protection Of Public
7-3-6: Relocation And Protection Of Utilities
7-3-7: Revocation Or Refusal Of Permit
7-3-8: Exception In Emergency
7-3-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to break, excavate,
tunnel, undermine or in any manner affect the surface or base of any street or
to place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth or any other excavated
material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street,
unless such person shall first have obtained an excavation permit therefor from
the proper city official. (1978 Code § 11-395, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Streets And Sidewalks:
      1.   No person shall make any excavation in any street, lane or alley or
remove any pavement or other material from any street or improvement thereon
without first obtaining a permit from the proper city official or other
authorized representative of the city.
      2.   No person shall excavate any sidewalk without first obtaining a
permit from the proper city official or other authorized personnel.
   C.   Franchise; Public Utility:
      1.   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to waive the
franchise required for any person by city ordinances or laws of Utah. (1978
Code § 11-381, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
      2.   Any public utility regulated by the state or holding a franchise
from the city which, in the pursuit of its calling, has frequent occasion to
open or make excavations in streets, may, upon application, receive a general
permit from the city to cover all excavations such utilities may make within
the streets of the city. (1978 Code § 11-395, as amended)
7-3-2: BOND REQUIRED:
   A.   Conditions: In order to ensure proper backfill and restoration of
surface, the city may require the permittee to deposit a surety bond or cash
deposit with the city recorder, payable to the city, except that a public
utility operating or using any of the streets under a franchise from the city
will not be required to furnish such bond, providing such franchise obligates
the holder thereof to restore the streets and to hold the city harmless in the
event of any injury to any person or damage to any property due to negligence
of such holder in conducting excavation and restoration operations under such
franchise. The required surety bond must be:
      1.   With good and sufficient surety.
      2.   By a surety company authorized to transact business in the state.
      3.   Satisfactory to the city attorney in form and substance.
      4.   Conditioned upon the permittee's compliance with this chapter in
order to secure and hold the city and its officers harmless against any and all
claims, judgments or other costs arising from the excavation and other work
covered by the excavation permit for which the city, the city council or any
city officer may be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to any
person or property through the fault of the permittee arising out of failure to
properly guard the excavation or for any other negligence of the permittee.
      5.   Conditioned to fill up, restore and place in good and safe
condition, as near as may be to its original condition, and to the satisfaction
of the city, all openings and excavations made in streets, and to maintain any
street where excavation is made in as good condition for the period of twelve
(12) months after the work shall be done, usual wear and tear excepted, as it
was before the work shall have been done.
   B.   Amount: The amount of the surety bond or cash deposit shall be
established by resolution and may be changed from time to time, but until such
resolution is passed the amount of the surety or cash deposit shall be two
hundred dollars ($200.00) and five dollars ($5.00) for each foot of street the
permittee shall excavate. (1978 Code § 11-394, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
7-3-3: SUBJECT AND EXCLUDED EXCAVATIONS:
   A.   Types Subject To Provisions: The types of excavations subject to the
provisions of this chapter are excavations for installation or repair of water
lines, sewer lines, gas lines, electrical cable and conduits, telephone cable
and conduits, and all other excavations for any other purpose within the street
rights of way of the city or in other public places. (1978 Code § 11-383, as
amended)
   B.   Types Not Subject To Provisions: The types of excavations which do not
come within the scope of this chapter are excavations of any kind in city
streets in projects designed, contracted for and inspected by the city engineer
or other authorized personnel of the city. (1978 Code § 11-382, as amended)
7-3-4: STANDARDS:
   A.   Preparation: The pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surface shall be
cut vertically along the lines forming the trench in such a manner as to not
damage the adjoining pavement or hard surfacing. An undercut bevel at the rate
of one inch (1") per foot of thickness will be provided at the proposed
junction between the old and new surfaces. The portion to be removed shall be
broken up in a manner that will not cause damage to the pavement outside the
limits of the trench. However, any pavement damaged by operations outside the
limits of the trench shall be replaced. All waste material resulting from the
excavation shall be removed immediately from the site of the work. (1978 Code
§ 11-384, as amended)
   B.   Backfill:
      1.   Materials: Materials for backfill will be of select nature. All
broken concrete, peat, decomposed vegetable matter and similar materials
obtained from excavation will be removed from the site prior to beginning of
backfilling. All backfill will be placed in layers not over eight inches (8")
loose measure in thickness. Compaction will be obtained by mechanical rollers,
mechanical tampers or similar means. Material for backfilling will have optimum
moisture to ensure compaction to a degree equivalent to that of the undisturbed
ground in which the trench was dug. Jetting or internal vibrating methods of
compacting sand fill or similar methods of compacting sand or similar granular
free draining materials will be permitted.
      2.   Density: The density (dry) of the backfill under pavements,
sidewalks, curbs or other structures will be not less than that existing prior
to excavation. The fill shall be restored and placed in a good condition which
will prevent settling. (1978 Code § 11-385, as amended)
   C.   Restoration Of Hard Surfaces:
      1.   General: All street surfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveways
or other hard surfaces falling in the line of the excavation which must be
removed in performance of the work shall be restored in kind by the excavator,
unless otherwise directed by the city council, in accordance with the
specifications contained herein governing the various types of surfaces
involved.
      2.   Protection Of Paved Surfaces: In order to avoid unnecessary damage
to paved surfaces, track equipment shall use pavement pads when operating on or
crossing paved surfaces.
      3.   Time: In traffic lanes of paved streets, the excavator shall provide
temporary gravel surfaces or cold mulch in good condition immediately after
backfill has been placed, and shall complete permanent repairs on the street,
sidewalk, curb, gutter, driveway and other surfaces, within five (5) days from
the date of completion of the backfill, except for periods:
         a.   When permanent paving material is not available.
         b.   When weather conditions prevent permanent replacement.
         c.   When an extension of time is granted by the superintendent of
streets.
      4.   Temporary Repair: If temporary repair has been made on the paved
street with gravel and a permanent repair cannot be made within the time
specified above due to any of the above mentioned conditions, then the
excavator shall be required to replace the gravel with cold mulch as soon as
possible. (1978 Code § 11-386, as amended)
   D.   Restoring Bituminous On Concrete Or Asphalt Surfaces:
      1.   Temporary Grade Surface: Where excavations are made in paved areas,
the surface shall be replaced with a temporary gravel surface. The gravel shall
be placed deep enough to provide a minimum of six inches (6") below the bottom
of the bituminous or concrete surface. Normally, this will require nine inches
(9") of gravel for bituminous surfaces, twelve inches (12") of gravel for
concrete, and concrete base for asphalt wearing surfaces. The gravel shall be
placed in the trench at the time it is backfilled. The temporary gravel surface
shall be maintained by blading, sprinkling, rolling, adding gravel, to maintain
a safe, uniform surface satisfactory to the inspector until the final surface
is laid. Excess material shall be removed from the premises immediately.
Material for use on temporary gravel surfaces shall be obtained from sound,
tough, durable gravel or rock meeting the following requirements for gradings:
 
Passing 1 inch sieve   100 percent
Passing 3/4 inch sieve 85–100 percent
No. 4 sieve            45–65 percent
Passing no. 10 sieve   30–50 percent
Passing no. 200 sieve  5–10 percent
 
      2.   Bituminous Surface: The exposed edges of existing pavement shall be
primed with type MC-1 bituminous material. The type, grade and mixture of the
asphalt to be used for street surface replacement shall be approved by the
superintendent of streets. The thickness shall be equal to the adjacent surface
thickness but not less than three inches (3"). The complete surface shall not
deviate more than one-half inch (1/2") between old and new work. (1978 Code
§ 11-387, as amended)
   E.   Concrete Surfaces: The subbase for concrete surfaces shall be sprinkled
just before placing the concrete. Joints and surfaces shall be made to match
the original surfaces. The thickness of concrete shall be equal to the adjacent
concrete but in no case less than six inches (6") thick. The mixing, cement,
water content, proportion, placement and curing of the concrete will be
approved by the superintendent of streets. In no case shall the concrete have
less compressive strength than three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch at
the end of twenty eight (28) days. (1978 Code § 11-388, as amended)
   F.   Concrete Base, Bituminous Wearing Surfaces: This type of surfacing
shall be constructed as above described. (1978 Code § 11-389, as amended)
   G.   Gravel Surfaces: Trenches excavated through gravel surfaced area, such
as gravel roads and shoulders and unpaved driveways, shall have the gravel
restored and maintained as described in subsection E of this section, except
that the gravel shall be a minimum of one inch (1") more than the thickness of
the existing gravel. (1978 Code § 11-390, as amended)
   H.   Jetting Pipe: Jetting pipe by means of water under pressure or
compressed air, is permitted only when approved by the city. (1978 Code § 11-
393, as amended)
7-3-5: PROTECTION OF PUBLIC:
Excavation operations shall be conducted in such a manner that a minimum amount
of interference or interruption of street traffic will result. Inconvenience to
residents and businesses fronting on public streets shall be minimized.
Suitable, adequate and sufficient barricades shall be available and used where
necessary to prevent accidents involving property or persons. Barricades must
be in place until all of the excavator's equipment is removed from site and
excavation has been backfilled and proper temporary gravel surface is in place.
From sunset to sunrise, all barricades and excavations must be clearly outlined
by acceptable warning lights, lanterns, flares and other devices. Police and
fire departments shall be notified at least twenty four (24) hours in advance
of any planned excavation requiring street closures or detour. (1978 Code § 11-
391, as amended)
7-3-6: RELOCATION AND PROTECTION OF UTILITIES:
An excavator shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written
consent of the city council and without advance notice to the owner of the
utility. If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing utility, it shall be
done by its owner unless the owner otherwise directs. No utility, whether owned
by the city or by a private enterprise, shall be moved to accommodate the
permittee unless the cost of such work be borne by the permittee or an
expressly written agreement is made whereby the utility owner and the excavator
make other arrangements relating to such cost. The permittee shall support and
protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other
apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and shall do
everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or
across the work. In case any of the pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus
should be damaged (and for this purpose pipe coating or other encasement or
devices are to be considered as part of a substructure), they shall be repaired
by the agency or person owning them, but the utility owner shall be reimbursed
for the expense of such repairs by the permittee. It is the intent of this
chapter that the permittee shall assume all liability for damage to
substructures, and any resulting damage or injury to anyone because of such
substructure damage and such assumption of liability shall be deemed a
contractual obligation which the permittee accepts upon acceptance of an
excavation permit. The city need not be made a party to any action because of
this chapter. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and
location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage.
(1978 Code § 11-392, as amended)
7-3-7: REVOCATION OR REFUSAL OF PERMIT:
All permits shall be subject to revocation, and the city may refuse to issue a
permit for failure of the permittee or applicant to abide by the terms and
conditions of this chapter. (1978 Code § 11-395, as amended)
7-3-8: EXCEPTION IN EMERGENCY:
Excavation permits will not be required prior to excavation in case of
emergency endangering life or property, providing the city is notified as soon
as practicable and a permit is applied for upon the next regular working day
following the emergency. (1978 Code § 11-395, as amended)
CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY; USE AND CONTROL
SECTION:
7-4-1: Use And Control
7-4-1: USE AND CONTROL:
   A.   Unlawful Use: Unless authorized by permit or other written
authorization issued by the city, or unless authority is granted by provisions
of this code or other ordinance of the city, now or hereafter enacted, it shall
be a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code for any person to: (1978 Code § 8-111, as amended; amd. 2007
Code)
      1.   Property Controlled By City: Construct, lay, excavate, erect,
operate or maintain over, under, across, in or through any property owned or
controlled by the city, any utility, canal, ditch, construction or building.
      2.   Restricted Areas: Enter upon any property of the city contrary to
any posting or marking restricting or prohibiting use of the area.
      3.   Damage To Property: Intentionally use or perform acts upon property
of the city which materially impair, alter or damage the property. (1978 Code
§ 8-111, as amended)
   B.   Repair After Unlawful Use: The city council, in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed, may order any person who has damaged, altered or
changed any property of the city to repair or restore the property to its
original condition prior to the damage, alteration or change. (1978 Code § 8-
112, as amended)
   C.   Franchise; Easement:
      1.   Provisions: The city council may grant to any person a franchise or
easement on such terms and conditions as it deems reasonable, for the purpose
of entering upon, constructing, building, operating and maintaining any
business or for other use of the property of the city, and the provisions of
subsections A and B of this section shall not apply to the extent such
provisions are waived, qualified or made inapplicable to the rights or
privileges granted in the franchise ordinance or easement.
      2.   In Writing: Any franchise or easement granted by the city shall be
in writing and any franchise or easement not in writing shall be void. (1978
Code § 8-113, as amended)
   D.   Acts Exempted: It shall not be a violation of this section where any
person uses the public property of the city in the manner or for the purpose
for which such property has been made available for public use. (1978 Code § 8-
114, as amended)
CHAPTER 5
SALE OF GOODS AND SERVICES WITHIN PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES
SECTION:
7-5-1: Permit Required
7-5-2: Rules And Regulations
7-5-3: Penalty
7-5-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Any person or entity desiring to sell goods or services within city parks or
recreation facilities must obtain a sale of goods and services permit from the
city office. (Res. 2002-9, 6-26-2002; amd. 2007 Code)
7-5-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Use Of Picnic Tables Prohibited: Any person or entity desiring to sell
goods or services within city parks or recreation facilities must bring their
own tables for display or preparation and will not use the existing picnic
tables at the park.
   B.   Trash Removal: Any person or entity desiring to sell goods or services
within city parks or recreation facilities must ensure that all trash generated
by the sale of their goods or services is picked up during and after the sale.
In addition, if city trash containers are full so that they cannot accommodate
the trash generated by the event, then any additional trash must be removed by
the permittee. No trash should be left on the premises outside of a city placed
trash container.
   C.   Restroom Use: If public restrooms are not available at the park, a
permittee is required to encourage the use of the public restrooms at the
visitor center by patrons of the park and to report to the police department
anyone they observe using the park or surrounding area as an outdoor restroom
facility.
   D.   Compliance Required: Any person or entity desiring to sell goods or
services within city parks or recreation facilities must comply with all other
state and city regulations. (Res. 2002-9, 6-26-2002)
7-5-3: PENALTY:
Any person or entity breaking this policy is guilty of an infraction and
subject to citation, and a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). All costs associated
with noncompliance will be born by the applicant, including costs of clean up.
(Res. 2002-9, 6-26-2002)
CHAPTER 6
HANGAR USE AT AIRPORT
SECTION:
7-6-1: Use Regulations
7-6-1: USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Priority:
      1.   When a hangar becomes available for rent, the city will give first
priority to lease the hangar to residents of San Juan County who own an active
aircraft that is currently registered in San Juan County. An "active aircraft"
is any aircraft which has passed its annual inspection within the preceding
twelve (12) months.
      2.   Second priority shall be given for storage of a noncounty resident
who owns an active aircraft that is currently registered in San Juan County.
      3.   Third priority shall be given for storage of a noncounty resident
who owns an active aircraft that is not registered in San Juan County.
      4.   Fourth priority shall be given for storage of aircraft to residents
of San Juan County for inactive aircraft storage.
      5.   Fifth priority shall be given to noncounty residents for inactive
aircraft storage.
   B.   Use Other Than Storage: Rental of hangars for the purposes other than
storage of active or inactive aircraft and/or other approved aviation use,
shall be conditional and subject to the approval of the city and the need for
aircraft storage at a future date. In the event city is renting a hangar for an
inactive aircraft or nonaviation use and the hangar is needed for storage of an
active aircraft, the hangar will be rented on the condition that the renter
will vacate the needed hangar within thirty (30) days of receiving written
notice from the city.
   C.   Availability: A hangar shall be deemed available for rent at the end of
the current lease term of that hangar or the earlier termination thereof. (Res.
2003-8, 5-28-2003)
CHAPTER 7
LANDSCAPING AND TREE PLANTING
SECTION:
7-7-1: Purpose
7-7-2: Minimum Maintenance
7-7-3: Requirements
7-7-4: Amendment Process
7-7-5: Enforcement
7-7-6: Penalty
7-7-1: PURPOSE:
In order to provide for public safety and protect investments in
infrastructure, this chapter sets forth minimum standards for landscaping and
tree planting in and near the public rights of way. It considers line of sight
at intersections as well as utility clearance and protection of sidewalks,
curbs, power lines, both aboveground and belowground, and other utilities in
the public rights of way. (Ord., 6-15-2004)
7-7-2: MINIMUM MAINTENANCE:
Minimum maintenance of public rights of way adjoining property shall include
mowing or cutting of weeds and other vegetation to maintain integrity of the
curbs, sidewalks and other public utilities, and also allow for unobstructed
passage by the public. (Ord., 6-15-2004)
7-7-3: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Planting Of Trees Encouraged: The city promotes tree planting in the
public rights of way when it is done in conjunction with proper planning to
help avoid negative impacts to public safety and city improvements.
   B.   Tree Placement Distances:
      1.   Curb: Half distance from sidewalk.
      2.   Sidewalk: Half distance from curb or five feet (5'), whichever is
greater.
      3.   Overhead power lines: Ten feet (10') minimum horizontal distance or
dwarf trees that do not reach power line.
      4.   Underground utility lines: Five feet (5') minimum; prefer ten feet
(10').
      5.   Light poles: All trees shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') from
light poles.
   C.   Spacing Between Curb And Sidewalk:
 
   Space Requirements For Trees
   Between Curb And Sidewalk
0 – 36 inches 36 inches – 60 inches 60 inches or greater
No trees        Dwarf trees             Large trees
               15 feet – 25 feet     25 feet – 60 feet
                When mature             When mature
 
   D.   Shrubs And Bushes: All other landscape planting in public right of way
shall be maintained at or below twenty four inches (24") in height based on
public safety and public passage.
   E.   Clear Vision Area/Sight Triangle 1 : The clear vision area is that
triangular area of a corner lot or parcel formed by the street centerlines and
the line connecting them at points eighty feet (80') from the intersecting
centerlines of the two (2) streets.
      1.   Fencing and planting is restricted within this area as follows:
(Ord., 6-15-2004)
         a.   No sight obstructing fence. (Ord., 6-15-2004; amd. Ord. 2008-3,
3-25-2008)
         b.   Shrubs shall be pruned to a height not to exceed twenty four
inches (24").
         c.   Trees shall be pruned to maintain a clear area below eight feet
(8').
      2.   This clear vision area of the public right of way serves many
different functions simultaneously, such as, public access for both people and
utilities overhead and underground, transition zone from street to adjoining
properties, beautification area, storage of rain water and snow and play area
for children. Our effort is to facilitate all of these uses as much as possible
in a balanced manner. (Ord., 6-15-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 10, chapter 5 of this code for provisions relative to
  residential districts.
7-7-4: AMENDMENT PROCESS:
Any person may initiate a review and possible change to this chapter. The
person must submit the proposed change in writing, with reasons for the
requested change listed with clear detail to the planning commission. The
planning commission may recommend a change based on a review of the information
submitted or may deny the request. If the planning commission recommends a
change, that recommendation will go to the city council. If the city council
chooses to take action, they shall set a public hearing date after advertising
the proposed change in a local paper at least two (2) weeks prior to the public
hearing meeting. (Ord., 6-15-2004)
7-7-5: ENFORCEMENT:
No representative of the city shall grant any approval if such use would be in
violation of this chapter. (Ord., 6-15-2004)
7-7-6: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty to a class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord., 6-15-2004; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 8
STREET NUMBERING AND NAMING
SECTION:
7-8-1: Numbering And Naming Of City Streets
7-8-1: NUMBERING AND NAMING OF CITY STREETS:
All streets within the city, and those which are annexed, shall be numbered by
appropriate numbers north and south of Center Street and east and west of Main
Street, and may carry a street name. In the event the street is named, a street
sign must be provided, and the street sign shall also be designated by street
number. The street name will be in smaller letters than the street number, so
that the street number is more prominent than the street name and so that the
sign will be established and constructed to be in compliance with state law.
(Ord., 6-9-1999; amd. 2007 Code)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
WATER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
8-1-1: Water Department
8-1-2: Applications For Connection, Service
8-1-3: Fees
8-1-4: Statement Of Charges; Delinquency
8-1-5: Discontinuance Of Service Request By Customer
8-1-6: Use Without Payment Prohibited
8-1-7: Use Without Authority; Restrictions
8-1-8: Installation Of Water Lines
8-1-9: Pipe Requirements
8-1-10: Water Mains Extended
8-1-11: Sprinkling Vehicles
8-1-12: Right Of Entry
8-1-13: Motors And Certain Machinery Restricted
8-1-14: Fire Hydrants
8-1-15: Scarcity Of Water
8-1-16: Waste Of Water
8-1-17: Water Meters
8-1-18: Service Outside City
8-1-19: Nonliability For Damages
8-1-20: Water Conservation
8-1-1: WATER DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Creation: The water department of the city is hereby created. It shall
administer the operation and maintenance of the water system of the city. (1978
Code § 14-110, as amended)
   B.   Superintendent: There is hereby created the position of superintendent
of the water department. (1978 Code § 14-111, as amended)
   C.   Duties: The superintendent of the water system shall manage and
supervise the city water system pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and
pursuant to resolutions, rules and regulations adopted by the city council from
time to time prescribing his powers and duties and directing the manner and
frequency with which he shall make reports to the mayor relating to the water
system. All of the functions and activities of the superintendent shall be
carried on under the direction of the city administrator. (1978 Code § 14-112,
as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
8-1-2: APPLICATIONS FOR CONNECTION, SERVICE:
   A.   Connection: Any person, other than a subdivider or developer seeking
multiple connections, who desires or is required to secure a new connection to
the city water system, shall file with the city for each such connection a
written and signed application and agreement for connection, which form is on
file in the city office. (1978 Code § 14-113, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Connection By Subdivider Or Developer: Whenever a subdivider or
developer desires or is required to install water connections and extensions
for a subdivision or development, the subdivider or developer shall enter into
a written extension agreement, which shall constitute an application for
permission to make the extensions and connections, and an agreement specifying
the terms and conditions under which the water extensions and connections shall
be made and the payments that shall be required. (1978 Code § 14-114, as
amended)
   C.   Service: Any person who desires or is required to secure water service
when such service is available from the city water system, shall file with the
water department a written application and agreement for the service, which
shall be on file in the city office. (1978 Code § 14-115, as amended; amd. 2007
Code)
   D.   Nonowner Applicants: Applications for water service made by the tenant
of an owner must, in addition to the above requirements, be guaranteed by an
agreement signed by the owner of the premises or his duly authorized agent in
such form as is on file in the city office. (1978 Code § 14-116, as amended;
amd. 2007 Code)
8-1-3: FEES:
   A.   Service Rates And Connection Fees: The rates, penalty fee for
delinquency in payment, connection fee, reservoir fee, inspection fee and other
charges incidental to connection and services from the city water system shall
be fixed from time to time by resolution enacted by the city council. The city
council may from time to time promulgate rules for levying, billing,
guaranteeing and collecting charges for water services and all other rules
necessary for the management and control of the water system. Rates for
services furnished shall be uniform with respect to each class or classes of
service established or that may hereafter be established. (1978 Code § 14-117,
as amended)
   B.   Special Rates: The city council may from time to time fix by agreement
or resolution special rates and conditions for users using exceptionally large
amounts of water service or making use of the water system under exceptional
circumstances, upon such terms and conditions as they may deem proper. (1978
Code § 14-118, as amended)
   C.   Complaints; Corrections: The city council is hereby constituted a board
of equalization of water rates to hear complaints and make corrections of any
assessments deemed to be illegal, unequal or unjust. They may, if they see fit,
rebate all or any part of the water bill of any indigent person. (1978 Code
§ 14-119, as amended)
8-1-4: STATEMENT OF CHARGES; DELINQUENCY:
   A.   Statement: The city treasurer or billing department shall furnish to
each user or mail to, or leave at his place of residence or usual place of
business, a written or printed statement stating thereon the amount of water
service charges assessed against him once each month or at such other regular
interval as the governing body shall direct.
   B.   Content Of Statement: The statement shall specify the amount of the
bill for the water service and the place of payment and date due. If any person
fails to pay the water charges within fifteen (15) days of the date due, the
city treasurer or billing department shall give the customer and property
owner, if customer is a nonowner user, notice in writing of intent to
discontinue the service to the customer unless the customer or property owner
pays the bill in full within twenty four (24) hours from the date of notice.
   C.   Discontinuance: If the water service is thereafter discontinued for
failure to make payment, then before the water service to the premises shall
again be provided, all delinquent water charges must have been paid to the city
treasurer or arrangements made for their payment in a manner satisfactory to
the city. In the event water is turned off for nonpayment of water charges,
then before the water service to the premises shall again be provided, the
customer shall pay, in addition to all delinquent water charges, such extra
charge for turning the water on and off as the governing body may have
established by resolution. Furthermore, in addition to such payments and
penalties, a delinquent customer may be required to make and file a new
application and deposit if the previous deposit has theretofore been applied to
the payment of delinquent bills. The city recorder is hereby authorized and
empowered to enforce the payment of all delinquent water charges by an action
at law in the name of the municipality. (1978 Code § 14-121, as amended; amd.
2007 Code)
8-1-5: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE REQUEST BY CUSTOMER:
Any customer desiring to discontinue service shall notify the city in writing
of such fact at least two (2) business days before the date when such service
shall be discontinued. On giving such written notice, the customer shall not be
responsible for water bills incurred after the date specified in the notice.
Any credit balance in favor of the customer as a result of an advance payment
of bills or a deposit made will be refunded upon discontinuation of service.
(1978 Code § 14-141, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
8-1-6: USE WITHOUT PAYMENT PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person by himself, family, servants or agents to
utilize the city water or sewage system without paying therefor, as herein
provided or, without authority, to open any fire hydrant, stopcock, valve or
other fixtures attached to the system of water supply unless it is done
pursuant to proper application, agreement or resolution. It shall be unlawful
to injure, deface or impair any part or appurtenance of the water or sewer
system, or to cast anything into any reservoir or tank belonging to the water
system. (1978 Code § 14-120, as amended)
8-1-7: USE WITHOUT AUTHORITY; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Turning On After Being Turned Off Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for
any person, after the water has been turned off from the premises for
nonpayment of water charges or other violation of the ordinances, rules,
regulations or resolutions pertaining to the water supply, to turn on or allow
the water to be turned on, tampered with, adjusted or used without authority
from the city administrator or an authorized employee of the city. Violation of
this subsection is a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1978 Code § 14-122, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Separate Connections: It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more families
or service users to be supplied from the same service pipe, connection or water
meter unless special permission for such combination usage has been granted by
the city council, and the premises served are owned by the same owner. In all
such cases, a failure on the part of any one of the users to comply with this
subsection shall warrant a withholding of a supply of water through the service
connections until compliance or payment has been made, and in any event, the
property owner shall be primarily liable to the city for all water services
utilized on all such premises. Nothing herein shall be deemed to preclude the
power of the city to require separate pipes, connections or meters at a
subsequent time. (1978 Code § 14-123, as amended)
   C.   Unauthorized Users: It shall be unlawful for any water service user to
permit any person from other premises or any unauthorized person to use or
obtain water service regularly from his premises or water facilities, either
outside or inside his premises. (1978 Code § 14-124, as amended)
   D.   Adjoining Premises: No consumer shall be permitted to conduct water
pipes across lots or buildings to adjoining premises without permission from
the city council and subject to such requirements relating to controls as may
be imposed by him. (1978 Code § 14-127, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   E.   Visitors: Individuals visiting the premises of an authorized user in a
recreational vehicle, not including a mobile home, and continuing to live
therein during the period of visitation may receive water service from the
service pipes or facilities of the host during the visitation period which
shall not exceed three (3) months. Continued use thereafter shall be deemed
unauthorized and violative of the provisions of this chapter relating to
separate connections and unauthorized use. (1978 Code § 14-125, as amended)
8-1-8: INSTALLATION OF WATER LINES:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to lay, repair,
alter or connect any water line to the city culinary water system without first
having received a construction permit from the proper city official. (1978 Code
§ 14-137, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Application: Applications for permits to make water connections or
other alteration or for laying or repairing lines connected directly or
indirectly to the city water system must be made by a licensed plumber, his
authorized agent, or by the owner of the premises who shall describe the nature
of the work to be done for which the application is made.
   C.   Determination Of Approval: The application shall be granted if the
proper city official determines that:
      1.   The connection, repair, alteration or installation will cause no
damage to the street in which the water main is laid, or that it will not be
prejudicial to the interests of persons whose property has been or may
thereafter be connected to the water main.
      2.   The connection conforms to the ordinances, regulations,
specifications and standards of materials required by the city.
   D.   Line And Grade Designation: All connections, alterations or
installations shall be to the line and grade designated by the proper city
official.
   E.   Fees: Fees for permits or for inspection services shall be of such
amounts as the city council shall from time to time determine by resolution.
(1978 Code § 14-138, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   F.   Moving Or Replacement Of Water Lines: In the event that the city in its
sole discretion determines that any water line of the city must be moved or
replaced, the city shall bear that portion of the cost of such move or
replacement which applies to main lines and service laterals up to the meter
located on the property line of the customer. The cost of reconnecting such new
line or lines from the house or business of the customer to his property line
shall be borne by the customer. (1978 Code § 14-139, as amended; amd. 2007
Code)
   G.   Plumbing Requirements: Permission to connect with the city water system
shall not be given unless the plumbing in the house or building to be connected
meets the provisions of the building and plumbing codes of the city. (1978 Code
§ 14-140, as amended)
8-1-9: PIPE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Good Repair: All users of water services shall keep their service pipes
and connections and other apparatus in good repair and protected from frost at
their own expense. No person, except under the direction of the proper city
official, shall be allowed to dig into the street for the purpose of laying,
removing or repairing any service pipe. (1978 Code § 14-126, as amended; amd.
2007 Code)
   B.   Quality Of Service Pipe: All service and other pipe used in conjunction
with the water services of the city shall be of such material, quality and
specifications as the city council may from time to time by resolution provide,
and shall be installed at such distances belowground as may be specified by
regulations relating to the water department. All work, alterations or
extensions affecting water pipes shall be subject to the acceptance of the
proper city official, and no connections with any water mains shall be made
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the proper city official. (1978
Code § 14-127, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
8-1-10: WATER MAINS EXTENDED:
   A.   Petition To City Council: Any person, including any subdivider, who
desires to have the water mains extended within the city, and is willing to
advance the whole expense of such extension and receive the return of an agreed
portion thereof, as hereinafter provided, may make application to the city
council by petition. The petition shall contain a description of such proposed
extension accompanied by a map showing the location of the proposed extension
together with an offer to advance the whole expense thereof, which cost shall
be verified by the proper city official. The city council may grant or deny the
petition as in its discretion deems best for the welfare of existing water
users in the city. (1978 Code § 14-143, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Ownership Of Extension: Any such extension shall be deemed the property
of the city. (1978 Code § 14-147, as amended)
   C.   Required Extension Of Water Main Line By Person, Subdivider Or
Developer: Any person, subdivider or developer who desires to secure a new
connection to the municipal water system at a location where access to a water
main is not currently available along the full length of the parcel being
proposed for development shall be required to extend the water main service
lines to the far end of the lot or development or to some mid lot point, if no
future connective benefit exists as solely determined by the city with city
council approval, at their expense and in accordance with city specifications.
(Ord. 2007-2, 4-24-2007)
8-1-11: SPRINKLING VEHICLES:
Vehicles for sprinkling shall be regulated and controlled by the water
department through the proper city official. (1978 Code § 14-129, as amended;
amd. 2007 Code)
8-1-12: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The water superintendent and his agents shall at all ordinary hours have free
access to any place supplied with water services from the municipal system for
the purpose of examining the apparatus and ascertaining the amount of water
service being used and the manner of its use. (1978 Code § 14-130, as amended)
8-1-13: MOTORS AND CERTAIN MACHINERY RESTRICTED:
No water shall be supplied from the pipes of the city water system for the
purpose of driving motor, syphon, turbine or other wheels, or any hydraulic
engines or elevators, or for driving or propelling machinery of any kind
whatsoever, nor shall any license be granted or issued for any such purpose,
except by special permission of the city council. (1978 Code § 14-132, as
amended)
8-1-14: FIRE HYDRANTS:
Water for fire hydrants will be furnished free of charge by the city.
Installation and repairs on such hydrants shall be at the expense of the city
and shall be made under the direction of the city. All customers shall grant
the city, upon demand, a right of way or easement to install and maintain such
hydrants on their premises if the city concludes that hydrants shall be so
installed for the protection of the residents of the city. (1978 Code § 14-142,
as amended)
8-1-15: SCARCITY OF WATER:
In time of scarcity of water, whenever it shall in the judgment of the mayor
and the governing body be necessary, the mayor shall, by proclamation, limit
the use of water to such extent as may be necessary. It shall be unlawful for
any person, his family, servants or agents, to violate any proclamation made by
the mayor in pursuance of this chapter. (1978 Code § 14-134, as amended)
8-1-16: WASTE OF WATER:
   A.   Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful for any water user to:
      1.   Waste water.
      2.   Allow it to be wasted by stops, taps, valves, leaky joints or pipes,
or to allow tanks or watering troughs to leak or overflow.
      3.   Wastefully run water from hydrants, faucets or stops, or through
basins, water closets, urinals, sinks or other apparatus.
      4.   Use the water for purposes other than for those which he has
applied, or to use water in violation of the rules and regulations for
controlling the water supply. (1978 Code § 14-128, as amended)
   B.   Waste Prohibited: Users of water from the city water system shall not
permit wasteful practices which, in the judgment of the water superintendent or
any of the officers or authorized employees of the city, result in the needless
waste or nonjudicious use of the resource. The city, through its
representative, shall give notice to the user to discontinue the wasteful
practice and may give suggestions for alternate methods of use. If the user
fails to discontinue such wasteful practice, the city may restrict service in
accordance with subsection D of this section.
   C.   Emergency Declaration: In times of water scarcity, the city, through
proclamation of the city council or mayor, may declare a "water emergency" and
shall set restrictions, turns, guidelines, fees, usage ceilings or any other
defined practice or procedure for the use of municipal water. Said proclamation
may be changed from time to time to reflect current needs or limitations of the
system. The public shall be notified by posting the proclamation at the city
office and by publication one time in a local newspaper. The proclamation shall
take effect on the first day following its publication in a local newspaper.
   D.   Violations: The city shall notify the water user in writing of a
violation of any restriction or practice and shall set forth a time period in
which compliance is required. On the occurrence of a second violation, the city
may impose a one hundred dollar ($100.00) surcharge to be added to the user's
billing and shall be handled in accordance with the collection procedure set
forth in section
8-1-4 of this chapter. On the occurrence of a third violation, the city may,
without written notice, discontinue service. (1978 Code § 14-135, as amended)
8-1-17: WATER METERS:
   A.   Number Of Meters; Dispute: Except as otherwise expressly permitted by
this chapter, all structures, dwelling units, establishments and persons using
water from the city water system must have such number of water meters
connected to their water system as are necessary in the judgment of the proper
city official to adequately measure use and determine water charges to the
respective users. Whenever a dispute between the proper city official and the
property owner arises as to the appropriate number of meters to be installed on
any premises, the matter shall be heard and determined by the city council
after due notice in writing to the parties involved.
   B.   Meters Furnished By City: Meters will be furnished by the city upon
application for a connection, and upon payment of such connection fees and
other costs as may be established by the city council from time to time by
resolution. Meters shall be deemed to be and remain the property of the city.
   C.   Meter Readings: The city shall cause meter readings to be taken
regularly and shall advise the city recorder thereof for the purpose of
recording the necessary billings for water service.
   D.   Tampering: Meters may be checked, inspected or adjusted at the
discretion of the city, and they shall not be adjusted or tampered with by the
customer. Meter boxes shall not be opened for the purpose of turning on or off
the water, except by an authorized representative of the city, unless special
permission is given by the city through its representatives to the customer to
do so.
   E.   Meter Testing: If a customer submits a written request to the city to
test his water meter, the city may, if under the circumstances it deems it
advisable and in its discretion, order a test of the meter, measuring the water
delivered to such customer. If such request is made within twelve (12) months
after the date of the last previous test, the customer may be required to pay
the cost of such test. If the meter is found in such test to record from ninety
seven percent (97%) to one hundred three percent (103%) of accuracy under
methods of testing satisfactory to the city council, the meter shall be deemed
to accurately measure the use of water.
   F.   Estimation In Case Of Failure: If the city meters fail to register at
any time, the water delivered during the period of failure shall be estimated
on the basis of previous consumption during a period which is not questioned.
In the event a meter is found to be recording less than ninety seven percent
(97%) or more than one hundred three percent (103%) of accuracy, the city shall
make such adjustments in the customer's previous bills as are just and fair
under the circumstances.
   G.   Damage By Customer: All damages or injury to the lines, meters or other
materials of the city on or near the customer's premises caused by any act or
neglect of the customer shall, in the discretion of the city, be repaired by
and at the expense of the customer, and the customer shall pay all costs and
expenses, including a reasonable attorney fee, which may arise or accrue to the
city through its efforts to repair the damage to the lines, meters or to other
equipment of the water department or collect such costs from the customer.
(1978 Code § 14-136, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
8-1-18: SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY:
   A.   Scope: The city may furnish water service from its water system to
persons outside the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1978 Code § 14-151, as amended)
   B.   Petition For Service: Any person located outside the city limits who
desires to be supplied with water services from the city water system and is
willing to pay in advance the whole expense of extending the water system to
his property, including the cost of extending any water main beyond its present
location, may make application to the city council by petition containing:
      1.   A description of the proposed extension.
      2.   A map showing the location thereof.
      3.   An offer to pay the whole expense incurred by the city in providing
such extension and to advance such expense as shall be verified by the city.
The city council and the person seeking such extension may enter into an
agreement providing in detail the terms under which the extension may be
utilized by others in the future and the terms under which all or any portion
of the cost of installing such extension may be refunded.
      4.   An acknowledgment that the city in granting the petition need supply
only such water to the petitioner which from time to time the city council
deems beyond the requirements of water users within the city limits, and that
such extension shall be the property of and subject to the control of the city.
(1978 Code §14-152, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Costs Determined: Upon receipt of such petition and map and before the
petition is granted, the city council shall determine what portion, if any, of
the extension of the city water mains to the city limits the city shall
construct, and shall obtain from the city staff a verified statement showing
the whole cost and expense of making such extension. Such costs and expenses
shall include administrative and supervisory expenditures of the water
department, which shall in no event be deemed to be less than ten percent (10%)
of the cost of materials and labor. (1978 Code § 14-154, as amended; amd. 2007
Code)
   D.   Extensions May Be Master Metered: When an extension supplying more than
one house or user outside the city limits is connected to city water mains, the
city may require a master meter to be installed near the point where the
connection is to be made to the city main. This installation will be at the
expense of the persons served by such extension according to the regular rates
for meter installation. Responsible parties must agree to pay all bills for
water served through the meter at the applicable water rates. (1978 Code § 14-
153, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
8-1-19: NONLIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
The city shall not be held liable for any damage to a water service user by
reason of stoppage or interruption of his or her water supply service caused by
fires, scarcity of water, accidents to the water system or its mains, or which
occurs as the result of maintenance and extension operations, or from any other
unavoidable cause. This section shall not be construed to extend the liability
of the city beyond that provided in the governmental immunity act. (1978 Code
§14-131, as amended)
8-1-20: WATER CONSERVATION:
   A.   When using the City of Blanding potable water source, watering will
only be allowed each day before ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. or after six o'clock
(6:00) P.M.
   B.   All irrigation systems must be maintained in a manner that promotes
efficient watering and limits leaks, damage to the system, or overwatering that
would allow flow of water beyond property lines.
   C.   This ordinance does not apply in the following situations:
      1.   New lawns that require frequent irrigation for establishment
purposes within 90 days of planting.
      2.   Short cycles required for testing, inspecting and maintaining
irrigation Systems.
      3.   Other situations as permitted by the city. (Ord. 2019-4, 11-12-2019)
CHAPTER 2
BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Purpose
8-2-2: Definitions
8-2-3: Surveys And Testing
8-2-4: Protection Of Water System
8-2-5: Customer Responsibility
8-2-6: City Responsibility
8-2-7: Certified Backflow Technician Responsibility
8-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to:
   A.   Protect the city drinking water system and supply from contamination or
pollution by requiring compliance with this chapter, applicable plumbing codes,
health regulations and drinking water industry standards. Compliance with these
codes and regulations is considered reasonable vigilance on the part of
consumers for prevention of contaminants and pollutants backflowing into the
public drinking water system.
   B.   Promote elimination and control of cross connections by all consumers
in their service connections, industrial piping and all plumbing applications,
and thus protect the drinking water system.
   C.   Provide a program and policy for the owner of the drinking water system
to administer and enforce for the continual and effective prevention of all
backflow into the public drinking water distribution system. (Ord., 2-26-1992)
8-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE/ASSEMBLY: Mechanical equipment manufactured
for the drinking water industry to positively prevent backflow and specifically
approved by the state of Utah department of health as successfully meeting all
their criteria for its designed purpose.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the property or
structures of the consumer, other than the purveyor's drinking water. May
include any source or supply such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor,
storm runoff, domestic or industrial wastewater, etc. These waters do not meet
the safe drinking water specifications and cannot be allowed to backflow or
siphon into the purveyor's distribution system.
BACK PRESSURE: The pressure exerted on the water meter from the consumer's
side. It is a concern when it exceeds the pressure on the purveyor's side.
BACK SIPHONAGE: Backflow of water from any source into the purveyor's
distribution pipes caused by a negative pressure or vacuum occurring in the
purveyor's pipe system.
BACKFLOW: The reverse direction of normal water flow through the consumer's
meter. Flow from the consumer's side of the meter backwards into the purveyor's
distribution system.
CERTIFIED BACKFLOW PREVENTION TECHNICIAN: A person certified by the state of
Utah department of health as meeting their criteria and standards and qualified
to inspect, survey and test backflow prevention devices/assemblies.
CONTAINED CROSS CONNECTION: Any cross connection protected with an approved
backflow prevention device properly installed and maintained so as to
continually prevent backflow. In this case, the device is located near the
consumer's meter and ahead of the consumer's piping network.
CONTAMINATION: Degrading and polluting of safe and quality drinking water by
the intrusion or backflow and commingling of unsafe materials of any kind or
from any source.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or plumbing
fixtures which could allow backflow or mixing of any unsafe water, industrial
fluid, wastewater or foreign material with the safe drinking water supply of
the purveyor. This includes, in reality, any connection within the public
drinking water distribution system.
HIGH HAZARD CROSS CONNECTION: High hazard connection will be identified by the
person representing the city conducting the survey of the consumers' piping.
Industrial, commercial, institutional and manufacturing users are most likely
to have a high hazard cross connection.
ISOLATED CROSS CONNECTION: Any cross connection protected with an approved
backflow prevention device/assembly properly installed and maintained so as to
continually prevent backflow. In this case, the device is located at the point
in the consumer's piping system where cross connection occurs and would likely
be remote from where the consumer's meter is located.
WATER PURVEYOR: The owner, staff and management of a public drinking water
system organized for the purpose of providing, circulating and disseminating
safe drinking water to the public. Said system is controlled and regulated by
the state of Utah department of health, which promulgates health and quality
standards for drinking water. (Ord., 2-26-1992)
8-2-3: SURVEYS AND TESTING:
   A.   Protection Required: The city shall be responsible for the protection
of its own drinking water system, against all foreseeable conditions which may
lead to the contamination or pollution of the drinking water. Backflow or back
siphonage are concerns addressed by this chapter.
   B.   Surveys And Inspections; Records: Surveys and inspections will be made
of the consumer's water distribution system and facilities for the purpose of
locating all existing or potential cross connections. Surveys and inspections
will be made by persons representing the city who are qualified and certified
in the cross connection program. Records of all surveys will be made by these
qualified personnel and filed by the water department.
   C.   Notification Requirements: It shall be the responsibility of the city
to notify all water customers of the need for the periodic system survey to
comply with health and safe drinking water standards. The customer shall be
notified twenty four (24) hours prior to any inspection or survey and shall be
invited to observe.
   D.   Approved Backflow Prevention Device: Selection of an approved backflow
prevention device shall be made based on the results of the survey.
   E.   Testing Requirements:
      1.   High Hazard: Each backflow prevention device/assembly located at a
high hazard cross connection, shall be tested yearly by the water department or
by a private technician. The test shall be performed according to established
procedure. The test shall be performed by a certified technician. Records of
each test shall be made by the technician and filed with the water department,
the customer and the state department of health.
      2.   Low Hazard: Low hazard backflow prevention devices/assemblies shall
be tested on a rotating schedule, but at least once every ten (10) years.
(Ord., 2-26-1992)
8-2-4: PROTECTION OF WATER SYSTEM:
   A.   Required: No water service connection shall be installed or maintained
by the water department unless the water supply is protected as required by
state health laws and regulations.
   B.   Discontinuance For Violation: Water service to a consumer's meter shall
be discontinued if found to be in violation of this chapter. The consumer shall
be notified in writing of the violation and adequate time allowed to bring his
system into compliance. Service shall not be restored until all conditions are
met.
   C.   Open For Inspection: The customer's system shall be open for inspection
at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the public drinking
water system.
   D.   Type Of Device: The type of backflow prevention device/assembly
required shall be determined after close inspection and survey of the
consumer's system. The certified inspector will determine the degree of
potential hazard, which will then dictate the type of device/assembly called
for.
   E.   Existing Devices Tested: All existing backflow prevention devices/
assemblies shall be tested by a certified technician. If determined inadequate
to properly protect the public drinking water system, the device/assembly shall
be replaced by an approved device/assembly within a reasonable time. The time
to be set by the water department after consulting with the consumer.
   F.   High Hazard Devices Testing Schedule: A schedule for testing the
operation of all high hazard backflow prevention devices at least once each
year will be formulated by the water department. Certified technicians shall do
the testing following standards set forth by the state department of health.
The expense of these scheduled annual tests will be the responsibility of the
customer.
   G.   Violations: If violations of this chapter occur, the violator shall be
given written notification. If no action or response is made by the consumer
within ten (10) calendar days, the water purveyor may physically disconnect the
service connection until corrective action has been completed.
   H.   Installation Of Devices: Caution shall be used to not install a
backflow prevention device in an unsafe or hazardous location such as over an
electrical panel, near steam pipes or boilers, or in pits or above ceiling
level. (Ord., 2-26-1992)
8-2-5: CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   The customer shall comply with this chapter as a term and condition of
receiving water service from the water department. Acceptance of water service
is an admission of customer's awareness of this requirement.
   B.   It shall be the responsibility of the consumer to purchase, install,
test and maintain any "high hazard" backflow prevention device/assembly
required in order to comply with this chapter, and to maintain their own
plumbing system in compliance with state regulations and all applicable codes.
(Ord., 2-26-1992)
8-2-6: CITY RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   The city shall employ a certified plumbing inspector and a certified
backflow technician, as well as water department personnel to enforce codes and
ordinances concerning all plumbing and piping on the consumer's side of the
meter.
   B.   All building and construction drawings shall be reviewed for potential
cross connections. Owners, developers, builders and contractors shall be made
aware of the city cross connection control policy as soon as possible in their
planning phase.
   C.   The water department shall supply tags used to identify devices/
assemblies referred to in subsection 8-2-7A7 of this chapter. (Ord., 2-26-1992)
   D.   The city shall notify each customer, when a backflow prevention device/
assembly is installed, of the potential thermal expansion danger that exists as
a result of the installation. (Ord., 2-26-1992; amd. 2007 Code)
8-2-7: CERTIFIED BACKFLOW TECHNICIAN RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   Whether employed by the city or by a private consumer, all certified
backflow technicians shall:
      1.   Perform all tests, surveys and maintenance on backflow prevention
devices/assemblies.
      2.   Maintain and distribute competent and accurate reports of all tests,
surveys and maintenance tasks.
      3.   Use acceptable test procedures and equipment in performing their
tasks.
      4.   Report all testing and repairs to the consumer, the water system
owner and the state health department. Reports shall be on forms approved by
the state and made within the prescribed time frame. Reports shall include all
replacement materials, supplies and parts used.
      5.   Use replacement parts equal in quality to the original equipment.
      6.   Not change the original design, operation or equipment used.
      7.   Tag each double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, reduced
pressure backflow assembly and high hazard air gap, showing the serial number
and date of test. Tag shall show name and license number of tester supplied by
the water department.
   B.   Notify in writing the owner of the public drinking water system prior
to any installation, test, survey or repair of any backflow prevention device/
assembly. Also inform the customer in writing of the possible thermal expansion
danger posed by a closed system created by the backflow device/assembly. (Ord.,
2-26-1992)
   C.   When a private consumer selects a commercially available technician,
any certified technician is authorized to make the test and report the results
to the consumer, the water purveyor and the state. If such a commercially
tested assembly requires repair, a licensed plumber shall make the actual
repair. (Ord., 2-26-1992; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER SERVICE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Definitions
8-3-2: Sewer Department And Superintendent
8-3-3: Applications For Service
8-3-4: Wastewater Treatment Charge
8-3-5: Use Of Public Sewers Required
8-3-6: Sanitary Sewers, Building Sewers And Connections
8-3-7: Revocation Of Permits
8-3-8: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
8-3-9: Discharge Regulations
8-3-10: Ownership Of Connecting Lines
8-3-11: Private Wastewater Disposal
8-3-12: Hearing Board
8-3-13: Penalty
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams per
liter.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five
feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal. Also called "service lateral".
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or
surface water.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
GARBAGE: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of foods.
HEARING BOARD: That board appointed according to provisions of section
8-3-12 of this chapter.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The wastewater from industrial processes, trade or business,
as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
MAY: Is permissive. (See definition of Shall)
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or
ground water.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter
of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and hydrogen ion
concentration of 10-7.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 centimeters).
PUBLIC SEWER: A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public
utility.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that carries liquid and water carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together
with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not admitted
intentionally,
SEWAGE: The spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater".
SEWER: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SHALL: Is mandatory. (See definition of May)
SLUDGE: Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty
four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal operation and shall
adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater
treatment works.
STORM DRAIN OR STORM SEWER: A drain or sewer for conveying water, ground water,
subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source.
SUPERINTENDENT: The superintendent of wastewater facilities of the city, or his
authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of
or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods For The
Examination Of Water And Wastewater" and referred to as nonfilterable residue.
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it
may be combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any
ground water, surface water and storm water that may be present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the
effluent.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial waste and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous
with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "water
pollution control plant".
WATERCOURSE: A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water, either
continuously or intermittently. (1978 Code § 14-205, as amended; amd. 2007
Code)
8-3-2: SEWER DEPARTMENT AND SUPERINTENDENT:
   A.   Created: The sewer department is hereby created. It shall comprise all
of the property, equipment and personnel necessary to the maintenance and
operation of the city sewage collection and disposal system. The department
shall administer the operation and maintenance of the city sewer system. (1978
Code § 14-211, as amended)
   B.   Superintendent: There is hereby created the position of superintendent
of the sewer department. (1978 Code § 14-212, as amended)
   C.   Duties: The superintendent of the sewer department shall manage and
supervise the city sewer system under the direction of the city administrator,
who from time to time shall, by resolution or otherwise, prescribe the
superintendent's powers and duties and direct the manner and frequency with
which he shall make reports to the mayor relating to the sewer system. (1978
Code § 14-213, as amended)
8-3-3: APPLICATIONS FOR SERVICE:
   A.   Application: Any person who desires or is required to secure sewer
service when such service is available from the city sewer system shall apply
therefor to the city and file an agreement with the city, which shall be in
such form as is on file in the city office. (1978 Code § 14-214, as amended;
amd. 2007 Code)
   B.   Nonowner Applicants; Agreement By Owner: Applications for sewer
services made by the tenant or an owner must, in addition to the above
requirement, be guaranteed by an agreement signed by the owner of the premises
or his duly authorized agent, which shall be in such form as is on file in the
city office. (1978 Code § 14-215, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Required Extension Of Sewer Main Line By Person, Subdivider Or
Developer: Any person, subdivider or developer who desires to secure a new
connection to the municipal sewer system at a location where access to a sewer
main is not currently available along the full length of the parcel being
proposed for development shall be required to extend the sewer main service
lines to the far end of the lot or development or to some mid lot point, if no
future connective benefit exists as solely determined by the city with city
council approval, at their expense and in accordance with city specifications.
(Ord. 2007-2, 4-24-2007)
8-3-4: WASTEWATER TREATMENT CHARGE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose shall be to generate sufficient revenue to pay all
costs for the operation and maintenance of the complete wastewater collection
system. The costs shall be distributed to all users of the wastewater system in
proportion to each user's contribution to the total loading of the treatment
works. Factors such as strength (BOD and SS), volume and delivery flow rate
characteristics shall be considered and included as the basis for the user's
contribution to ensure a proportional distribution of operation and maintenance
costs to each user (or user class).
   B.   Determining Total Annual Cost Of Operation And Maintenance: The city
council shall determine the total annual costs of operation and maintenance of
the wastewater system which are necessary to maintain the capacity and
performance during the service life of the collection system, for which such
system was designed and constructed. The total annual cost of operation and
maintenance shall include, but need not be limited to, labor, repairs,
equipment replacement, maintenance, necessary modifications, power, sampling,
laboratory tests and a reasonable contingency fund.
   C.   Determining Each User's Wastewater Contribution Percentage:
      1.   The city shall determine the average monthly sewer use for each
connection based on the six (6) month water use from October through March of
each fiscal year.
      2.   The city shall determine each sewage strength of biochemical oxygen
demand and suspended solids for those users who discharge sewage of greater
strength than residential strength.
   D.   User Charge Rate: The user charge rates shall be in such amounts as
established by resolution of the city council.
   E.   Review Of Each User's Wastewater Service Charge: The city council shall
review the total annual cost of operation and maintenance, including the city
yearly contribution, and will revise the service charges as necessary to assure
equity of the service charge system established herein and to assure that
sufficient funds are obtained to adequately operate and maintain the wastewater
treatment works.
   F.   Notification: Each user will be notified, at least annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user
charges which are attributable to wastewater treatment services. (1978 Code
§ 14-216, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   G.   Delinquency; Discontinuance Of Service:
      1.   The sewer department, or such other person as the governing body may
designate, shall furnish to each user or mail or leave at his place of
residence or usual place of business, a written or printed statement stating
the sewer service charges assessed against him once each month or at such other
regular intervals as the governing body shall direct. The statement shall
specify the amount of the bill, place of payment and the date due.
      2.   If any person fails to pay his sewer charges within fifteen (15)
days of the date due, the city shall give the customer notice in writing of the
intent to discontinue the service of water to the premises unless the customer
pays the bill in full within five (5) days from date of notice.
      3.   If the water service is thereafter discontinued for failure to make
payment of the sewer service charges, before the water service to the premises
shall again be provided, all delinquent sewer charges must have been paid to
the city treasurer or arrangements made for their payment that are satisfactory
to the city.
      4.   In the event water is turned off for nonpayment of sewer charges,
before the water service to the premises shall again be provided, the customer
shall pay, in addition to all delinquent charges, such extra charge for turning
the water on and off as the governing body may have established by resolution
or ordinance.
      5.   If any person fails to pay his sewer charges within thirty (30) days
of the due date, the city is hereby authorized to take all action necessary to
enforce collection, including, but not limited to, the commencement of legal
proceedings in a court of proper jurisdiction seeking judgment for the amount
of the delinquent fees and service charges and all costs of collection,
including court costs and attorney fees. (1978 Code § 14-219, as amended; amd.
2007 Code)
8-3-5: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   Depositing Waste Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or
private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said
city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   B.   Befouling Waters Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any
natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of said
city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Private Disposal: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful
to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. (1978 Code § 14-220,
as amended)
   D.   Connection Required: The owners of all houses, buildings or properties
used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated
within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which
there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of
the city are hereby required, at the owner's expense, to install suitable
toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within sixty
(60) days after the date of official notice to do so; provided, that said
public sewer is within three hundred feet (300') 1  of the property line. (1978
Code § 14-220, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   E.   Restricting The Use Of Other Sewage Disposal Systems: It shall be
unlawful for the owner or any other person occupying or having charge of any
premises within the municipality, on a lot that is less than one acre in size,
to dispose of sewage therefrom by any means other than by use of the municipal
sewer system. In addition, no subdivision that is not considered minor may
dispose of sewage therefrom by any means other than by use of the municipal
sewer system. (See the subdivision code). (Ord. 2007-2, 4-24-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 4-4-3B of this code.
8-3-6: SANITARY SEWERS, BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   No unauthorized persons shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
   B.   There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: 1) for
residential and commercial service; and 2) for service to establishments
producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the proper city official. A permit and
inspection fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council
shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed.
   C.   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owners. The owners shall indemnify the
city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building sewer.
   D.   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another or an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway. The building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not
assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from
any such single connection aforementioned.
   E.   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the city, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
   F.   The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of all
sanitary sewers, including building sewers and the methods to be used in
excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench,
shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes, or
other applicable rules and regulations of the city and the state. In the
absence of suitable code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials
and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF
manual of practice no. 9 shall apply.
   G.   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In any buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   H.   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a
building sewer or building drain, which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer, unless such connection is approved by
the city for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.
   I.   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes, or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF manual of practice no. 9.
All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by
proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must
be approved by the city before installation.
   J.   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the city.
   K.   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. (1978 Code
§ 14-222, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
8-3-7: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
All construction permits for sewer connections or installations shall be issued
to the plumber who is to do the work, or to the owner of the property, subject
to the supervision and inspection by the city. The city may at any time revoke
a permit because of defective work or because of undue delay in completing the
permitted work. (1978 Code § 14-224, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
8-3-8: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   The city's duly authorized employees bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to
discharge to the community system in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   B.   The city's duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain
information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the
kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. The industry
may withhold information considered confidential. The industry must establish
that the revelation to the public of the information in question might result
in an advantage to competitors.
   C.   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in subsection A of this section, the city's duly authorized employees shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company,
and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city
employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to
its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damages asserted against the company growing out of
the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence
or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in subsection
8-3-9H of this chapter.
   D.   The city's duly authorized employees bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which
the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited
to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of
any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry
and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance
with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private
property involved. (1978 Code § 14-227, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
8-3-9: DISCHARGE REGULATIONS:
   A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted
waters such as storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage or cooling water to any sewer, except storm water runoff
from limited areas, which storm water may be polluted at times, may be
discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the city.
   B.   Storm water other than that exempted under subsection A of this
section, and all other unpolluted drainage, shall be discharged to such sewers
as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved
by the city and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water
or process waters may be discharged, on approval of the city, to a storm sewer
or natural outlet.
   C.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described water or wastes to any public sewer:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
      2.   Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases,
in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to
contaminate the sludge of any municipal systems, to injure or interfere with
any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create
a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the
wastewater treatment plant.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the wastewater treatment works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater facilities, such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
   D.   The following described substances, materials, waters or wastes shall
be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities
which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or
equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not
otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. The
city may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the
regulations below if in its opinion such severe limitations are necessary to
meet the above objectives. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability, the
city will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste
in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of
the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the
wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the
wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or
restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged
to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the city
are as follows:
      1.   Wastewater having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
      2.   Wastewater containing more than twenty five milligrams per liter (25
mg/l) of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral
oil origin.
      3.   Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat or
grease.
      4.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see definition of
"property shredded garbage" at section
8-3-1 of this chapter). Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers
from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering
establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation
of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when
served by caterers.
      5.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material
received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds
the limits established by the design of the system for such materials.
      6.   Any waters or wastes containing odor producing substances which may
exceed limits established by the design of the system.
      7.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the design of the system in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
      8.   Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a
"sludge" as defined in section
8-3-1 of this chapter.
      9.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
      10.   Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or
wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended
solids that interfere with the collection system, or create a condition
deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
   E.   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which water contains the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in subsection D of this section, and which in
the judgment of the city, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater
facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create
a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may:
      1.   Reject the wastes;
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      4.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of
section
8-3-4 of this chapter.
When considering the above alternatives, the city shall give consideration to
the economic impact of each alternative on the discharges. If the city permits
the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of
the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the
city.
   F.   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in
subsection D3 of this section, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful
ingredients; except interceptors shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the city, and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and
disposal by appropriate means of the captivated material and shall maintain
records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by the
city. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by
owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms.
   G.   Where pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided or
required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
   H.   When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure,
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such
structures, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The structure shall
be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as
to be safe and accessible at all times.
   I.   The city may require a user of sewer services to provide information
needed to determine compliance with this chapter. These requirements may
include:
      1.   Wastewaters discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time
period.
      2.   Chemical analysis of wastewaters.
      3.   Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality.
      4.   Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or
other materials important to sewer use control.
      5.   A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location.
      6.   Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
      7.   Details of systems to prevent and control the loss of materials
through spills to the municipal sewer.
   J.   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of
Water And Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association.
Sampling methods, location, times, durations and frequencies are to be
determined on an individual basis, subject to approval by the city.
   K.   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the city for treatment. (1978 Code § 14-230, as amended; amd. 2007
Code)
8-3-10: OWNERSHIP OF CONNECTING LINES:
Unless provision is expressly made for ownership of mains or lines by the owner
of the adjacent property by means of written agreement, all lines and mains
connecting the sewer system to a landowner or resident premises which are
situated on the public way between the main and the property line shall be
deemed to be the property of the city and subject to its absolute control and
supervision even though actual installation and maintenance shall be performed
by the owner or resident of the premises. (1978 Code § 14-233, as amended; amd.
2007 Code)
8-3-11: PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL:
   A.   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of subsection 8-3-5D of this chapter, a building sewer shall be
connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions
of this section.
   B.   Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, the owners shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city. The
application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city,
which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other
information as deemed necessary by the city. A permit and inspection fee in
such amount as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to
the city at the time the application is filed.
   C.   A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city.
The city shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction,
and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when the
work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are
covered. The inspection shall be made during regular business hours within
twenty four (24) hours of the receipt of notice by the city.
   D.   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department
of health. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is
less than forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet. No
septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
   E.   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in subsection 8-3-5D of
this section, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within
sixty (60) days in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks,
cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned
of sludge and filled with suitable material.
   F.   The owners shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. Sludge
shall be removed by a licensed operator and disposed of as required by the
state division of health and city ordinances.
   G.   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer.
(1978 Code § 14-240, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
8-3-12: HEARING BOARD:
   A.   Created: A hearing board shall be appointed as needed for arbitration
of differences between the city and sewer users on matters concerning
interpretation and execution of the provisions of this chapter by the city. The
cost of the arbitration will be divided equally between the city and the sewer
user.
   B.   Membership: One member of the board shall be a registered professional
engineer; one member shall be a health official; one member shall be a
representative of industry or manufacturing enterprise; one member shall be a
lawyer; and one member shall be selected at large for his interest in
accomplishing the objectives of this chapter. (1978 Code § 14-241, as amended;
amd. 2007 Code)
8-3-13: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except
section
8-3-8 of this chapter, shall be served by the city with a written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for
the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
   B.   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in subsection A of this section, shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall
be deemed a separate offense.
   C.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by
reason of such violation.
   D.   No person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct. (1978 Code § 14-242, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 4
ELECTRIC POWER
SECTION:
8-4-1: Department Created
8-4-2: Municipal Power Board
8-4-3: Powers And Duties Of Board
8-4-4: General Provisions
8-4-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created the department of municipal power, which shall be
responsible for the development, production, purchase and distribution of all
electric power services by the city. At such time as a municipal power system
is available to serve residents, all residents shall connect to the municipal
system. (1978 Code § 14-311, as amended)
8-4-2: MUNICIPAL POWER BOARD:
   A.   Created: There is hereby created and established the Blanding municipal
power board (hereafter in this chapter, "board"), which shall have exclusive
jurisdiction, control and management of the department and all its operations
and facilities. The board shall have all the powers and duties necessary to
construct, acquire, expand and operate the public utility, and to do any and
all acts necessary, convenient or desirable to operate, maintain, enlarge,
extend, preserve and promote an orderly, economic and businesslike
administration of the public and utility. (1978 Code § 14-312)
   B.   Organization Of Board:
      1.   Number Of Commissioners: The board shall consist of six (6) members,
appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the city council. (1978 Code § 14-
313, as amended)
      2.   Appointment And Tenure: The commissioners shall be appointed to
serve terms of five (5) years or three (3) years, as determined by the mayor,
and until their successors are appointed and have qualified; but the term of
office of members of the governing body appointed to the commission shall
expire when that member's term on the governing body expires. (1978 Code § 14-
313, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
      3.   Vacancies: Vacancies shall be filled by the mayor, with the consent
and approval of the city council, for the unexpired term. No vacancy in the
commission shall impair the right of the remaining commissioners to exercise
all the powers of the commission.
      4.   Qualifications: To be appointed commissioner, a person must be a
resident of the city. At least one commissioner shall be a member of the city
council. Each commissioner shall serve the appointed term and may be removed
from office prior to the expiration of his appointed term only after just cause
for removal has been shown in a public hearing, and by action of a majority of
the members of the city council, with the concurrence of the mayor. A
commissioner who does not possess the qualifications of this subsection shall
be removed from office forthwith by the mayor.
      5.   Compensation: Until otherwise established by resolution, each
commissioner shall be paid from the revenues of the department, the sum of ten
dollars ($10.00) for each meeting of the board actually attended; but no
commissioner shall receive in any one year more than two hundred forty dollars
($240.00) for attending board meetings, and members of the governing body shall
receive no compensation. Commissioners may be reimbursed for expenses incurred
in carrying out their duties, other than compensation for attending meetings of
the board.
      6.   Conduct Of Meetings: The board, by majority vote, shall elect from
among its members a chairperson, who shall preside over the meetings of the
board, and a vice chairperson, who shall act for the chairperson during his
absence. The board shall have as its secretary and treasurer, the city recorder
and city treasurer, and the board shall pay to the city a reasonable sum, as
established by the city council, as compensation for their services. Election
of officers of the board shall be held at the first regular meeting at which
all members are present following the appointment of a new commissioner for a
full term, but not later than the fourth meeting following the appointment. The
board shall adopt rules for the conduct of its meetings. No action shall be
taken by the board except by the affirmative vote of at least three (3)
commissioners. Three (3) commissioners shall constitute a quorum. (1978 Code
§ 14-313, as amended)
8-4-3: POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD:
   A.   Personnel And Materials Used:
      1.   Except as is above provided, the board is authorized and empowered
to employ all necessary laborers, clerks and employees and fix and pay their
salaries. Whenever city employees are employed, or city equipment used, the
board and city council shall apportion and determine the compensation of the
employees or value of the equipment used. The board shall purchase all
necessary materials and supplies for the proper operation and maintenance of
the power system so owned and operated by the city.
      2.   The board may select one full time "electrician/manager" for the
department and define the duties and compensation thereof. The electrician/
manager duties include, but are not limited to, the proper operation,
maintenance and care of the department. The salary of the electrician/manager
will be set by the board, subject to the approval of the city council. The
normal working hours of the electrician/manager not needed in the proper
operation, maintenance and care of the department, may be used for other work
as needed by the city.
   B.   Surety Bonds: The board may require surety bonds for any of the
officers and employees of the department in such amounts as the board deems
necessary. The premiums for the bonds shall be paid by the department in the
same manner as any other operating expense.
   C.   Employee Benefits: The board may contribute to the cost of pension,
retirement, life and accident and health insurance programs for the officers
and employees of the department.
   D.   Real Estate And Contracts: The board may: 1) sell its products and
services to public and private corporations and to other consumers within and
outside the city; 2) construct plants, transmission lines and other facilities;
3) purchase real estate and franchises in the name of the city, with the
approval of the city council; and 4) enter into all contracts, leases and
agreements in furtherance hereof.
   E.   Extensions Of Service: The board may adopt regulations governing
extensions of services of the department both inside and outside the city
limits. The regulations shall provide the conditions under which the extensions
shall be made to render them compensatory and shall, when completed, become the
property of the city whether on public or private property. The board may
provide for the form of refunds where advances by the persons benefited are
necessary to make extensions compensatory.
   F.   Joint Operations With Others: The board may contract with any public or
private corporation or any individual, both inside and outside the city limits:
1) for the joint use of poles and other property belonging either to the
department or to the other contracting party or jointly to both parties; and 2)
with the approval of the council for the joint acquisition of real property and
franchises and the joint financing, construction and operation of plants,
transmission lines and other facilities, whereby any property acquired may
become the property of both the city and the other contracting party. (1978
Code § 14-314, as amended)
   G.   Eminent Domain: The board may enter upon any land or water for the
purpose of making surveys and may exercise the right of eminent domain on
behalf of the city whenever public necessity requires. (1978 Code § 14-314, as
amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   H.   Use Of Thoroughfares For Utility Installations: The board may use the
ground over, under or along any road, railroad, highway, street, sidewalk,
thoroughfare, alley or waterway in the operations of the department, but shall
in all cases and subject to the applicable general regulations of the city,
cause the surface of the public way to be restored to its usual condition.
   I.   Rates:
      1.   Subject to review by the city council, the board shall fix rates to
be charged for electricity sold and services rendered by the department. Rates
shall be fair, reasonable and compensatory, and shall be uniform for all
consumers within the same class; but different rate schedules may be applied to
different classes of consumers as determined by the board. Rates within the
city may be less but not more than rates for the same class of consumers
outside the city limits. Rates shall be sufficient to pay all operating and
maintenance expenses of each respective utility operation and, except for the
first two (2) years of operations, all bond interest and redemption costs of
the respective utility operations. The board may require reasonable deposits as
security for the payment of charges for utility services and may provide for
the return of the deposits when satisfactory consumer credit has been
established.
      2.   The collection of all funds due the department for the consumption
of electric power by any and all consumers, shall be administered as directed
by the board for the collection of the same.
   J.   Authority For Expenditures: Money shall not be drawn from the funds of
the department nor shall any obligation for the expenditures of money be
incurred except as authorized by the board. No claim against the department
shall be paid unless evidenced by a voucher approved by the board.
   K.   Promotion Expenditures: The board may authorize reasonable expenditures
to advertise and otherwise promote the use of the services of the department
and to acquaint the public with the operations, programs and planned expansion
of the department.
   L.   Sinking Fund: The board shall establish a sinking or reserve fund in an
amount to be established by the city council by resolution. The sinking fund
shall be maintained for use in paying emergency expenditures of the power
system and, in addition, the board may transfer not to exceed one-third (1/3)
of any amount in the fund to the city to meet emergency capital improvements.
(1978 Code § 14-314, as amended)
   M.   Franchise Tax And Transfer Of Funds: The board shall pay annually to
the city a franchise tax of seventy nine thousand five hundred dollars
($79,500.00), or as changed from time to time by mutual agreement between the
city council and the board, after the interest and principal and reserve
requirements of the bond issue have been met. In addition, the board may, from
net revenues of the system, transfer to the city treasury such surplus funds as
in the board's judgment will not be needed for the operation and maintenance of
the system or any of its funds, the transfer to be made at the close of the
operational year, but the funds so transferred may only be used by the city to
reduce taxes or for a capital improvement for the entire city. (1978 Code § 14-
314, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   N.   Accounting And Budget Reports: The board, in addition to the reports
and accounting it may otherwise be required by law to make, shall not later
than April 1 in each year, furnish the city council through the mayor, its
annual report which shall include the following statements as of the end of the
preceding fiscal year: 1) a balance sheet showing the financial condition of
the department and each separate division, prepared according to generally
accepted public utility accounting principles; 2) a statement of operations for
each division of the department; and 3) any additional supporting statements or
schedules deemed necessary and desirable by the city council to make a clear
and informative presentation of the financial position of the department. The
reports shall be kept on file in the city recorder's office and shall be open
to public inspection. The funds and accounts of the department shall be audited
annually by a certified accountant. The board shall also annually prepare a
budget forecast for the ensuing year and furnish a copy to the mayor and to the
city council for their information; but if the budget requires payments from
the general fund of the city, it shall be submitted to the mayor and the city
council in a manner prescribed by this chapter for the use of such funds. (1978
Code § 14-314, as amended)
8-4-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Disposition Of Public Utilities: The governing body shall have no
authority, without mutual consent of the board, to lease to operate, sell,
lease, abandon, or in any other way dispose of any public utility owned by it;
but nothing herein shall prevent the city from pledging the revenues of any
such public utility or entering into covenants with or for the benefit of the
holders of revenue bonds relating to the maintenance, use, expansion and
operation of any such public utilities. (1978 Code § 14-315, as amended; amd.
2007 Code)
   B.   Existing Obligations: Contracts and obligations relating to the utility
systems of the city incurred prior to the taking effect of this chapter shall
not be impaired and shall be binding upon the board insofar as they apply to
the department.
   C.   Payment Of Revenue Bonds: The revenues from the department shall, at
all times, be sufficient to pay all or any part of any bond or debit of the
department, whether the debit is in the form of a revenue bond, a general
obligation bond, the proceeds of which were used for the department, or any
other debit or obligation, including salaries of employees, operation and
maintenance. Nothing in this section shall prevent the board from establishing
a utility rate sufficient to create a surplus and to provide payments to the
general fund. (1978 Code § 14-315, as amended)
CHAPTER 5
NATURAL GAS
SECTION:
8-5-1: Definitions
8-5-2: Administrative Provisions
8-5-3: Applicable Regulations
8-5-4: Rates And Charges
8-5-5: Special Contracts
8-5-6: Excavations
8-5-7: Connection And Installation Of System
8-5-8: Gas Meters
8-5-9: Unlawful Acts
8-5-10: Tampering, Bypassing Or Unauthorized Metering
8-5-11: Control And Protection Of System
8-5-12: Nonliability Of City
8-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms, as
used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:
BYPASS OR BYPASSING: Any line, pipe, hose or other instrument, device or
contrivance connected to the natural gas supply system, service line, fuel
piping, or any part thereof, in such a manner as to transport or distribute any
such natural gas without passing through an authorized meter for measuring or
registering the amount of such gas.
CERTIFIED OPERATOR OR OPERATOR: Any person certified by the gas department of
Blanding City to install natural gas lines.
CHAPTER OR THIS CHAPTER: Title 8, chapter 5 of this code.
CUSTOMER: The person, authorized agent or employee of the person responsible
for the gas service account for the premises being served.
DEPARTMENT OR GAS DEPARTMENT: The operating department of the city which is
responsible for the operation and maintenance of the natural gas supply system
of the city.
DISTRIBUTION LINE: A pipe transporting natural gas, high or low pressure, which
is used for the purpose of general distribution of natural gas to the user.
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM: That portion of the natural gas system of the city which
is used primarily for the distribution of natural gas to the user.
FUEL PIPING: The piping downstream of the gas department meter set, which is
owned and maintained by the owner of the premises being served.
MAIN LINE: A distribution line that serves as a common source of supply for
more than one service line.
MASTER METER SYSTEM: Any system of distributing gas whereby an owner buys
metered gas from the city then distributes and sells the gas through the
owner's own underground piping system to the ultimate user.
METER SET: The gas department's piping, fittings, service regulator, service
meter, associated equipment and instruments installed downstream of the service
riser shutoff valve and upstream of the connection to the owner's fuel piping.
NATURAL GAS: Any fuel consisting in whole or in part of natural gas or
synthetic natural gas derived from petroleum liquids, coal, organic wastes,
etc.
NATURAL GAS SUPPLY SYSTEM OR NATURAL GAS SYSTEM: A. Any and all services,
facilities, structures, equipment or works owned or used by the city for the
purpose of the production, distribution or regulation of natural gas,
including, but not limited to, natural gas main lines, service lines,
regulators, meter set, valves and associated appurtenances; and
B. Any and all rights, property and obligations of the city concerning natural
gas distribution facilities; and
C. Any and all standby or contingency equipment facilities, devices or
materials which may be necessary to provide reliable natural gas service; and
D. Any and all land or sites owned or used by the city for the purpose of
measuring and regulating natural gas and/or providing natural gas service to
users, including any and all gas department facilities, easements and rights of
way; and
E. Any and all appurtenances, extensions, improvements, additions, alterations
or replacements thereof.
OWNER: The person who holds record title to the premises being served.
SERVICE LINE: A distribution line that transports natural gas from a main line
to a gas department meter set.
SERVICE STUB: That portion of the service line which extends from the main line
to the owner's property line, or to the city utility easement line, whichever
is appropriate.
SUPERINTENDENT: The manager or supervisor of the gas department, or his
designated representative.
TAMPER OR TAMPERING: Damaging, altering, adjusting or in any manner interfering
with or obstructing the action or operation of any regulator, meter or related
instrument provided for measuring, controlling or registering the amount of
natural gas passing through such meter.
UNAUTHORIZED METERING: Removing, moving, installing, connecting, reconnecting
or disconnecting any meter or metering device for natural gas service by a
person other than an authorized employee of the department.
USER: Any person who uses or consumes natural gas from or is connected to the
natural gas supply system of the city. A "user" may also be an owner, customer,
or neither. (Document, 11-9-1994)
8-5-2: ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Department Responsibility: The gas department shall be responsible for
the natural gas supply system serving the city, and such other areas as
authorized by the city council.
   B.   Superintendent Responsibility:
      1.   The superintendent shall be responsible for the management of the
natural gas distribution system of the city and all of the property
appertaining thereto. He shall see that such system is properly maintained and
kept in good working order and repair, and he shall ensure proper compliance
with all local, state and federal regulations concerning the distribution of
natural gas.
      2.   The superintendent shall perform such other duties in connection
with operations of the department as may be required by the city administrator.
   C.   Adoption Of Rules And Regulations: Rules and regulations adopted by the
superintendent shall pertain to, but not be limited to, installation,
construction, operation and maintenance of the natural gas distribution system
of the city, and standards, specifications, procedures and guidelines for
regulating the distribution and use of natural gas supplied by the city. In
establishing such rules and regulations, the superintendent shall seek to
assure the safe and efficient operation of the natural gas distribution system,
and the protection of such system, process, equipment and facilities
appurtenant thereto. (Document, 11-9-1994)
8-5-3: APPLICABLE REGULATIONS:
The use or connection to the natural gas supply system of the city by any
person, except a public utility, shall be subject to one or more of the
following, as applicable:
   A.   All ordinances and resolutions of the city;
   B.   The provisions of the currently effective tariff sheets governing
natural gas service for the various classes, including regulations set forth
herein;
   C.   The most current gas department service line design and construction
specifications;
   D.   Applicable provisions of the United States department of
transportation, published in the federal register concerning natural gas; and
(Document, 11-9-1994)
   E.   Applicable provisions of the mechanical, building, fire and electrical
code. (Document, 11-9-1994; amd. 2007 Code)
8-5-4: RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Determined: The rates, charges and regulations, including conditions
for all classes of natural gas service for customers and users inside and
outside of the corporate limits of the city, shall be determined by the city
council, except in the case of a sale of natural gas by the department of
another public utility. The rates, charges and regulations, including
conditions for all classes of natural gas service, shall be set forth in tariff
sheets to be adopted by reference by resolution of the city council.
   B.   Tariff Sheets On File: One copy of the current effective tariff sheets
for natural gas service shall be kept on file with the city recorder and shall
be open for public inspection during regular business hours. Copies thereof may
be purchased by any person upon payment of the cost of reproduction.
   C.   Notice Of Changes: Notice of any change in the base rates or
regulations shall be mailed to all gas customers. This notice may be sent with
utility bills.
   D.   Standard For Setting Rates: All rates, as established by the city
council, shall be just, reasonable, sufficient and not unduly discriminatory.
All rates and regulations shall be designated in tariff sheets as provided
above and shall indicate an approval date and an effective date to be set by
the city council. (Document, 11-9-1994)
8-5-5: SPECIAL CONTRACTS:
The city may provide by special contract for the use of a connection to the
natural gas supply system of the city by institutions, plants, districts,
governments, municipal corporations or other similar users. (Document, 11-9-
1994)
8-5-6: EXCAVATIONS:
   A.   Conformance Required: All excavating for natural gas service
installations or repair shall be performed in accordance with the city
ordinances and the rules and regulations of the department, as applicable. Such
excavations shall meet all applicable safety standards, including any
requirements as to barricades and lights. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and
other public property disturbed in the course of work shall be restored in a
manner satisfactory to the city administrator or his designee.
   B.   Depth Requirements: All gas mainlines shall be in minimum of two feet
(2') in depth. Service lines shall be twelve inches (12") to eighteen inches
(18") in depth. All transmission lines having a pressure of over one hundred
(100) pounds shall be minimum of three feet (3') in depth. (Document, 11-9-
1994)
8-5-7: CONNECTION AND INSTALLATION OF SYSTEM:
   A.   Connection To System: The owner or developer of the premises shall
notify the department when such premises is ready for connection to the natural
gas distribution system of the city. No premises shall be supplied with
permanent natural gas from the natural gas distribution system unless the same
shall be designated by official street name and number and such official number
shall be placed and maintained conspicuously thereon. Connection for such
premises shall only be performed upon approval by the department. The city
shall not be subject to any liability for any deficiency or defect which is not
discovered by inspection, nor shall the owner or developer of such premises be
absolved from liability for such deficiency or defect, and any resulting damage
of or from the responsibility to correct such deficiency or defect.
   B.   Unauthorized Connection Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person
to connect any line, pipe, hose or other instrument, device or contrivance to
the natural gas supply system, or any part thereof, without the written consent
of the superintendent. Any person found in violation of this subsection shall
be guilty of a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. In addition to any other penalties that may be imposed, the
court may order any person who is found guilty of violating the provisions of
this subsection to pay estimated user charges for the period during which such
violation existed.
   C.   Unauthorized Connection; Recovery Of User Charges: In addition to other
penalties set out in this chapter, estimated user charges may be recovered by
the city from any person who connects any line, pipe, hose or other instrument,
device or contrivance to the natural gas supply system, or any part thereof,
without the written consent of the superintendent.
   D.   Mainline Installation: The superintendent shall determine the location,
type and capacity of all mainline easements that may be required where deemed
necessary by the superintendent to ensure the safety or efficiency of the
operation or maintenance of the natural gas supply system.
   E.   Service Lines; Installation And Fitter Certification:
      1.   The city shall determine the location or locations at which any
owner service line shall be connected to the gas distribution system of the
city. Such connections shall be made without entering upon property other than
the property of the owner so connected, unless an acceptable recorded utility
easement is provided.
      2.   The gas service line from the property line of the premises to be
served, or the city utility easement line to the meter set, shall be installed
for the division by a certified service line fitter or the gas department, at
the expense of the owner of the premises and in accordance with the city gas
department specifications. The city gas department shall be responsible for the
inspection of all such installations. Upon inspection and approval, the
department shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of the service
line up to the meter set.
      3.   There is hereby established a service line fitter certification
process to be administered by the department. The department shall review
applications, conduct training courses, and administer exams as part of the
service line fitter certification process. The certification process shall be
conducted in accordance with the gas department service line certification
procedures. The certification process shall be successfully completed by all
persons engaging or proposing to engage in the installation of natural gas
service lines destined to be connected to the city natural gas supply system.
Upon successful completion of the certification process, the applicant shall be
certified as a service line fitter.
      4.   Conditions for continued certification, recertification and issuance
of violations or revocation of certification shall be as set forth by the
department service line fitter certification procedures. The department
reserves the right to revoke certification of any person determined by the
department to be inadequately qualified to install natural gas service lines.
      5.   As a condition precedent to receiving natural gas service, the owner
of the premises being served shall grant the department permission to locate
any portion of the natural gas supply system lines or meters necessary to
provide service, on or within the boundaries of the premises; and further,
grant the department the irrevocable right of access for the purpose of reading
the meter, and installation, removal, operation and maintenance of all such
portions of the natural gas supply system, including permission to make
necessary excavation for such purposes.
   F.   Extension And Installation; Conformance With Rules And Regulations: All
extensions of the natural gas supply system, including the installation of new
main lines and service lines, shall be in conformance with all applicable rules
and regulations of the department. The superintendent, in his discretion, may
refuse to extend service to any person failing to so conform with such rules
and regulations. (Document, 11-9-1994; amd. 2007 Code)
   G.   Required Extension Of Natural Gas Main Line By Person, Subdivider Or
Developer: Any person, subdivider or developer who desires to secure a new
connection to the municipal natural gas system at a location where access to a
natural gas main is not currently available along the full length of the parcel
being proposed for development shall be required to extend the natural gas main
service lines to the far end of the lot or development or to some mid lot
point, if no future connective benefit exists as solely determined by the city
with city council approval, at their expense and in accordance with city
specifications. (Ord. 2007-2, 4-24-2007)
8-5-8: GAS METERS:
   A.   Location: The user shall be required to provide a location for the city
meter set which is safe from damage and is accessible for reading, operation
and maintenance.
   B.   Multiple Meter Loops; Marking Required: In the event that gas is served
to more than one user at a single premises through a multiple meter set, the
owner shall be responsible for plainly marking each meter of the multiple meter
set with a permanent brass tag or approved plastic tag which identifies the
apartment, office, room or other area served by each meter. (Document, 11-9-
1994)
   C.   Master Meters: In the event that gas is served through a master meter
system, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of such premises to
install, operate and maintain the gas piping and facilities downstream of the
meter. Master meters shall be installed only upon the approval of the
department superintendent. (Document, 11-9-1994; amd. 2007 Code)
8-5-9: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
   A.   Specified: It shall be unlawful for:
      1.   Any person to install a bypass without the express written
authorization of the superintendent.
      2.   Any customer or the user at any premises knowingly to receive
natural gas service by means of a bypass which has not been authorized in
writing by superintendent.
      3.   Any person to tamper with a gas meter, regulator or related
instrument without the express written authorization of the superintendent.
      4.   Any customer or the user at any premises knowingly to receive
natural gas service by means of tampering which has not been authorized in
writing by the superintendent.
      5.   Any person to engage in unauthorized metering.
      6.   Any customer or the user at any premises knowingly to receive
natural gas service by means of unauthorized metering which has not been
expressly authorized in writing by the superintendent. (Document, 11-9-1994)
   B.   Prosecution And Restitution: Anyone found guilty of violating any of
the provisions of subsection A of this section is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. As a condition of granting probation, deferred prosecution,
deferred sentence or suspended sentence, the court may order any person who is
charged with or found guilty of any such violation, as the case may be, to pay
as restitution estimated or actual user charges for the period during which the
violation existed, the cost of repairing or replacing any damaged utility
equipment, and any other costs incurred by the city related to the violation,
including, but not limited to, costs of investigation, disconnection,
reconnection and service calls. (Document, 11-9-1994; amd. 2007 Code)
8-5-10: TAMPERING, BYPASSING OR UNAUTHORIZED METERING:
   A.   Evidence Of Violations:
      1.   Proof of the existence of any bypass, tampering or unauthorized
metering, as prohibited in this chapter, shall be deemed prima facie evidence
that the user had knowledge of the bypass at the premises where such bypass,
tampering or unauthorized metering occurred, if it is proven that the user is
an occupant of the premises and that said user had access to the gas meter or
other utility equipment where the bypass, tampering or unauthorized metering is
proved to exist. (Document, 11-9-1994; amd. 2007 Code)
      2.   Proof of the existence of any bypass, tampering or unauthorized
metering, as prohibited by this chapter, shall be deemed prima facie evidence
that the customer had knowledge for the bypass, tampering or unauthorized
metering if it is proven that said customer controlled access to the gas meter,
regulator or other related equipment where the bypass, tampering or
unauthorized metering is proved to exist.
   B.   Interruption Of Service: "Tampering", "bypassing" or "unauthorized
metering", as defined in this chapter, is subterfuge and constitutes a safety
hazard. Such tampering, bypassing or unauthorized metering shall be grounds for
immediate disconnection of service without notice to the customer or user at
such premises, and service shall not be reconnected until any and all
deficiencies in piping, connections, meters and/or other natural gas facilities
of the premises have been repaired, corrected or otherwise altered to conform
to the requirements and regulations, and until the requirements of subsection C
of this section are met.
   C.   Reconnection Charges: In order for gas service to be reconnected to
premises where tampering, bypassing or unauthorized metering has occurred, the
customer or user at the premises shall pay the following charges to the city
prior to the reconnection:
      1.   A service charge calculated to compensate the city for all
reasonable expenses incurred on account of the tampering, bypassing or
unauthorized metering, including, but not limited to, costs of investigation,
disconnection, reconnection and service calls, but in no event less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00); and
      2.   The cost of repairing or replacing any damaged utility; and
      3.   The actual or estimated user charges not previously billed to the
customer as a result of the tampering, bypassing or unauthorized metering.
(Document, 11-9-1994)
8-5-11: CONTROL AND PROTECTION OF SYSTEM:
   A.   Unlawful To Damage System:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere or tamper in any
manner with any distribution line, service stub, service line, meter set or any
appurtenance thereof connected to or part of the natural gas system without
prior authorization from the utility or city.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, impair or deface any
part, appliance or appurtenance of the natural gas distribution system of the
city.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate, obstruct or
disconnect any distribution facility of the city, or to do any act or thing to
divert, damage or otherwise impede or hinder, or tend to impede or hinder, the
flow of natural gas through the natural gas distribution system of the city.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate with other than hand
tools within eighteen inches (18") of any underground natural gas pipeline or
facility. Excavation near such facilities shall be in combination with careful
probing. For the purpose of this subsection, "hand tools" shall include only
nonmotorized tools.
      5.   It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate on a premises
located within the city certified natural gas service area which is served by
natural gas, or within a street right of way or utility easement which contains
natural gas facilities owned by the city without first requesting utility
locations from the city at least two (2) working days prior to beginning the
excavation.
      6.   In the event that piping or equipment attached to or part of the
city gas distribution system is exposed or damaged, it shall be the
responsibility of the party causing exposure or damage to immediately notify
the gas department of such exposure or damage, and further, to provide for the
continued exposure of said facilities until the city can appropriately inspect
or repair its facilities.
   B.   Prosecution And Restitution: Anyone found guilty of violating any of
the provisions of subsection A of this section is guilty of a class C
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. As a condition of granting probation, deferred prosecution,
deferred sentence, or suspended sentence, the court may order any person who is
charged with or found guilty of such violation, as the case may be, to pay as
restitution estimated or actual user charges for the period during which the
violation existed, the cost of repairing or replacing any damaged utility
equipment, and any other costs incurred by the city related to the violation,
including, but not limited to, costs of investigation, disconnection,
reconnection and service calls.
   C.   Disconnection For Unsafe Condition: The owner of the premises served by
the gas distribution system of the city shall maintain all natural gas piping
downstream of the meter set to the end use at the premises and shall keep other
gas equipment and facilities of such premises in safe condition in accordance
with all ordinances, rules and regulations of the city; provided, however, that
all the natural gas supply system installed, owned or operated by the gas
department shall be maintained by the department. In the event that the
superintendent determines that any gas piping or other natural gas equipment or
facility on a premises is unsafe, service to such premises may be disconnected
and shall not be reconnected until the owner of such premises has corrected the
unsafe situation and it has been approved by the department.
   D.   Nonliability Of City: The city shall not be liable to any person for
failure to maintain gas service during repairs or extensions to the gas supply
system, nor shall the city be liable where such failure is caused by or
resulted from a strike or act of God, an unavoidable accident or other
contingency beyond the control of the city. (Document, 11-9-1994; amd. 2007
Code)
8-5-12: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
   A.   Nonliability:
      1.   The city official charged with the enforcement of this chapter,
acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required
by this chapter or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be
rendered personally liable for damages that may accrue to persons or property
as a result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of
such duties. A suit brought against the city official or employee because of
such act or omission performed by the city official or employee in the
enforcement of any provision of such codes or other pertinent laws or
ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this chapter or enforced by
the code enforcement agency shall be defended by this jurisdiction until final
termination of such proceedings, and any judgment resulting therefrom shall be
assumed by this jurisdiction.
      2.   This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating or controlling any building or
structure for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall
this chapter, enforcement agency or its parent jurisdiction be held as assuming
any such liability by reason of the inspections authorized by this chapter or
any permits or certificates issued under this chapter.
   B.   Cooperation Of Other Officials And Officers: The city official may
request, and shall receive, the assistance and cooperation of other officials
of this jurisdiction so far as is required in the discharge of the duties
required by this chapter or other pertinent law or ordinance.
   C.   Failure To Maintain Service: The city shall not be liable to any person
for failure to maintain gas service during repairs or extensions to the gas
supply system, nor shall the city be liable where such failure is caused by or
results from a strike, an act of God, an unavoidable accident or other
contingency beyond the control of the city. (Document, 11-9-1994; amd. 2007
Code)
CHAPTER 6
ROUTES, EASEMENTS AND RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
8-6-1: Procedures Specified
8-6-1: PROCEDURES SPECIFIED:
All easements or rights of way required by the city for the extension,
construction, improvement or repair of utilities operated by or for the city or
its residents, shall be obtained in accordance with the procedure set forth
herein:
   A.   Need: The city shall establish a need for the easement or right of way.
   B.   Specifications: The city shall establish through staff or city
contractor, the specifications for the easement or right of way:
      1.   Width.
      2.   Height/depth.
      3.   Route.
      4.   Setbacks.
      5.   Construction requirements.
      6.   Material specifications.
      7.   Timing of disturbance.
   C.   Value: The city shall establish a value for the right of way, incursion
or disturbance by appraisal, negotiation, market or experience.
   D.   Offer To Purchase: The city shall offer to purchase the easement or
right of way in accordance with the price determined in subsection C of this
section.
   E.   Form Of Agreement: The property owner shall be required to execute an
easement or right of way in substantially the same form as that attached to
ordinance dated November 25, 1997, as may be modified from time to time to
address legal needs.
   F.   Equal Treatment: All property owners involved in any given project
shall be treated in like manner. No inducements, other than monetary payment,
shall be offered by the city.
   G.   Condemnation Process: In the event that the city and the property owner
are unable to establish a value for the right of way or easement by agreement,
the city will acquire the needed right of way or easement through the
condemnation process. (Ord., 11-25-1997)
CHAPTER 7
STORMWATER UTILITY ENTERPRISE FUND
SECTION:
8-7-1: Findings
8-7-2: Purpose
8-7-3: Definitions
8-7-4: Stormwater Utility
8-7-5: Stormwater Utility Fee
8-7-6: Billing
8-7-7: Obstruction
8-7-8: Dumping
8-7-9: Violation And Penalty
8-7-1: FINDINGS:
The city council makes the following findings regarding stormwater runoff and
the city's stormwater system:
   A.   The city's existing stormwater system consists of a network of manmade
and natural facilities, structures and conduits, including ground water and
aquifers, that collect and route stormwater runoff.
   B.   The city's existing stormwater system does not adequately handle the
stormwater runoff generated in the city.
   C.   The city's anticipated growth will place increased demands on the
already inadequate stormwater system.
   D.   Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled stormwater runoff causes
erosion and property damage.
   E.   Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled stormwater runoff impedes the
regular flow of traffic in the city.
   F.   Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled stormwater runoff poses health
hazards to the citizens of the community.
   G.   Stormwater has the potential to carry concentrations of oil, grease,
nutrients, chemicals, heavy metals, toxic materials and other undesirable
materials that may jeopardize the integrity of ground waters and receiving
water, including the city's culinary water supply.
   H.   All developed properties in the city contribute to the need for the
stormwater system by converting natural ground cover into impervious surfaces.
   I.   All developed properties in the city make use of or benefit from the
city's operation and maintenance of the stormwater system.
   J.   Absent effective maintenance, operation, regulation and control,
existing stormwater drainage conditions in the city may constitute a potential
hazard to the health, safety and general welfare of the city, its residents,
and its businesses.
   K.   A stormwater utility is the most equitable and efficient method of
managing stormwater in the city and ensuring that each property in the city
pays its fair share of the amount that the property contributes to, benefits
from, and otherwise uses the stormwater system. (Ord. 2009-1, 2-19-2009)
8-7-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
city and its inhabitants by improving the city's stormwater system, managing
and controlling stormwater runoff, protecting property, preventing unwanted
waters from entering the city's water supply and other receiving waters, and
establishing a viable and fair method of financing the construction, operation
and maintenance of a stormwater system. (Ord. 2009-1, 2-19-2009)
8-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall be defined as follows:
CATCH BASIN: A basin combined with a storm drain inlet to trap solids.
DEBRIS: Any dirt, rock, sand, tree, or other rubbish, litter, etc.
DETENTION BASIN: A depression, designed with an inlet and outlet that regulates
water flow and allows debris to settle out, that is capable of detaining
stormwater runoff until it can be released without causing damage downstream.
DEVELOPED PARCEL: Any parcel that has been altered from its natural condition
by grading, filling, or the construction of improvements or other impervious
surfaces.
DRAIN INLET: A point of entry into a sump, detention basin, or storm drain
system.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU): The average amount of impervious surface
expressed in square feet, on developed single-family residential parcels in
Blanding.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any hard surface, other than the natural surface, that
prevents or retards the absorption of water into the soil, or that causes water
to run off the surface in greater quantities or at a greater rate of flow than
the natural surface.
NONSTORMWATER RUNOFF: Any runoff other than stormwater.
STORM DRAIN: A closed conduit for conducting stormwater that has been collected
by inlets or collected by other means.
STORMWATER: Precipitation such as rain, snow, hail, or other natural
occurrence.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: Water that is generated by stormwater flows overland.
SUMP: A formalized structure underground surrounded by drain rock, that acts as
a detention basin to allow the slow release of water into the surrounding
subsoil. Sumps usually receive stormwater runoff from paved areas such as
streets, parking lots, building roofs, etc. (Ord. 2009-1, 2-19-2009)
8-7-4: STORMWATER UTILITY:
   A.   Creation: The city council hereby creates and establishes a stormwater
utility as part of the city's overall water system. The stormwater utility
shall plan, design, construct, maintain, administer and operate the city's
stormwater system.
   B.   Enterprise Fund: The city council hereby establishes a stormwater
utility enterprise fund to handle all income, expenses and other financial
transactions related to the stormwater utility. All stormwater utility service
charges shall be deposited in the enterprise fund. Money in the stormwater
utility enterprise fund shall not be commingled with or transferred to other
city funds without the consent of the city council. The stormwater utility may
pay other city funds for services and expenses directly attributable to the
stormwater utility. The enterprise fund shall be operated according to state
law and city policy.
   C.   Facilities And Assets: The stormwater utility shall have the same
relationship to the city as other city utilities such as the water utility and
the sanitary water (water waste) utility. Upon creation of the utility, all of
the city's stormwater facilities and assets (other than streets and other
facilities and assets designated by the city manager) shall be transferred to
the stormwater utility in consideration for the stormwater utility's agreement
to take primary responsibility for planning, designing, constructing,
maintaining, administering and operating the city's stormwater system.
   D.   Administration: The stormwater utility shall be administered by the
city's public works department. (Ord. 2009-1, 2-19-2009)
8-7-5: STORMWATER UTILITY FEE:
   A.   Imposed: Each developed parcel of real property in the city or
undeveloped parcel which uses the city's stormwater system to dispose of
irrigation water shall be charged a stormwater utility fee.
   B.   ERU: The fee shall be based on the number of equivalent residential
units (ERUs) contained in the parcel. The city council finds that the ERU is
the most accurate measurement for determining the amount that each parcel
contributes to, benefits from, and otherwise uses the stormwater utility. The
city council finds and establishes that one ERU equals three thousand (3,000)
square feet of impervious surface area.
   C.   Calculation: The city council finds that each single-family residential
parcel contributes approximately the same amount of stormwater runoff;
therefore, each developed single-family residential parcel shall pay a base
rate of one ERU. All nonsingle-family residential parcels shall pay a multiple
of this base rate, expressed in ERUs according to the measured impervious area
on the parcel.
   D.   Charge Per ERU: The amount charged for each ERU may be amended by
resolution of the city council. The following are the initial established
stormwater rates.
   STORMWATER RATES
 
Beginning April 2009
   Single-family residential monthly fee                 $1.00  
   Fee per ERU                                           1.00   
Residential:
   Single-family and duplex                                   $1.00 per
                                                                  month
   Triplex and fourplex                                       2.00 per
                                                                  month
   Apartments with more than 4 units                          Commercial
                                                                  rate
Commercial and industrial:
   3,000 square feet of impervious     surface equals  ERU$1.00 per
                                                                  month per ERU
 
Example: A commercial business that has a total impervious surface area of
8,900 square feet would have 3 ERUs: 3 x $1.00 = $3.00 per month.
Note:
1.   Commercial and industrial parcels can receive a reduction for having on
site mitigation.
   E.   Credit For On Site Mitigation: Nonresidential parcels having
constructed on site stormwater detention, retention or mitigation management
facilities will be eligible for a service charge credit as follows:
Fifty percent (50%) reduction for a parcel that has an on site detention basin
constructed to city standards with a maximum release from the basin of 0.20
cfs/ac within a landscaped area on site and having installed an approved sand
and oil interceptor system before discharging into the city's storm drain
system.
Thirty percent (30%) reduction for a parcel that has an on site detention basin
constructed to city standards with a maximum release from the basin of 0.20
cfs/ac within a landscaped area or a retention basin within a landscaped area
on site.
Twenty percent (20%) reduction for a parcel that has an on site detention basin
constructed to city standards of a maximum release of 0.20 cfs/ac within an
impervious surface area on the site or within a piping system designed for
detention on site.
   F.   Exemptions And Credits: The city council may establish exemptions and
credits to the stormwater utility fee by resolution.
   G.   Policies: The public works department may adopt policies, consistent
with this chapter and any resolutions passed by the city council, to assist in
the application, administration and interpretation of this chapter and any
resolutions related to the stormwater utility.
   H.   Appeals: Any person or entity that believes that this chapter, or any
stormwater utility rate resolution, was interpreted or applied erroneously may
appeal to the city council at a regularly scheduled council meeting. The appeal
shall be in writing, shall state any facts supporting the appeal, and shall be
made within ten (10) days of the decision, action, or bill being appealed. The
city council's decision shall be final and binding on all parties. (Ord. 2009-
1, 2-19-2009)
8-7-6: BILLING:
The city council finds that the city's stormwater system, sanitary sewer
system, culinary water system, and solid waste collection system are
interrelated services that are part of a unified city plan to provide for the
health, safety and welfare of the city and its residents in an environmentally
responsible manner. Therefore, the stormwater utility fee shall be included on
the city's regular monthly utility bill for any given property. If there is no
regular utility bill for the property, the stormwater utility fee shall be
charged to the owner of the property. The fee shall be deemed a civil debt owed
to the city by the person or entity paying for the city utility services
provided to the property. All properties shall be charged the fee, regardless
of whether or not the owner or occupant of the property requests the stormwater
utility service. Failure to pay any portion of the utility bill may result in
termination of water service. (Ord. 2009-1, 2-19-2009)
8-7-7: OBSTRUCTION:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct or contribute to the
obstruction of the flow of stormwater runoff or nonstormwater runoff into any
sump, retention basin, storm drain, curb and gutter, drain inlet, or other
associated structural controls that convey stormwater and/or nonstormwater
runoff.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to cause any obstruction that inhibits
the normal flow of stormwater and/or nonstormwater runoff in any curb and
gutter, unless the obstruction is associated with a street and/or storm
drainage improvement project and is authorized by the city public works
director or his appointee.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to cover over any drain inlet for any
reason or purpose.
   D.   Subsections A and B of this section shall not apply during cleanup
periods established by the city, provided the materials are placed according to
any directions from the city and do not obstruct drain inlets. (Ord. 2009-1, 2-
19-2009)
8-7-8: DUMPING:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to dump, or allow to be dumped, into any
sump, detention basin, storm drain, curb and gutter, drain inlet, or other
storm drainage structure that conveys stormwater and/or nonstormwater, any type
of debris, petroleum product, chemical, paint, pesticide, herbicide, heavy
metal, acid or base product, solid or liquid waste product, hazardous waste
product, and/or human or animal waste.
   B.   The restrictions set forth in subsection A of this section shall not
apply to the normal runoff of nonstormwater related to domestic home uses; for
example, lawn water, washing cars, etc. (Ord. 2009-1, 2-19-2009)
8-7-9: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
   A.   The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a class
C misdemeanor, punishable as defined in this code for a class C misdemeanor.
   B.   If, as a result of the violation of any provision of this chapter, the
city or any other party suffers damages and is required to make repairs and/or
replace any materials, the cost of repair or replacement shall be borne by the
party in violation, in addition to any criminal fines and/or penalties. (Ord.
2009-1, 2-19-2009)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING AND RELATED CODES; REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Purpose And Intent
9-1-2: Codes Adopted
9-1-3: Successor Codes
9-1-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish the regulatory codes
and guidelines to govern construction within the city in a thorough and concise
manner while also providing for the adoption of changes to the codes and
guidelines without the necessity of adopting new ordinances for each change or
amendment to said codes and guidelines. (2007 Code)
9-1-2: CODES ADOPTED:
   A.   Building Code: The international building code (IBC), as adopted by the
state, is hereby adopted as the official building code for the city, subject to
section
9-1-3 of this chapter.
   B.   Fire Code: The international fire code (IFC), as adopted by the state,
is hereby adopted as the official fire code for the city, subject to section
9-1-3 of this chapter.
   C.   Other Codes As Approved: All other building, plumbing, electrical,
mechanical, energy and/or natural gas codes established and adopted as standard
by the state, including amendments thereto, shall hereby become established as
the adopted codes of the city, subject to section
9-1-3 of this chapter. (2007 Code)
9-1-3: SUCCESSOR CODES:
The adoption of any and all codes, as established herein, as the adopted codes
of the city, shall also adopt any replacement or successor codes as they become
adopted by the state and shall become effective by the city immediately upon
passage by the state.
   A.   Work Exempt From Permit Fee And Building Inspections: Unless otherwise
required by code, any detached accessory structure up to two hundred fifty six
(256) square feet will be exempt from permit fees and subject to building
inspections only for building size, building placement, and minimum building
spacing of at least four feet (4') from any other structure, providing that in
no event shall any one side of any said accessory building exceed sixteen feet
(16') in length as measured at the roofline. (Ord. 2012-1, 1-24-2012)
CHAPTER 2
IMPACT FEES
ARTICLE A.  WATER AND SEWER IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
9-2A-1: Definitions
9-2A-2: Applicability, Time Of Payment, Exemptions
9-2A-3: Service Area
9-2A-4: Impact Fee Offsets
9-2A-5: Voluntary Service Upgrades
9-2A-6: Calculation Of Impact Fees
9-2A-7: Collection And Expenditure
9-2A-8: Refunds
9-2A-9: Appeals, Enforcement And Judicial Review
9-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this article shall have the following
meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
CAPITAL FACILITIES PLAN: The plan for water and sewer infrastructure as
required by Utah Code Annotated section 11-36-201.
CITY: Blanding City.
CONNECTION FEE: The costs reasonably incurred by the city, or any authorized
contractor, for labor, equipment, materials and like expenses associated with
the installation and connection of municipal utility services, such as water
and wastewater.
COUNCIL: The Blanding City council.
DEVELOPMENT: The construction of a building, dwelling, structure or industrial
facility; the installation of a mobile or modular home; the construction of a
campground, recreational vehicle or mobile home park; the subdivision of land;
an application for a planned unit development (PUD); a conditional use permit
application; a building permit application; or any change in the use of land,
buildings or structures that creates additional demand or impact upon public
facilities.
ENCUMBERED OR ENCUMBRANCE: The pledging by written instrument of funds or
monies collected pursuant to this article for the payment of costs of
construction or debt service of system improvements.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT OR ERU: The amount of water or wastewater required
or generated by a typical single residential unit, as determined by the city
based upon accepted engineering standards and specifications.
IMPACT FEE: A one time payment of money imposed by the city on development
activity pursuant to this article as a condition precedent to the granting of
development approval and/or a building permit in order to pay for constructed
and planned water and sewer facilities. "Impact fee" does not mean a building
permit fee, a business license fee, a connection fee, sales tax, special
assessments or other such charges.
POLICY RESOLUTION: A resolution, duly enacted by the city council, identifying
with reasonable detail, types of system improvements to be constructed in the
future in specified geographic areas of the city and surrounding lands.
PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS: Those improvements to real property constructed in the
development of a project and which primarily benefit and provide service to
that lot, development or use, as opposed to neighboring parcels or other uses.
"Project improvements" may include water and sewer infrastructure required to
be dedicated to the city as a condition for development approval.
QUALIFYING IMPROVEMENTS: System improvements that are planned by the city as
part of a capital facilities plan or policy resolution approved by the city
council and which are required to be constructed by a developer as a condition
for development approval.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS: Existing public facilities that are designed to provide
service to areas within the community at large and planned future public
facilities identified in a capital facilities plan or policy resolution that
are intended to provide service to the community at large, as opposed to
individual lots, developments or uses. (Ord. 2001-5, 6-27-2001)
9-2A-2: APPLICABILITY, TIME OF PAYMENT, EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Applicability: Impact fees shall apply to all new development within
the service area defined by section
9-2A-3 of this article, unless expressly exempted by the provisions of this
chapter. Impact fees are payable in full upon the following:
      1.   At the time a building permit is issued in the case of redevelopment
or remodeling of structures already connected to municipal water or sewer
services;
      2.   At the time the building permit is issued in the case of new
construction; or
      3.   As governed by any impact fee agreement duly executed and approved
in accordance with the provisions of this article.
   B.   Payment Required Prior To Service: In no event shall water or sewer
service be provided to any property subject to this chapter without payment of
all applicable impact fees.
   C.   Exemptions: The following activities are exempt from the payment of
impact fees:
      1.   The placement of a moved on structure or temporary construction
trailer, office or similar temporary structure placed upon property for a
period not to exceed one year.
      2.   Development, however denominated, that does not include a connection
to municipal water or sewer facilities and which will not otherwise impact or
impose direct or indirect demand on system improvements.
      3.   Replacement of a structure or mobile home, or the remodeling of an
existing building where the new structure will:
         a.   Not be put to a use substantially different from the prior use;
and
         b.   Where there will be no net increase in equivalent residential
units of water demand or wastewater treatment demand.
      4.   Construction of accessory improvements such as fences, barns,
outbuildings, utility lines, pipelines, roads or similar activities. (Ord.
2001-5, 6-27-2001)
9-2A-3: SERVICE AREA:
   A.   Defined: The service area for impact fees shall be the entire corporate
limits of the city, including annexations subsequent to the enactment of this
article, as well as all areas outside of the municipal limits which are served
by city water or sewer service.
   B.   Areas Outside City Limits: Impact fees shall be assessed for areas
outside of municipal limits. The fees shall be payable pursuant to an impact
fee agreement entered into between the city and the person or entity
contracting for services. (Ord. 2001-5, 6-27-2001)
9-2A-4: IMPACT FEE OFFSETS:
   A.   Authorized:
      1.   The city council, with recommendations from staff, may elect, by
written agreement, to allow an offset for all or a portion the impact fees
payable with respect to a particular development to the extent expressly
provided under this section.
      2.   An offset may be permitted where, as a condition for development
approval, a person is required to install or construct qualifying improvements
in lieu of, or in conjunction with, project improvements necessitated by the
development.
   B.   Limitation: Offsets shall be limited to the increment of reasonable
excess costs for labor, equipment, materials, design or technical services,
land, and access incurred by a person in constructing qualifying improvements
over and above necessary project improvements.
   C.   Same Category And Type Required: An offset for qualifying improvements
shall only be allowed against impact fees otherwise due for the same category
and type of improvement.
   D.   Attachment To Land; Validity: An offset granted by agreement with the
city shall attach to and run with the lands included within the development
application and subject to impact fees. Offsets shall be valid for a period not
to exceed ten (10) years from the date of approval or until the last date of
construction within the project, whichever occurs first.
   E.   Prohibited Refund: A person shall not be entitled to a refund of any
offset value where qualifying improvements are constructed, in whole or in
part, but connection or service by city water or sewer systems is not
accomplished due to the abandonment or lapse of the development.
   F.   Time Limit For Filing Claim: Claims for offsets shall be made in
writing within thirty (30) days of development plan approval. Any request for
offsets not made within that thirty (30) day period shall be denied.
   G.   Inspection: All qualifying improvements shall be subject to inspection
by the public works director or other designated city staff, and shall be
constructed in accordance with all applicable city design and construction
specifications. No credit for an offset shall be given until such time as the
qualifying improvements are accepted by the public works director. (Ord. 2001-
5, 6-27-2001)
9-2A-5: VOLUNTARY SERVICE UPGRADES:
Any person desiring a water service upgrade to a larger size meter shall be
entitled to credit for the value of the existing meter, based upon meter size,
and shall only be assessed a water impact fee equaling the difference between
the larger meter size and the credit amount, together with applicable
connection fees. (Ord. 2001-5, 6-27-2001)
9-2A-6: CALCULATION OF IMPACT FEES:
   A.   Water: Water impact fees for residential and commercial uses shall be
calculated based upon meter size and an equivalent residential unit (ERU)
basis.
      1.   The following schedule applies to residential and commercial water
impact fees:
 
Water Meter Size ERU Capacity Water Impact Fee
Inches
3/4              1.0          $1,100.00
1                1.67         1,837.00
11/2             3.33         3,663.00
2                5.33         5,863.00
 
      2.   Impact fees for meter sizes different than those specified will be
calculated by the city engineer based on ERU capacity.
   B.   Sewer:
      1.   The following schedule applies to residential and commercial sewer
impact fees:
 
Water Meter Size Inches ERU Capacity      Sewer Impact Fee
3/4                     1.0               $1,000.00 500.00
                        Discounted to 0.5
1                       1.67              1,670.00
1 ½                    3.33              3,330.00
2                       5.33              5,330.00
 
      2.   Impact fees for meter sizes different than those specified will be
calculated by the city engineer based on ERU capacity. (Ord. 2001-5, 6-27-2001;
amd. Ord. 2019-2, 10-8-2019)
9-2A-7: COLLECTION AND EXPENDITURE:
   A.   Separate Account: Water and sewer impact fees collected pursuant to
this article shall be deposited in separate interest bearing accounts. Interest
and principle from such accounts shall be expended only for existing and future
system improvements of the type for which the fee is collected.
   B.   Records: The city shall maintain financial records for each fund
showing the source, amount and date received of all monies collected pursuant
to this article. At the end of each fiscal year, the city shall prepare a
report identifying the source and amount of all monies received and identifying
all expenditures from each account. Such records shall be open for public
inspection to the extent all other city financial records are public documents.
   C.   Expenditures: Impact fees collected under this article may be expended
or encumbered immediately upon receipt, provided the action is reasonably
calculated to meet known and anticipated demands for new system improvements or
debt service payments, including payments on principal for existing system
improvements. Fees expended or pledged pursuant to this subsection are not
subject to refund.
   D.   Time For Expenditure: Impact fees shall be expended or encumbered
within six (6) years of receipt, unless the city council identifies by
resolution extraordinary and compelling reasons why said funds should be held
longer than six (6) years and specifies a date certain upon which said funds
will be used.
   E.   Use For Maintenance Or Operation Prohibited: Impact fees shall not be
used for maintenance or operation expenses of system improvements.
   F.   Uses Permitted: Impact fees may be used for the construction, design
and acquisition of new system improvements identified in a capital facilities
plan or policy resolution. In addition, said fees may be expended to retire
debt previously incurred to finance existing water and sewer system
improvements. (Ord. 2001-5, 6-27-2001)
9-2A-8: REFUNDS:
   A.   Application; Conditions: A refund of any paid impact fee, plus interest
earned, may be obtained upon written application by the person owning a parcel
subject to the fee upon satisfaction of all of the following conditions:
      1.   The application is made within one year of the lapse of plat or
abandonment of the development proposal;
      2.   The fees have not been spent or encumbered by the city; and
      3.   None of the lands subject to the fee have been connected to the
water or sewer system of the city.
   B.   Revocation Of Approval:
      1.   Payment of a refund of impact fees constitutes an express revocation
of all prior permit approval or plat approvals, and the city shall record an
affidavit of lapse of approval in the county land records contemporaneous with
the payment of any refund.
      2.   Persons engaging in development or otherwise attempting to sell or
convey property subject to impact fees following a refund and lapse of approval
do so in violation of this article and are subject to the remedies and
penalties as defined in subsection 9-2A-9B of this article.
   C.   If a refund is denied pursuant to this section or subsection 9-2A-7C of
this article, and an applicant or successor owner submits an application within
three (3) years of the denial for the same or a substantially similar
development, the city may grant an offset, as provided under section
9-2A-4 of this article. (Ord. 2001-5, 6-27-2001)
9-2A-9: APPEALS, ENFORCEMENT AND JUDICIAL REVIEW:
   A.   Appeal: A person wishing to challenge the legality of any impact fee,
the legality of any offset, denial of exemption, or any other challenge, to an
administrative decision pursuant to this article may appeal to the city
council, by delivering written notice to the city administrator within thirty
(30) days of payment of the fee. Payment of the applicable impact fee is a
prerequisite to any appeal.
      1.   The city council shall receive any evidence and arguments with
regard to the appeal, which hearing shall be conducted on the record. The
proceedings may be conducted informally and shall not be subject to the rules
of evidence. The city council shall render a decision based upon the evidence
provided at the hearing and, upon a majority vote, shall decide whether the
decision of the city administrator is sustained or reversed.
      2.   The hearing shall be chaired by the mayor. The city attorney shall
represent the city, and the city administrator or other staff may present
evidence in support of the city's position.
      3.   The hearing shall be held and a decision rendered no later than
thirty (30) days from the delivery of written notice of appeal. If the city
administrator's decision is reversed, there shall be no right of judicial
review.
      4.   Exhaustion of all administrative remedies shall be a jurisdictional
prerequisite to judicial review. Any party wishing to appeal and adverse
decision by the city council may seek judicial review by filing a civil action
with the county district court no later than ninety (90) days from the date of
the decision by the city council. Review shall be limited to the record
established before the city council, and the court shall affirm the decision if
it is supported by substantial evidence.
   B.   Penalty; Judicial Review: Violations of the provisions of this article
shall be punishable, at the option of the city, either as a class C
misdemeanor, or by appropriate civil action to enjoin or abate the violation.
In any such civil action, the violator shall be liable for civil damages
derived from the violation, together with fines not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) per violation and reasonable attorney fees and court costs.
      1.   To obtain injunctive relief, it shall only be necessary that the
city establish satisfactory proof of the violation of this article. Evidence of
irreparable harm shall not be required.
      2.   Jurisdiction and venue for any action to enforce this chapter shall
be in the district court, San Juan County, Utah. (Ord. 2001-5, 6-27-2001; amd.
2007 Code)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2: Purpose
10-1-3: Separability
10-1-4: Scope
10-1-5: Application
10-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and cited as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF BLANDING CITY,
UTAH. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
The zoning regulations and districts, as hereinafter set forth, have been made
in accordance with a comprehensive study of the city with reasonable
consideration, among other things, being given to the existing and potential
uses for each of the districts, to the character of the districts as they
relate to the community, to the conservation of land and building values, and
to the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. This title is designed
to promote the health and the general welfare; prevent overcrowding of land;
avoid undue concentration of population; prevent scattered, haphazard, new
growth; avoid land use conflicts; upgrade and maintain an attractive
appearance; and to facilitate the adequate provision of streets, utilities,
schools, parks and other public facilities. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-1-3: SEPARABILITY:
If any part or provision of this title or the application thereof to any
person, property or circumstance is adjudged invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation and direction to
the part, provision, section or application directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and shall not
affect or impair the integrity or validity of the remainder of this title, or
the application thereof, to other persons, property or circumstances. The city
council hereby declares that it would have enacted the remainder of this title
even without any such part, provision, section or application. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-
8-1978, as amended)
10-1-4: SCOPE:
   A.   This title applies to all private lands situated within the boundaries
of the city and any public lands legally subject to its provisions.
   B.   The provisions of this title may be regarded as minimum requirements
for the protection of the public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience,
prosperity and welfare.
   C.   This title is not intended to abrogate or annul any building permit,
certificates of occupancy, or other lawful permit issued before the effective
date hereof.
   D.   Wherever higher or more restrictive standards are established by the
provisions of any other applicable statute, ordinance or regulation, the
provisions of such other statute, ordinance or regulation shall apply. (Ord.
1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-1-5: APPLICATION:
   A.   No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used and no building
or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, moved or structurally altered except in conformance with the
regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located; nor shall
a yard, lot or open space be reduced in dimension or area to an amount less
than the minimum requirements set forth herein.
   B.   No structure shall hereafter be erected, altered or used until a proper
permit therefor has been issued by the responsible official designated by the
city council.
   C.   No person, firm or corporation, and no officer or employee thereof,
shall knowingly sell, rent or lease, or offer to sell, rent or lease, any land
or structure for any use or purpose contrary to the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Definitions
10-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases are hereby defined and shall be
interpreted as such throughout this title. Terms not herein defined shall have
the meaning customarily assigned to them.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to
that of a main building located on the same zone lot, including, by way of
example, but not limited to, the following:
A. Tool shed.
B. Wood shed.
C. Pool house.
D. Gazebo.
E. Detached garage.
ACCESSORY USE: Including, by way of example, but not limited to, the following:
A. Trash receptacles.
B. Tennis courts.
C. Trampoline.
D. Hot tub, jacuzzi.
E. Swimming pool.
BOARDING HOUSE: A dwelling other than a hotel where, for compensation and by
prearrangement for definite periods, meals are provided for three (3) or more
but not exceeding twelve (12) persons on a weekly or monthly basis.
BUILDING: Any structure intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals or chattel (i.e., movable possessions).
BUSINESS SERVICES: Any activities conducted for gain which render service
primarily to other commercial and industrial enterprises, or which service and
repair appliances and machines used in a home or business.
DAY NURSERIES, PRIVATE: Any place, home or institution which receives children.
DISTRICTS: Any section or sections of the city for which the regulations
governing the use of land and the use, density, bulk, height and coverage of
buildings and other structures are uniform.
DWELLING: A structure, or portion thereof, used for residential purposes.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the areas of the several floors of a building measured
between the exterior faces of the walls at each floor.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or a part of a main building used for
storage purposes only for not more than three (3) automobiles, or for a number
of automobiles which does not exceed two (2) times the number of families
occupying the dwelling unit to which such garage is accessory, whichever number
is greater. Such space shall not be used for storage of more than one
commercial vehicle, which shall not exceed one and one-half (11/2) tons rated
capacity, per family living on the premises, and not to exceed two (2) spaces
shall be rented to persons not residing on the premises for storage of
noncommercial passenger vehicles only.
GASOLINE SERVICES OR FILLING STATION: Any area of land, including structures
thereon, that is used for the retail sale of gasoline or oil fuels, but not
butane or propane fuels, or other automobile accessories, and incidental
services, including facilities for lubrication, hand washing and cleaning, or
otherwise servicing automobiles, but not including painting, major repair or
automatic washing.
HISTORIC BUILDING: Any building listed in the national register of historic
places or on the Utah state register of historic sites or so designated by
resolution of the governing body.
HOME OCCUPATION: A gainful occupation conducted by members of the family only
within the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the character
thereof; provided, that no display, except a regulated sign will indicate from
the exterior that the building or land is being utilized in part for any
purpose other than that of a dwelling.
HOSPITAL: An institution intended primarily for the medical diagnosis,
treatment and care of patients being given medical treatment. A hospital shall
be distinguished from a clinic by virtue of providing for bed and patient care.
INTERIOR LOT: A lot located near the center of a block with a street on one
side and private property on the other three (3) sides, or private property on
two (2) sides and alley on the fourth side.
JUNKYARD OR SALVAGE YARD: A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used for
the collecting, storage or sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or discarded
material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storing and salvaging of
machinery of vehicles not in running condition, or for the sale of parts
thereof.
LOADING SPACE: A space within the main building or on the same zone lot
providing for the standing, loading or unloading of a vehicle.
MOBILE HOME: Any vehicle or structure designed and equipped to provide sleeping
and living quarters, and designed to be transported from place to place by
another vehicle. Mobile homes shall be classified as follows:
A. Class I Mobile Home: Any mobile home which may be transported over the
highways in one piece by a single vehicle. Any such structure from which the
wheels have been removed shall not be construed to be a permanent dwelling
structure.
   B.   Class II Mobile Home: Any mobile home which must be transported over
the highways in two (2) or more sections. Any such structure from which the
wheels have been removed shall be considered to be a permanent dwelling
structure subject to being placed on a permanent foundation with proper
footing.
MOBILE HOME SPACE: A plot of ground within a mobile home area which is designed
for and designated as the location for only one automobile and one mobile home
and not used for any other purpose whatsoever other than the customary
accessory use thereof.
MODULAR OR PRECONSTRUCTED HOME: See title 12 of this code.
MOTEL: A building or series of building in which lodging is offered for
compensation, and which is distinguished from a hotel primarily by reason of
providing direct independent access to, and adjoining parking for, each rental
unit.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A structure which does not conform to the building
location regulations of the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE 1 : A use carried on within any building or on any zone lot
which does not conform to the use or density regulations of the district in
which it is located.
PARKING SPACE: An off street space available for the parking of one motor
vehicle and having an area of not less than two hundred (200) square feet,
exclusive of passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto, and having direct
access to a street or alley.
PERMITTED USE: A use enumerated for a zoning district.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board
duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under state or municipal regulations,
to the public, electricity, gas, steam, communication, telegraph,
transportation or water.
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES: Land and structures, along with accessory equipment,
designed and utilized for leisure time activities of a predominantly "outdoor"
nature and of a more specific purpose than passive park like open spaces.
RETAIL STORE: A commercial establishment for the sale of material, goods or
commodities directly to the consumer.
SETBACK: The horizontal distance between any structure and the established zone
lot line.
SIGN: Any device or display of letters, words, models, banners, flags,
pennants, symbols or other representations which are in the nature of an
announcement or advertisement, or calls attention to a product, service,
organization, person or event. The word "sign" does not include the flag,
pennant or insignia of any nation, state, city or other political unit.
ZONE LOT: A single parcel of contiguous land occupied or intended to be
occupied by such structure and uses as permitted under this title. (Ord. 1978-
1, 3-8-1978, as amended; amd. Ord., 5-28-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. See also definition at subsection 10-10-1A of this title.
CHAPTER 3
ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
10-3-1: Planning Commission
10-3-2: Board Of Adjustment
10-3-3: Building Inspector
10-3-4: Amendment Procedures
10-3-5: Violations, Penalties And Remedies
10-3-1: PLANNING COMMISSION:
   A.   Created: There is hereby created a commission to be known and
designated as the planning commission of the city, to be appointed and to hold
office as is set forth hereinafter.
   B.   Membership: The planning commission shall consist of five (5) members,
one of whom shall be designated from among the members of the city council, and
four (4) shall be appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the city council.
The term of office for the council members shall correspond to his or her term
of office. The term of office for each appointed member shall be four (4)
years. Each commissioner shall hold office until his or her successor is
appointed and qualified.
   C.   Organization:
      1.   The members of the planning commission shall select from their own
members a chairperson and such other officers as deemed necessary, and shall
adopt rules and regulations for their organization and for the transaction of
business and the conduct of their proceedings.
      2.   Reports of official acts and recommendations of the planning
commission shall be public and made by the chairperson in writing to the
governing body, and shall indicate how each member of the commission voted with
respect to such act or recommendation. Any member of the commission may also
make a concurring or dissenting report or recommendation to the governing body.
      3.   The planning commission shall meet monthly and at such other times
as the planning commission may determine.
      4.   Three (3) members of the planning commission shall constitute a
quorum.
   D.   Powers And Duties: The planning commission shall have all the powers
and duties explicitly or impliedly given planning commissions by the laws of
the state. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-3-2: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT:
   A.   Creation And Organization: There is hereby created a board of
adjustment, hereinafter referred to in this title as "the board". The
membership of the board shall consist of five (5) residents of the
municipality, appointed by the city council, one of whom shall be a member of
the planning commission. Their terms of office are five (5) years, and must be
fixed so that the term of office of one member expires each year. Appointments
to fill vacancies are to be made only for the unexpired portion of the term.
The board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve
annual terms and who may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any hearing or
the taking of any action, a quorum of three (3) members is required. No member
of the board shall hold any other office with the city, except the member who
is also a member of the planning commission. This member may also be the member
of the city council who sits on the planning commission.
   B.   Powers Of Board: In addition to the requirements of Utah Code Annotated
section 10-9a-701 et seq., the board of adjustment shall have the following
powers:
      1.   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error
in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the administrative
official in the enforcement of this title; and
      2.   To hear and decide special exceptions, if any, to the terms of this
title; and
      3.   To authorize upon appeal such variance from the terms of this title
as will not be contrary to the public interest, wherein special conditions or
literal enforcement of the provisions of the title will result in unnecessary
hardship; provided, that the spirit of this title shall be observed and
substantial justice done; and any variance must be granted pursuant to the
terms of subsection E of this section; and
      4.   To hear and decide requests for conditional uses 1 , but only within
the respective zones in which such conditional uses are permitted. (Ord. 1978-
1, 3-8-1978, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
   C.   Rules For Proceeding Before The Board: The board shall adopt rules
governing its actions. Among other things, such rules shall require that:
      1.   The board shall reach decisions on matters within its jurisdiction
only after a public hearing; and
      2.   The board shall give notice of such hearing to the public, the
applicant, the planning commission, the building inspector, and to such other
persons or agencies as the board may designate by rule, and to any person who
has made a timely request for notice; the board shall give notices in such
manner and at such time as shall be prescribed by rule; and
      3.   At any public hearing, any interested party may appear and, after
being duly sworn, may offer evidence and testimony and cross examine witnesses;
and
      4.   All evidence and testimony shall be presented publicly; and
      5.   The board shall keep a record of the proceedings, for each case
heard, either stenographically or by sound recording, and a transcript of the
proceedings and copies of graphic or written material received in evidence
shall be made available to any party at cost; the record of proceedings shall
include all documents and physical evidence considered in the case; and
      6.   The board shall render a decision on each case heard within forty
five (45) days of the hearing; and each decision must be accompanied by reasons
therefor and based on findings of fact and conclusions based on any provisions
of this title, or on any rule or regulation, must contain a reference to the
provisions, rule or regulation relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is
deemed appropriate in light of the facts found; and the board may deliberate in
executive session and such deliberation shall not be a part of the record of
the proceedings; however, the record shall show the grounds for each decision
and the vote of each member upon each question; this record of proceedings
shall be a public record.
   D.   Administration: The city council may establish by resolution reasonable
fees to be paid by an applicant requesting a hearing before the board. The
board will have such technical assistance and monies as the city council may
provide.
   E.   Powers Of The Board: The board shall have the power to modify the
requirements of this title as herein provided. In the exercise of this power,
the board may affirm, reverse or modify the order or decision appealed from and
make such order as ought to be made and to that end shall have all the powers
of the officer appealed from as more fully set forth in subsection B of this
section. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
   F.   Variances:
      1.   Any person or entity desiring a waiver or modification of the
requirements of a land use ordinance as applied to a parcel of property that he
owns, leases, or in which he holds some other beneficial interest, may apply to
the board of adjustment for a variance from the terms of the ordinance.
      2.   a. The board of adjustment may grant a variance only if:
            (1)   Literal enforcement of the ordinance would cause an
unreasonable hardship for the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the
general purpose of the land use ordinances;
            (2)   There are special circumstances attached to the property that
do not generally apply to other properties in the same zone;
            (3)   Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a
substantial property right possessed by other property in the same zone;
            (4)   The variance will not substantially affect the general plan
and will not be contrary to the public interest; and
            (5)   The spirit of the land use ordinance is observed and
substantial justice done.
         b.   (1) In determining whether or not enforcement of the land use
ordinance would cause unreasonable hardship under subsection F2a(1) of this
section, the board of adjustment may not find an unreasonable hardship unless
the alleged hardship:
               (A)   Is located on or associated with the property for which
the variance is sought; and
               (B)   Comes from circumstances peculiar to the property, not
from conditions that are general to the neighborhood.
            (2)   In determining whether or not enforcement of the land use
ordinance would cause unreasonable hardship under subsection F2a(1) of this
section, the board of adjustment may not find an unreasonable hardship if the
hardship is self-imposed or economic.
         c.   In determining whether or not there are special circumstances
attached to the property under subsection F2a(2) of this section, the board of
adjustment may find that special circumstances exist only if the special
circumstances:
            (1)   Relate to the hardship complained of; and
            (2)   Deprive the property of privileges granted to other
properties in the same zone.
      3.   The applicant shall bear the burden of proving that all of the
conditions justifying a variance have been met.
      4.   Variances run with the land.
      5.   The board of adjustment may not grant a use variance.
      6.   In granting a variance, the board of adjustment may impose
additional requirements on the applicant that will:
         a.   Mitigate any harmful affects of the variance; or
         b.   Serve the purpose of the standard or requirement that is waived
or modified.
   G.   Appeals From Board: Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by any
decision of the board of adjustment may file a petition for review with the
district court as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-801. (Ord.
1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 9 of this title.
10-3-3: BUILDING INSPECTOR:
   A.   Created: There is hereby created the office of building inspector,
which position may be filled by the same person filling the position of city
planner. The building inspector is vested with the power and duty to administer
and enforce the provisions of this title. For this purpose, the building
inspector shall administer such persons and monies as the city council may
provide. Incidental to this charge, he shall:
      1.   Administer rules and procedures established by the city council for
conducting the zoning affairs of the city, including issuing permits,
collecting fees, coordinating with other officials and developing necessary
forms; and
      2.   Intervene and participate, when deemed desirable, in public hearings
before the board of adjustment on behalf of the city, and have decisions of the
board reviewed in court when the city council considers such review desirable;
and (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
      3.   Receive and review all applications for permits and approve or
disapprove such applications as a basis for the issuance of permits by the
building inspector; and (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
      4.   Receive all applications for amendment to this title and to the
zoning district map, refer such applications to other city officials for
comment and present such comments and applications to the city council for
final disposition; and
      5.   Propose to the planning commission any changes to this title or to
the zoning district map that may be desirable or necessary; and
      6.   Maintain a current zoning ordinance and map or maps showing the
current zoning classification of all lands within the municipality; and
      7.   Maintain a current register of all nonconforming uses; and
      8.   Maintain such records and files as may be necessary in the conduct
of the above duties; and
      9.   Make any examinations or investigations relative to the use of land
or structures to determine compliance with these regulations.
   B.   Building Permits:
      1.   The building inspector shall not issue any building permit for any
building, construction or repair of any building unless such fully conforms to
all zoning regulations or ordinances of this municipality in effect at the time
of the application.
      2.   No permit shall be issued for any building or structure, or part
thereof, on any land located between the mapped lines of any street as shown on
any official street map adopted by the governing body. However, the board of
adjustment shall have the power, upon an appeal filed with it by the owner of
any such land, to authorize the grant of a permit for a building or structure,
or any part thereof, within any mapped street located in any case in which the
board of adjustment, upon the evidence, finds:
         a.   The property of the appellant of which such mapped street
location forms a part will not yield a reasonable return to the owner unless
such permit be granted; or
         b.   Balancing the interest of the municipality in preserving the
integrity of the official map and the interest of the owner in the use and
benefits of the property, the grant of such permit is required by consideration
of justice and equity; and before taking on such action, the board of
adjustment shall hold a public hearing thereon; and in the event that the board
of adjustment decides to authorize a building permit, it shall have the power
to specify the exact location, ground area, height and other details and
conditions of extent and character and also the duration of the building,
structure, or part thereof, to be permitted. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as
amended)
10-3-4: AMENDMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Statement Of Public Policy: It is the intent of the municipality that
these regulations, which include this title and the official map, have been
established for the purpose of promoting sound and desirable development and of
maintaining a stable community. In harmony with this purpose, this title and
map shall not be amended except to: 1) correct an obvious error or oversight in
the regulations; or 2) recognize changing conditions in the community, which
require that amendments be adopted for the promotion of the public health,
safety and general welfare. In conformity with this statement of policy, the
city council may initiate amendments, or any person, firm or corporation may
initiate amendments, in the manner hereinafter set forth.
   B.   Type Of Amendments And How Made:
      1.   Amendments shall be of two (2) types:
         a.   Language amendments which seek to change the wording of this
title; and
         b.   Map amendments which seek to change the district boundary lines
on the official map.
      2.   Applications for amendments of either type shall be made to the
building inspector, who may develop forms for this purpose. The application
shall include, among other things:
         a.   The name and address of the applicant; and
         b.   The applicant's interest in the application; and
         c.   The nature and effect of the proposed amendment; and
         d.   A description and map of any area sought to be rezoned; and
         e.   A statement of the legal basis for such an amendment, whether to
correct an error or to recognize changing conditions.
      3.   The building inspector shall assemble the application and shall
forward a copy to planning commission and to any other agency which he feels
might be affected by the amendment. Any such agency may require additional
information of a reasonable and pertinent nature from the applicant.
      4.   The planning commission shall consider the application and forward
its recommendations to the building inspector. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit the planning commission from developing close working
relationships with the city council in order to apprise the city council of
development policies and problems of the municipality.
      5.   The building inspector shall submit to the city council the
completed application, including agency comments and planning commission
recommendation.
   C.   Public Hearing: No amendment to this title or map shall be enacted
until after a public hearing has been held at which all interested parties have
had an opportunity to be heard. Notice of such a hearing shall be by posting
any affected property for fifteen (15) days prior to such a hearing and by any
other method that the city council may provide. Such posting shall include
information on the nature of the amendment sought and the date, time and place
for the public hearing. The applicant shall be responsible for notification and
posting as prescribed by city council.
   D.   Protests To Map Amendments: In the event that twenty percent (20%) of
the property owners of the land included within a proposed change, or twenty
percent (20%) of the property owners located within two hundred feet (200')
from the perimeter of the proposed change file a written protest with the city
council at least four (4) hours prior to the time of the public hearing, then
and in that event an amendment to the official map shall not become effective
except by a favorable vote of four (4) council members.
   E.   Intent And Minimum Size:
      1.   Specified: It is the intent of this title that zoning districts be
of such a size as to function effectively and for the benefit of the community
or a significant segment of the populace. For that reason, no amendment to this
title shall be adopted whereby the zoning classification is changed unless the
area to be zoned meets the following minimum size requirements:
 
R-1   5 acres
R-2   5 acres
C     5 acres
I     5 acres
O     1 acre
MH    2 acres
 
      2.   How Measured: For the purpose of computing the size of an area for
compliance with subsection E1 of this section, there shall be included:
         a.   One-half (1/2) of the area of abutting streets not, however, to
exceed fifty feet (50'); and
         b.   All of the area of public rights of way interior to the area
being changed; and
         c.   Adjacent and contiguous land within the municipality already
zoned in the zoning classification being sought for the new area; and
         d.   Adjacent and contiguous land outside the municipality that is
zoned in a similar category or is used substantially for uses similar to those
being sought by the applicant. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
   F.   Filing Fee And Publication Charge: At the time the application is filed
requesting change with respect to zoning or building, or uses of land, as
contemplated by this title, there shall be paid to the city treasurer a filing
fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the purpose of deferring the cost of
advertising such public hearing. The city planner shall notify such applicant
of such charge for advertising and shall not proceed with the advertising until
such charge has been paid. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
10-3-5: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES:
   A.   A failure to comply with any of the provisions of this title shall
constitute a violation of this title. Every day in which a violation exists
shall constitute a separate violation and a separate offense. The building
inspector shall, in writing, state the nature of the violation to the owner,
the developer, tenant, lessee or manager, and the method and time by which the
violation must be corrected. After any such order has been served on any use,
building or any tract of land, no work shall proceed on such use, building or
tract of land except to correct the violation.
   B.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this title,
upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than two hundred ninety nine
dollars ($299.00) or imprisoned not more than ninety (90) days, or both. Each
day during which the illegal erection, construction, alteration, maintenance or
use continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
   C.   In addition to any foregoing remedies, the city attorney, acting in
behalf of the city council, or any proper person, may maintain an action for an
injunction to restrain any violation of this title. The imposition of any
penalty hereunder shall not preclude the municipality or any proper person from
instituting any appropriate action or proceeding to require compliance with the
provisions of this title and with administrative orders and determinations made
hereunder. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
CHAPTER 4
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Districts Established
10-4-2: Zoning District Map
10-4-3: Uniform District Regulations
10-4-4: Zone Lot For Structures And Uses
10-4-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
In order to carry out the provisions of this title, the city is hereby divided
into the following basic zoning districts:
 
R-1   Residential
R-2   Residential
MH    Mobile home
R-1A  Agricultural residential
C     Commercial
I     Industrial
O     Open space
 
(Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended; amd. Ord. 2008-3, 3-25-2008)
10-4-2: ZONING DISTRICT MAP:
   A.   The boundaries of these zoning districts are hereby and shall be
established as shown on maps entitled "Zoning District Map Of The City Of
Blanding, Utah", which maps and all future official amendments thereto are
hereby made a part of this title.
   B.   Unless otherwise defined on the zoning district maps, district boundary
lines are lot lines; the centerline of streets, alleys, railroad rights of way
or such lines extended; section lines; municipal corporate lines; the
centerline of streambeds; or other lines drawn to scale on the zoning district
map.
   C.   It is the intent of this title that all lands within the boundaries of
the city shall be located within one of the enumerated zoning districts. It is
the further intent of this title that if any land within the boundaries of the
city shall be determined not to be within one of the enumerated zoning
districts, whether such determination result from annexation, from judicial
declaration, or from any other reason or cause, then and in that event no
permits shall be issued for the use of the land or for the erection or
alteration of any structures thereon until the area has been examined by the
city council and a zoning classification established within a reasonable period
of time. If no zoning classification is established for the land within one
hundred twenty (120) days from the date on which the area was found without
classification, then any use which is authorized in the R-1 zoning district
shall be permitted. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-4-3: UNIFORM DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
   A.   The provisions of this title shall apply uniformly to all geographical
areas bearing the same district classification.
   B.   Where an ownership of record is divided by a district boundary line,
each such parcel thus created shall conform to the regulations pertaining to
the zoning district in which each parcel is located.
   C.   If one of the parcels described in subsection B of this section is
smaller than the minimum zone lot size of the district in which it is located,
it may be combined with the larger parcel and used for a use permitted in
either of the zone districts applying to the entire ownership parcel. (Ord.
1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-4-4: ZONE LOT FOR STRUCTURES AND USES:
The land area occupied by a use and/or the building site designated for a
structure shall be deemed the zone lot for the purposes of this title, and
shall be provided and maintained for each use and/or structure in accordance
with the provisions of the district in which the structure is located. The
boundaries of a designated zone lot may be amended if all of the requirements
of this title can be maintained. Where more than one structure or use is to be
placed on a designated zone lot, the provisions of chapter 13 of this title
shall apply. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
CHAPTER 5
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A.  R-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-5A-1: Purpose
10-5A-2: Permitted Uses
10-5A-3: Accessory Uses
10-5A-4: Home Occupations
10-5A-5: Conditional Uses
10-5A-6: Temporary Conditional Uses
10-5A-7: Area, Width, Setback And Height Requirements
10-5A-8: Off Street Parking
10-5A-9: Fences, Walls And Retaining Walls
10-5A-1: PURPOSE:
The R-1 residential district is intended as a low density residential area of
one- and two-family dwellings, and is intended to include related recreational,
religious, cultural and educational facilities normally required to provide a
balanced and attractive residential area. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-5A-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Permanent single-family dwelling. Minimum square footage of living
space, one thousand one hundred (1,100).
   B.   Permanent single-family dwelling. Minimum square footage of one
thousand one hundred (1,100), with one of the following apartment types minimum
of seven hundred (700) square feet of living space:
      1.   Basement.
      2.   Attic.
      3.   Garage or over garage.
   C.   Public parks and playgrounds.
   D.   Public schools, elementary and secondary.
   E.   Churches and parish houses.
   F.   Essential public utility and public service installations for the
benefit and protection of the immediate surrounding area. Such uses shall not
include business offices, repair, sales or storage facilities. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-
8-1978, as amended)
10-5A-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Any use which complies with all of the following conditions may be operated as
an accessory use to a permitted use:
   A.   Is clearly incidental and customary to and commonly associated with the
operation of the permitted use; and
   B.   Is operated under the same ownership and on the same zone lot as the
permitted use; and
   C.   Does not include structures or structural features inconsistent with
the permitted use; and
   D.   Does not include residential occupancy; and
   E.   Does not include a floor area of over fifty percent (50%) of the floor
area of the permitted use or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is
larger. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended; amd. Ord. 2014-1, 2-25-2014)
10-5A-4: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Home occupations shall be allowed, provided all the following conditions are
met. All home occupations must have a plan review prior to obtaining a business
license:
   A.   Such use must be conducted entirely within a dwelling; and
   B.   Such use must be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling for dwelling purposes and must not change the residential character
thereof; and
   C.   The total area used for such purposes may not exceed twenty five
percent (25%) of the first floor area of the user's dwelling unit; and
   D.   There must be no advertising display or other indications of the home
occupation on the premises, except as may be specifically allowed (see section
10-12-3 of this title, sign regulations in zoning districts); and
   E.   There shall be only limited sales of stock, supplies or products
conducted on the premises; and
   F.   There must be no exterior storage on the premises of material or
equipment used as a part of the home occupation; and
   G.   There must be no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat
or glare noticeable at or beyond the property line; and
   H.   A home occupation must provide adequate off street parking to
accommodate all needs created by the home occupation (parking same as
commercial district, see subsection 10-6A-7A of this title);
I/we                                          name(s) have read the above
listed requirements to have or maintain a home business and understand that
failure to comply with one or all of these requirements will place at jeopardy
my/our opportunity to operate a home business.
                                                         
Signature            Date
                                                         
Signature            Date
                                                                      
   Address of Business
   (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-5A-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following may be allowed as conditional uses in the R-1 district:
   A.   Historical building. The board of adjustment or building inspector may
permit as a conditional use in historic buildings the following uses:
      1.   Offices and accessory commercial uses as deemed appropriate if
designed for use by the occupants of and visitors to the offices; provided,
that access to such uses is only from within the building and there is no
exterior evidence of such uses as signs or display windows; or
      2.   Limited retail businesses which do not change the basic character of
the building in the district in which it is located. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as
amended)
10-5A-6: TEMPORARY CONDITIONAL USES:
The following may be allowed as temporary conditional uses in the R-1 district:
   A.   Mobile homes. A maximum of one mobile home per building lot may be
allowed for the use and occupancy of aged or handicapped family members of the
owner or lessee of said lot, or agent of either, and if such occupancy is
deemed necessary to provide the needed care of said family member, and
providing the following conditions are met:
      1.   The city council approves the issuance of the conditional use by
resolution. The permit must be renewed every two (2) years; and
      2.   The setbacks, lot size, height and lot coverage requirements of the
zone district be fully complied with; and
      3.   A minimum of twenty feet (20') be maintained between the mobile home
and any other structure; and
      4.   The conditional use permit expires and the mobile home be removed
when the need no longer exists.
   B.   Mobile homes. A maximum of one mobile home per building lot may be
allowed for the use and occupancy of the owner or lessee of said lot, or agent
of either, and if such occupancy is deemed necessary to provide said person
and/or family a place to live while a permanent structure is being constructed
on said building lot for their occupancy. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-5A-7: AREA, WIDTH, SETBACK AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum lot area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
   B.   Minimum lot width: One hundred feet (100') at the front setback line.
   C.   Minimum front setback for structures:
      1.   For properties abutting local or collector streets, twenty feet
(20').
      2.   For properties abutting arterial streets, forty feet (40').
   D.   Minimum rear setback for structures:
      1.   Structure containing a permitted use, twenty feet (20').
      2.   Structure containing an accessory use only, five feet (5').
   E.   Minimum side setback for structures:
      1.   Side setback not abutting a street, ten feet (10'), or one foot (1')
for each three feet (3') of a building height or fraction thereof, whichever is
greater.
      2.   Side setback abutting an arterial street, forty feet (40').
   F.   Maximum building height:
      1.   Buildings containing a permitted use, thirty five feet (35').
      2.   Buildings containing an accessory use only, twenty feet (20').
   G.   Maximum lot coverage:
      1.   Dwelling units and their accessory uses shall cover no more than
thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area.
      2.   All other permitted uses and their accessory uses shall cover no
more than twenty five percent (25%) of the total lot area. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-
1978, as amended)
10-5A-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
The provisions of chapter 11 of this title shall be in full force and effect
for this district.
 
Each classroom in an elementary or junior high school                2 spaces
Each dwelling unit                                                   1 space
Each 4 seats in a senior high school auditorium, church or principal 1 space
place of assembly
 
(Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-5A-9: FENCES, WALLS AND RETAINING WALLS:
   A.   Fences, walls and retaining walls up to forty eight inches (48") in
height may be erected on any part of the zone lot.
   B.   Fences, walls and retaining walls, on an interior lot, may be erected
to a height of seventy two inches (72") on any part of the zone lot not in the
front setback space. Open clear chainlink fencing with no solid blocking of any
type, including trees or other landscaping, may be erected to a height of
seventy two inches (72") in the front setback on an interior lot.
   C.   Fences, walls and retaining walls, on a corner lot, may be erected to a
height of seventy two inches (72") on any part of the zone lot, except for the
following:
      1.   Open clear chainlink with no solid blocking trees or other
landscaping may be erected to a height of seventy two inches (72") in the front
setback on a corner lot; and
      2.   "Sight triangle" areas explained as follows 1 : A triangular area
formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points thirty
feet (30') from the intersection of such property lines. These sight triangle
areas are to contain no obstructions to the view of the driver of a vehicle.
Any fencing, landscaping or other improvements placed within the area of the
triangle shall allow visibility across the area. Only open clear chainlink
fencing with no sight obstructions, including vegetation, may be erected in the
sight triangle up to a height of seventy two inches (72"). All other fencing,
walls and retaining walls, shrubs, boulders, ground covers, landscaping and
similar improvements shall be maintained at or below a height of forty eight
inches (48") above grade (ground level).
   D.   Barbed wire, sharp pointed metal fences and electrically charged fences
shall not be permitted.
   E.   Fences shall be maintained in a good state of repair.
   F.   Open mesh fences of any height may be erected on zone lots containing
schools, public parks and playgrounds.
   G.   The height of fences under this section shall include combinations of
walls and fences. The height allowances shall be measured from the high side of
adjoining properties allowing each property the right to a six foot (6')
privacy wall, fence or combination from finished grade. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978,
as amended)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 7-7-3E of this code.
ARTICLE B.  R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-5B-1: Purpose
10-5B-2: Permitted Uses
10-5B-3: Accessory Uses
10-5B-4: Home Occupations
10-5B-5: Conditional Uses
10-5B-6: Temporary Conditional Uses
10-5B-7: Area, Width, Setback And Height Requirements
10-5B-8: Off Street Parking
10-5B-9: Fences, Walls And Retaining Walls
10-5B-1: PURPOSE:
The R-2 residential district is intended as a high density residential, office
and institutional area, providing living accommodations for the small or
nonfamily, and providing services to the broader community. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-
1978, as amended)
10-5B-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Permanent single-family dwelling. Minimum square footage of living
space seven hundred (700).
   B.   Permanent two-family dwellings. Minimum square footage of living space
seven hundred (700) per unit.
   C.   Multiple-family dwelling.
      1.   Minimum square footage per dwelling unit, seven hundred (700) square
feet per unit 1 . Multiple-family dwellings in this article are regarded as any
complex containing three (3) or more units. Complexes of this nature are
required, as part of the plot plan, to include a designated play area(s) in the
form of open space with landscaping, further amenities at the discretion of the
developer such as: swings, slides, sand box, picnic table, etc. The number of
these open space areas are to be determined by the number of units to be
developed using the following scale:
 
Number Of Dwellings (Unit #) Open Space Requirements
   4 – 8                   1
   8 – 16                  2
   16 and up              To be considered by the city planner or building
                             official
 
      2.   All multiple-family dwelling units must meet minimum standards in
square footage per dwelling unit, off street parking requirements, landscaping
and open space requirements on the same zone lot prior to receiving final plot
plan approval.
      3.   Studio apartments are allowable under the following conditions:
         a.   The unit shall have a living room of not less than two hundred
twenty (220) square feet of superficial floor area. An additional one hundred
(100) square feet of superficial floor area shall be provided for each occupant
of such unit in excess of two (2).
         b.   The unit shall be provided with a separate closet.
         c.   The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance
and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less
than thirty inches (30") in front. Light and ventilation conforming to current
building code shall be provided.
         d.   The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a
water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
      4.   All other requirements of the R-2 zone are required in any studio
apartment development.
   D.   Public parks and playgrounds.
   E.   Public and private school, elementary and secondary.
   F.   Boarding and rooming house.
   G.   Hospitals, nursing homes and sanatoriums.
   H.   Professional offices such as but not limited to medical and dental
clinics, law, insurance, architect, and accounting offices.
   I.   Churches and parish houses.
   J.   Higher educational institutions and vocational schools.
   K.   Essential public utility and public service installations and
facilities for the benefit and protection of the surrounding area; such uses
shall not include business offices, repair, sales or storage facilities. (Ord.
1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended; amd. Ord. 2017-2, 10-24-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection C3 of this section.
10-5B-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Any use which complies with all of the following conditions may be operated as
an accessory use to a permitted use:
   A.   Is clearly incidental and customary to and commonly associated with the
operation of the permitted use; and
   B.   Is operated under the same ownership and on the same zone lot as the
permitted use; and
   C.   Does not include structures or structural features inconsistent with
the permitted use; and
   D.   Does not include residential occupancy; and
   E.   Does not include a floor area of over fifty percent (50%) of the floor
area of the permitted use or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is
larger. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended; amd. Ord. 2014-1, 2-25-2014)
10-5B-4: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Home occupations shall be allowed, provided all the following conditions are
met. All home occupations must have a plan review prior to obtaining a business
license:
   A.   Such use must be conducted entirely within a dwelling; and
   B.   Such use must be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling for dwelling purposes and must not change the residential character
thereof; and
   C.   The total area used for such purposes may not exceed twenty five
percent (25%) of the first floor area of the user's dwelling unit; and
   D.   There must be no advertising display or other indications of the home
occupation on the premises, except that may be specifically allowed (see
section
10-12-4 of this title, sign regulations in zoning districts); and
   E.   There shall be only limited sales of stock, supplies or products
conducted on the premises; and
   F.   There must be no exterior storage on the premises of material or
equipment used as a part of the home occupation; and
   G.   There must be no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat
or glare noticeable at or beyond the property line; and
   H.   A home occupation must provide adequate off street parking to
accommodate all needs created by the home occupation (parking same as
Commercial District, see subsection 10-6A-7A of this title).
I/we                                    name(s) have read the above listed
requirements to have or maintain a home business and understand that failure to
comply with one or all of these requirements will place at jeopardy my/our
opportunity to operate a home business.
Signature      Date
Signature      Date
   Address of Business
   (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-5B-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following may be allowed conditional uses in the R-2 District:
   A.   Historic buildings. Historic buildings may be used for offices and
accessory commercial uses and/or limited retail businesses, subject to the same
restrictions as set forth in section
10-5A-5 of this title, R-1 district. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-5B-6: TEMPORARY CONDITIONAL USES:
The following may be allowed as temporary conditional uses in the R-2 district:
   A.   Mobile homes. A maximum of one mobile home per building lot may be
allowed for the use and occupancy of the owner or lessee of said lot, or agent
of either, an if such occupancy is deemed necessary to provide said person and/
or his family a place to live while a permanent structure is being constructed
on said building lot for their occupancy.
   B.   Mobile homes. A maximum of one mobile home per building lot may be
allowed for the use and occupancy of aged or handicapped family members of the
owner or lessee of said lot, or agent of either, and if such occupancy is
deemed necessary to provide the needed care of said family member, and
providing the following conditions are met:
      1.   The city council approves the issuance of the conditional use by
resolution. The permit must be renewed every two (2) years; and
      2.   The setbacks, lot size, height and lot coverage requirements of the
zone district be fully complies with; and
      3.   A minimum of twenty feet (20') be maintained between the mobile home
and any other structure; and
      4.   The conditional use permit expires and the mobile home be removed
when the need no longer exists. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-5B-7: AREA, WIDTH, SETBACK AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum lot area: Seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
   B.   Minimum lot width: Seventy feet (70') at the front setback line.
   C.   Minimum front setback for structures:
      1.   For properties abutting local or collector streets, twenty feet
(20').
      2.   For properties abutting arterial streets, forty feet (40').
   D.   Minimum rear setback for structure:
      1.   Structure containing a permitted use, twenty feet (20').
      2.   Structure containing an accessory use only, five feet (5').
   E.   Minimum side setback for structures:
      1.   Side setback not abutting a street, seven feet (7'), or one foot
(1') for each three feet (3') of building height or fraction thereof, whichever
is greater.
      2.   Side setback abutting a local or collector street, fifteen feet
(15').
      3.   Side setback abutting an arterial street, forty feet (40').
   F.   Maximum building height:
      1.   Buildings containing a permitted use, fifty feet (50').
      2.   Buildings containing an accessory use only, thirty feet (30').
   G.   Maximum lot coverage:
      1.   Dwelling units and their accessory uses shall cover no more than
fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area.
      2.   All other permitted uses and their accessory uses shall cover no
more than forty percent (40%) of the total lot area. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as
amended)
10-5B-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
The provisions of chapter 11 of this title shall be in full force and effect
for this district.
 
Each classroom in an elementary or junior high school                2 spaces
Each dwelling unit                                                   1 space
Each 4 seats in a senior high school auditorium, church or principal 1 space
place of assembly
All other permitted uses, for each 600 square feet of floor area     1 space
 
(Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-5B-9: FENCES, WALLS AND RETAINING WALLS:
   A.   Fences, walls and retaining walls up to forty eight inches (48") in
height may be erected on any part of the zone lot.
   B.   Fences, walls and retaining walls, on an interior lot, may be erected
to a height of seventy two inches (72") on any part of the zone lot not in
front setback space. Open clear chainlink fencing with no solid blocking of any
type, including trees or other landscaping, may be erected to a height of
seventy two inches (72") in the front setback on an interior lot.
   C.   Fences, walls and retaining walls, on a corner lot, may be erected to a
height of seventy two inches (72") on any part of the zone lot, except for the
following:
      1.   Open clear chainlink with no solid blocking trees or other
landscaping may be erected to a height of seventy two inches (72") in the front
setback on a corner lot; and
      2.   "Sight triangle" areas explained as follows: A triangular area
formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points thirty
feet (30') from the intersection of such property lines. These sight triangle
areas are to contain no obstructions to the view of the driver of a vehicle.
Any fencing, landscaping or other improvements placed within the area of the
triangle shall allow visibility across the area. Only open clear chainlink
fencing with no sight obstructions, including vegetation, may be erected in the
sight triangle up to a height of seventy two inches (72"). All other fencing,
walls and retaining walls, shrubs, boulders, ground covers, landscaping and
similar improvements shall be maintained at or below a height of forty eight
inches (48") above grade (ground level).
   D.   Barbed wire, sharp pointed metal and electrically charged fences shall
not be permitted.
   E.   Fences shall be maintained in a good state of repair.
   F.   Open mesh fences of any height may be erected on zone lots containing
schools, public parks and playgrounds.
   G.   The height of fences under this section shall include combinations of
walls and fences. The height allowances shall be measured from the high side of
adjoining properties allowing each property the right to a six foot (6')
privacy wall, fence or a combination from finished grade. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-
1978, as amended)
ARTICLE C.  MH MOBILE HOME DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-5C-1: Purpose
10-5C-2: Permitted Uses
10-5C-3: Accessory Uses
10-5C-4: Home Occupations
10-5C-5: Conditional Uses
10-5C-6: Area, Width, Setback And Height Requirements
10-5C-7: Off Street Parking And Loading
10-5C-8: Fences, Walls And Retaining Walls
10-5C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the MH mobile home district is to provide areas with proper
facilities for mobile homes. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-5C-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Mobile home park.
   B.   Public park or playground.
   C.   Residential uses. Any use allowed as a permitted use in an R-1 or R-
2 district, so long as the applicant and/or owner is willing to comply with the
city's development guidelines for that type of development as interpreted by
staff for single- family development and by the planning commission for a
multiple-family development. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended; amd. Ord.
2009-2, 11-24-2009)
10-5C-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Any use which complies with all of the following conditions may be operated as
an accessory use to a permitted use:
   A.   Is clearly incidental and customary to and commonly associated with the
operation of the permitted use; and
   B.   Is operated under the same ownership and on the same zone lot as the
permitted use; and
   C.   Does not include structures or structural features inconsistent with
the permitted use; and
   D.   Does not include residential occupancy; and
   E.   Does not include a floor area of over twenty percent (20%) of the floor
area of the permitted use. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-5C-4: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Home occupations shall be allowed, provided all the following conditions are
met. All home occupations must have a plan review prior to obtaining a business
license.
   A.   Such use must be conducted entirely within a dwelling; and
   B.   Such use must be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling for dwelling purposes and must not change the residential character
thereof; and
   C.   The total area used for such purposes may not exceed twenty five
percent (25%) of the first floor area of the user's dwelling unit; and
   D.   There must be no advertising display or other indications of the home
occupation on the premises, except that may be specifically allowed (see
section
10-12-8 of this title, sign regulations in zoning districts, based on R-
2 district); and
   E.   There shall be only limited sales of stock, supplies or products
conducted on the premises; and
   F.   There must be no exterior storage on the premises of material or
equipment used as a part of the home occupation; and
   G.   There must be no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat
or glare noticeable at or beyond the property line; and
   H.   A home occupation must provide adequate off street parking to
accommodate all needs created by the home occupation (parking same as
commercial district, see subsection 10-6A-7A of this title).
I/we                                name(s) have read the above listed
requirements to have or maintain a home business and understand that failure to
comply with one or all of these requirements will place at jeopardy my/our
opportunity to operate a home business.
                                                         
Signature            Date
                                                         
Signature            Date
                                                                      
   Address of Business
   (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-5C-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following may be allowed a conditional use in the MH district:
   A.   Historic buildings. Historic buildings may be used for offices and
accessory commercial uses and/or limited retail businesses, subject to the same
restrictions as set forth in section
10-5A-5 of this chapter, R-1 districts. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-5C-6: AREA, WIDTH, SETBACK AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: There shall be provided for each mobile home sought
to be parked, a minimum land area of four thousand (4,000) square feet.
   B.   Minimum Front Setback For Structures:
      1.   For corner properties abutting local or collector streets, fifteen
feet (15').
      2.   For all other properties, fifteen feet (15').
   C.   Minimum Rear Setback For Structures: All structures, five feet (5').
   D.   Minimum Side Setback For Structures:
      1.   All structures adjacent to streets, fifteen feet (15').
      2.   All other structures, five feet (5').
      3.   Minimum of twenty feet (20') between all habitable structures.
   E.   Maximum Building Height:
      1.   Building containing a permitted use, thirty five feet (35').
      2.   Building containing an accessory use only, twenty feet (20'). (Ord.
1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-5C-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
   A.   Required Off Street Parking: The provisions of chapter 11 of this title
shall be in full force and effect for this district.
 
Each dwelling unit        1 space
                          There shall be provided on the zone lot an additional
Each 5 mobile home spaces off street parking space for guests and service
                          vehicles
Each mobile home space    1 space
 
   B.   Loading Requirements: None. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-5C-8: FENCES, WALLS AND RETAINING WALLS:
   A.   Fences, walls and retaining walls up to forty eight inches (48") in
height may be erected on any part of the zone lot.
   B.   Fences, walls and retaining walls may be erected to a height of seventy
two inches (72") on any portion of the zone lot not in the front setback
spaces.
   C.   Barbed wire, sharp pointed metal fences and electrically charged fences
shall not be permitted.
   D.   Fences shall be maintained in a good state of repair.
   E.   Open mesh fences of any height may be erected on zone lots containing
parks and playground.
   F.   The height of fences in this section shall include combinations of
walls and fences. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
ARTICLE D.  R-1A AGRICULTURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-5D-1: Purpose
10-5D-2: Permitted Uses
10-5D-3: Accessory Uses
10-5D-4: Home Occupations
10-5D-5: Conditional Uses
10-5D-6: Temporary Conditional Uses
10-5D-7: Area, Width, Setback And Height Requirements
10-5D-8: Off Street Parking
10-5D-9: Fences, Walls And Retaining Walls
10-5D-1: PURPOSE:
The R-1A agricultural residential district is intended as a low density
residential and agriculture area of one-family dwellings on large lots (2 acre
minimum) to include a rural development type; no curb and gutters or sidewalks
on public rights of way are allowed. Raising and harboring of animals are
subject to local and state guidelines. This is intended to be an open and
spacious rural residential zone. (Ord. 2008-3, 3-25-2008)
10-5D-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Permanent one-family dwellings. Minimum square footage of living space:
One thousand (1,000).
   B.   Animal husbandry.
   C.   Public parks and recreational areas.
   D.   Essential public utility and public service installations for the
benefit and protection of the immediate surrounding area. Such uses shall not
include business offices, repair, sales, or storage facilities. (Ord. 2008-3,
3-25-2008)
10-5D-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Any use which complies with all of the following conditions may be operated as
an accessory use to a permitted use:
   A.   Is clearly incidental and customary to and commonly associated with the
operation of the permitted use; and
   B.   Is operated under the same ownership and on the same zone lot as the
permitted use; and
   C.   Does not include structures or structural features inconsistent with
the permitted use; and
   D.   Does not include residential occupancy; and
   E.   Does not include a floor area of over two hundred twenty five percent
(225%) of the floor area of the permitted use. (Ord. 2008-3, 3-25-2008)
10-5D-4: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Home occupations shall be allowed provided all the following conditions are
met. All home occupations must have a plan review prior to obtaining a business
license:
   A.   Such use must be conducted entirely within a dwelling; and
   B.   Such use must be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling for dwelling purposes and must not change the residential character
thereof; and
   C.   The total area used for such purposes may not exceed twenty five
percent (25%) of the first floor area of the user's dwelling unit; and
   D.   There must be no advertising display or other indications of the home
occupation on the premises, except that specifically allowed (see section
10-12-3 of this title, sign regulations in zoning districts); and
   E.   There shall be only limited sales of stock, supplies, or products
conducted on the premises; and
   F.   There must be no exterior storage on the premises of material or
equipment used as a part of the home occupation; and
   G.   There must be no extensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat
or glare noticeable at or beyond the property line; and
   H.   A home occupation must provide adequate off street parking to
accommodate all needs created by the home occupation. The parking requirements
are the same as in the commercial district (see section
10-6A-7, "Off Street Parking And Loading", of this title);
I/We                                          Names(s) have read the above
listed requirements to have or maintain a home business and understand that
failure to comply with one or all of these requirements will place at jeopardy
my/our opportunity to operate a home business.
                                                
Signature   Date
                                                  
Signature    Date
                                                 
Address of Business
(Ord. 2008-3, 3-25-2008)
10-5D-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following may be allowed as conditional uses in the R-1A district:
   A.   Historical building. The board of adjustment or building inspector may
permit as a conditional use in historic buildings the following uses:
      1.   Offices and accessory commercial uses as deemed appropriate if
designed for use by the occupants of and visitors to the offices; provided that
access to such uses is only from within the building and there is no exterior
evidence of such uses as sites or display windows; or
      2.   Limited retail businesses which do not change the basic character of
the building in the district in which it is located. (Ord. 2008-3, 3-25-2008)
10-5D-6: TEMPORARY CONDITIONAL USES:
The following may be allowed as temporary conditional uses in the R-1A
district:
   A.   Mobile and/or modular homes:
      1.   A maximum of one mobile/modular home per building lot may be allowed
for the use and occupancy of the owner or lessee of said lot, or agent of
either, and if such occupancy is deemed necessary to provide said person and/or
family a place to live while a permanent structure is being constructed on said
building lot for their occupancy.
      2.   A maximum of one mobile home per building lot may be allowed for the
use and occupancy of aged or handicapped family members of the owner or lessee
of said lot or agent of either, and if such occupancy is deemed necessary to
provide the needed care of said family member, and providing the following
conditions are met:
         a.   The city council approves the issuance of the conditional use by
resolution; the permit must be renewed every two (2) years; and
         b.   The setbacks, lot size, height and lot coverage requirements of
the zone district be fully complied with; and
         c.   A minimum of twenty feet (20') be maintained between the mobile
home and any other structure; and
         d.   The conditional use permit expires and the mobile home be removed
when the need no longer exists. (Ord. 2008-3, 3-25-2008)
10-5D-7: AREA, WIDTH, SETBACK AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum lot area: Eighty seven thousand one hundred twenty (87,120)
square feet (or 2 acres) minimum.
   B.   Minimum lot width: One hundred feet (100') at the front setback line
adjoining a public street or right of way.
   C.   Minimum front setback for structures:
      1.   For properties abutting local or collector streets: Twenty five feet
(25').
      2.   For properties abutting arterial streets: Forty feet (40').
   D.   Minimum rear setback for structures:
      1.   Structure containing a permitted use: Twenty feet (20').
      2.   For properties abutting arterial streets: Forty feet (40').
   E.   Minimum side setback for structures:
      1.   Side setback not abutting a street: Ten feet (10'), or one foot (1')
for each three feet (3') of building height or fraction thereof, whichever is
greater.
      2.   Side setback abutting on an arterial street: Forty feet (40').
   F.   Maximum building height:
      1.   Buildings containing a permitted use: Thirty five feet (35').
      2.   Buildings containing an agriculture or accessory use only: Forty
feet (40').
   G.   Maximum lot coverage:
      1.   Dwelling units and their accessory uses shall cover no more than
thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area.
      2.   All other permitted uses and their accessory uses shall cover no
more than twenty five percent (25%) of the total lot area. (Ord. 2008-3, 3-25-
2008)
10-5D-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
Required for each dwelling unit: One space. (Ord. 2008-3, 3-25-2008)
10-5D-9: FENCES, WALLS AND RETAINING WALLS:
   A.   Fences, walls and retaining walls up to sixty inches (60") in height
may be erected on any part of the zone lot.
   B.   Fences, walls and retaining walls, on an interior lot, may be erected
to a height of seventy two inches (72") on any part of the zone lot not in the
front setback space. Open clear chainlink fencing with no solid blocking of any
type, including trees or other landscaping, may be erected to a height of
seventy two inches (72") in the front setback on an interior lot.
   C.   Fences, walls and retaining walls, on a corner lot, may be erected to a
height of seventy two inches (72") on any part of the zone lot, except for the
following:
      1.   Open clear chainlink with no solid blocking trees or other
landscaping may be erected to a height of seventy two inches (72") in the front
setback on a corner lot; and
      2.   "Sight triangle" areas explained as follows 1 : A triangular area
formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points thirty
feet (30') from the intersection of such property lines. These sight triangle
areas are to contain no obstructions to the view of the driver of a vehicle.
Any fencing, landscaping or other improvements placed within the area of the
triangle shall allow visibility across the area. Only open clear chainlink
fencing with no sight obstructions, including vegetation, may be erected in the
sight triangle up to a height of seventy two inches (72"). All other fencing,
walls and retaining walls, shrubs, boulders, ground covers, landscaping and
similar improvements shall be maintained at or below a height of forty eight
inches (48") above grade (ground level).
   D.   Barbed wire, sharp pointed metal fences and electrically charged fences
shall be permitted.
   E.   Fences shall be maintained in a good state of repair.
   F.   Open mesh fences of any height may be erected on zone lots containing
public parks and playgrounds.
   G.   The height of fences under this section shall include combinations of
walls and fences. The height allowances shall be measured from the high side of
adjoining properties allowing each property the right to a six foot (6')
privacy wall, fence or combination from finished grade. (Ord. 2008-3, 3-25-
2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 7-7-3E of this code.
CHAPTER 6
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A.  C COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 1
SECTION:
10-6A-1: Purpose
10-6A-2: Permitted Uses
10-6A-3: Accessory Uses
10-6A-4: Home Occupations
10-6A-5: Conditional Uses
10-6A-6: Area, Width, Setback And Height Regulations
10-6A-7: Off Street Parking And Loading
10-6A-8: Fences, Walls And Retaining Walls
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  10-12-5 of this title for sign regulations in this district.
10-6A-1: PURPOSE:
This C commercial district is for personal and business services and for
general retail and wholesale business of the city. It is intended to
accommodate those commercial facilities which serve local residents, nearby
residents and the traveling public. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-6A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Any general business, commercial or wholesale activity, including by way of
example, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   Automobile sales and repair shops.
   B.   Bakeries.
   C.   Banks.
   D.   Barber and beauty shops.
   E.   Blacksmith shops.
   F.   Cabinet making and carpentry shops.
   G.   Cleaning establishments.
   H.   Churches.
   I.   Clothing stores.
   J.   Dairies.
   K.   Drug stores.
   L.   Florists.
   M.   Gas stations.
   N.   Grocery stores.
   O.   Hardware stores.
   P.   Laundries.
   Q.   Lumber yards.
   R.   Machine shops.
   S.   Meat stores.
   T.   Office, studios, clinics.
   U.   Personal service shops.
   V.   Places of amusement or recreation.
   W.   Places serving food or beverages.
   X.   Plumbing shops.
   Y.   Printing and publishing establishments.
   Z.   Public facilities or utilities.
   AA.   Sporting goods stores.
   BB.   Theaters.
   CC.   Used car sales lots.
   DD.   Veterinary establishments. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-6A-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Any use which complies with all of the following conditions may be operated as
an accessory use:
   A.   Is clearly incidental and customary to and commonly associated with the
operation of the permitted use; and
   B.   Is operated under the same ownership and on the same zone lot as the
permitted use; and
   C.   Does not include structures or structural features inconsistent with
the permitted use; and
   D.   Does not include residential occupancy; and
   E.   Does not include a floor area of over fifty percent (50%) of the floor
area of the permitted use. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-6A-4: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Based on R-2 requirements 1 , if a conditional use permit is issued for
residential development. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  10-5B-4 of this title.
10-6A-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following may be allowed as conditional uses in the C district:
   A.   Historic buildings. Historic buildings may be used for offices and
accessory commercial uses and/or limited retail businesses, subject to the same
restrictions as set forth in section
10-5A-5 of this title, R-1 districts.
   B.   Residential uses. Any use allowed as a permitted use in an R-1 or R-
2 district, so long as the applicant and/or owner is willing to sign a
commercial residential agreement of understanding, as follows:
Commercial Residential Agreement Of Understanding
Residential development in the commercial zone is allowed as a permitted
conditional use. What does this mean? That the primary use of the zone (all
allowable commercial uses take precedence) and all impacts from these uses are
allowed and must be accepted as a common and natural state of the commercial
district(s) by way of example:
   Traffic.
   Noise.
   Smell.
Allowable 24 hour operation of business deliveries and pick up around the
clock.
Zero side yard setbacks are possible.
Greater chance of people coming on your property.
Also, as the commercial district develops, it could adversely affect the resale
value of residential development in its boundaries.
I/we                                          name(s) have read the above
information and understand by choosing to develop housing in a commercial zone
are subject to any and all of the above conditions with no legal basis for
complaint or action.
                                                         
Signature            Date
                                                         
Signature            Date
                                                                      
   Address
(Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-6A-6: AREA, WIDTH, SETBACK AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
   A.   Minimum lot area: None. However, a zone lot must be designated and
maintained for each structure containing a permitted use.
   B.   Minimum lot width: None.
   C.   Minimum front setback for structures: Fifteen feet (15').
   D.   Minimum rear setback for structures: Twenty feet (20').
   E.   Minimum side setback for structures: None. (See landscaping
requirements, chapter 14 of this title.)
   F.   Maximum building height: Fifty feet (50').
   G.   Maximum lot coverage: Structures containing permitted uses and their
accessory uses shall cover no more than sixty percent (60%) of the total lot
area. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-6A-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
   A.   Parking Requirements:
 
1. Places of public assembly       1 space for each 4 seats
2. Medical and dental clinics      1 space for each professional or
                                   paraprofessional practitioner
3. Offices                         1 space for each 300 square feet of gross
                                   leasable area
4. Retail establishments           1 space for each 150 square feet of gross
                                   leasable area
5. Customer service establishments 1 space for each 200 square feet of gross
                                   leasable area
6. Restaurant or bar               1 space for every 100 square feet of gross
                                   leasable area
7. Motel, hotel or other tourist   1 space for each bedroom or unit
accommodation
The building inspector shall determine the classification of a permitted use
in cases where there is a question and apply a reasonable parking
requirement.
 
   B.   Loading Requirements: One useable off street loading space of not less
than two hundred (200) square feet shall be provided for each ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of floor area. This space shall be provided in addition to
off street parking requirements. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-6A-8: FENCES, WALLS AND RETAINING WALLS:
   A.   Fences, walls and retaining walls not exceeding one hundred twenty
inches (120") in height may be erected on any part of the zone lot.
   B.   Barbed wire, sharp pointed metal fences and electrically charged fences
shall not be permitted.
   C.   Fences shall be maintained in a good state of repair.
   D.   Open mesh fences of any height may be erected on zone lots containing
schools, public parks and playgrounds.
   E.   The height of fences under this section shall include combinations of
walls and fences. The height allowances shall be measured from the high side of
adjoining properties allowing each property the right to one hundred twenty
inches (120") or ten foot (10') privacy wall, fence or combination from
finished grade. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
CHAPTER 7
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A.  I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 1
SECTION:
10-7A-1: Purpose
10-7A-2: Permitted Uses
10-7A-3: Accessory Uses
10-7A-4: Home Occupations
10-7A-5: Conditional Uses
10-7A-6: Area, Width, Setback And Height Requirements
10-7A-7: Off Street Parking
10-7A-8: Fences, Walls And Retaining Walls
10-7A-9: Limitations On External Effects Of Uses
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  10-12-6 of this title for sign regulations in this district.
10-7A-1: PURPOSE:
The I industrial district is intended to identify and preserve land suitable
for exclusive industrial use and to provide for the orderly grouping of light
manufacturing or industrial operations in an appropriate setting. It is the
further intent of this district to establish such regulatory controls as to
reasonably assume a harmonious relationship between the industrial uses and the
community. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-7A-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Light manufacturing, assembly, processing and fabrication plants.
   B.   Transportation terminals.
   C.   Special trades contractors (plumbing, heating, electrical, masonry,
cabinet maker, etc.).
   D.   Auto servicing and repair.
   E.   Warehousing and wholesaling.
   F.   Offices.
   G.   Public utility and yards.
   H.   Junkyards (shall be screened from surrounding uses).
   I.   Public facilities for the service and protection of the area.
   J.   Rail yards and trackage.
   K.   Heavy equipment rental.
   L.   Animal care.
   M.   Plant husbandry and sales.
   N.   Lumber yards. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-7A-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Any use which complies with all of the following conditions may be operated as
an accessory use to a permitted use:
   A.   Is clearly incidental and customary to and commonly associated with the
operation of the permitted use; and
   B.   Is operated under the same ownership and on the same zone lot as the
permitted use; and
   C.   Does not include structures or structural features inconsistent with
the permitted use; and
   D.   Does not include residential occupancy; and
   E.   Does not include a floor area of over fifty percent (50%) of the floor
area of the permitted use. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-7A-4: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Permitted home occupations: None. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-7A-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following may be allowed as conditional use to a permitted use in the I
district:
   A.   Historic buildings. Historic buildings may be used for offices and
accessory commercial uses and/or limited retail businesses subject to the same
restrictions as set forth in section
10-5A-5 of this title, R-1 districts. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-7A-6: AREA, WIDTH, SETBACK AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum lot area: None. However, a zone lot must be designated and
maintained for each structure containing a permitted use.
   B.   Minimum lot width: None.
   C.   Minimum front setback for structures: Twenty five feet (25').
   D.   Minimum rear setback for structures: Twenty feet (20').
   E.   Minimum side setback for structures: Twenty feet (20').
   F.   Maximum building height: Fifty feet (50').
   G.   Maximum lot coverage: Structures containing permitted uses and their
accessory uses shall cover no more than fifty percent (50%) of the total lot
area. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-7A-7: OFF STREET PARKING:
The provisions of chapter 11 of this title shall be in full force and effect
for this district.
There shall be provided an off street parking area equal to one-fourth (1/4) of
the gross floor area of all structures containing a permitted use. (Ord. 1978-
1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-7A-8: FENCES, WALLS AND RETAINING WALLS:
   A.   Fences of any height may be erected on any portion of the zone lot.
   B.   Fences shall be maintained in a good state of repair. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-
8-1978, as amended)
10-7A-9: LIMITATIONS ON EXTERNAL EFFECTS OF USES:
   A.   No use or activity shall be permitted to produce hazardous conditions
or noxious influences, such as noise, vibration, heat, glare, radiation, fumes,
smoke, or other pollutants to a degree detrimental to existing or prospective
development of the community.
   B.   All fuel, raw materials and products stored outdoors shall be enclosed
by a solid fence or wall adequate to conceal such fuel, raw materials and
products from adjacent residential and commercial districts. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-
1978, as amended)
   C.   No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be
stored in bulk aboveground, except in compliance with state law. (Ord. 1978-1,
3-8-1978, as amended; amd. 2007 Code)
CHAPTER 8
O OPEN SPACE DISTRICT 1
SECTION:
10-8-1: Purpose
10-8-2: Permitted Uses
10-8-3: Accessory Uses
10-8-4: Home Occupations
10-8-5: Conditional Uses
10-8-6: Area, Width, Setback And Height Requirements
10-8-7: Off Street Parking And Loading
10-8-8: Fences, Walls And Retaining Walls
10-8-9: Limitation On External Effects Of Uses
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  10-12-7 of this title for sign regulations in this district.
10-8-1: PURPOSE:
The O open space district is intended to preserve land for recreation,
agriculture and for other public and private open space uses. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-
8-1978, as amended)
10-8-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Agriculture.
   B.   Animal husbandry.
   C.   Cemeteries.
   D.   Any open space use providing entertainment or recreation.
   E.   Public parks and playgrounds.
   F.   Water reservoir.
   G.   Campground with toilet, utility and cooking facilities; structures in
this district shall be the minimum necessary for the operation of the permitted
use. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-8-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Any use which complies with all of the following conditions may be operated as
an accessory:
   A.   Is clearly incidental and customary to and commonly associated with the
operation of the permitted use; and
   B.   Is operated under the same ownership and on the same zone lot as the
permitted use; and
   C.   Does not include structures or structural features inconsistent with
the permitted use; and
   D.   Does not include residential occupancy; and
   E.   Does not include a floor area of over fifty percent (50%) of the floor
area of the permitted use. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-8-4: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
None permitted. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-8-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Historic buildings. Historic buildings may be used for offices and accessory
commercial uses and/or limited retail businesses subject to the same
restrictions as set forth in section
10-5A-5 of this title, R-1 districts. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-8-6: AREA, WIDTH, SETBACK AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum lot area: None.
   B.   Minimum lot width: None.
   C.   Minimum front setback for structures: Twenty five feet (25').
   D.   Minimum rear setback for structures: Twenty feet (20').
   E.   Minimum side setback for structures: Twenty feet (20').
   F.   Maximum building height: Thirty five feet (35').
   G.   Maximum lot coverage: None. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-8-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
   A.   Required Off Street Parking:
      1.   The provisions of chapter 11 of this title shall be in full force
and effect for this district.
      2.   There shall be off street parking requirements for this district
based upon the proposed use as approved by the city planner.
   B.   Loading: None required. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended; amd. 2007
Code)
10-8-8: FENCES, WALLS AND RETAINING WALLS:
Fences of any height may be erected on any portion of the zone lot. (Ord. 1978-
1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-8-9: LIMITATION ON EXTERNAL EFFECTS OF USES:
None. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
CHAPTER 9
CONDITIONAL USES 1
SECTION:
10-9-1: Purpose
10-9-2: Conditional Use Permit
10-9-3: Determination
10-9-4: Appeal Of Decision
10-9-5: Inspection
10-9-6: Time Limit
10-9-7: Temporary Conditional Use Permit
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 10-3-2B4d of this title where the board of adjustment
  is given authority to authorize conditional use permits.
10-9-1: PURPOSE:
Certain uses which may be harmonious under particular conditions and in
specific locations within a zoning district, but improper under general
conditions and in other locations, are classified as conditional uses within
the various districts and require conditional use permits. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-
1978, as amended)
10-9-2: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
A conditional use permit shall be required for all uses listed as conditional
uses in the district regulations or elsewhere in this title. A conditional use
permit may be revoked upon failure to comply with conditions precedent to the
original approval of the permit, as such are established by the board of
adjustment or building inspector, as the case may be.
   A.   Application: Application for a conditional use permit shall be made by
the property owner or certified agent thereof to the building inspector. The
building inspector shall submit the application to the board of adjustment;
except that the board of adjustment may authorize the building inspector to
grant or deny conditional use permits, subject to such limitations or
qualifications as are deemed necessary to maintain the integrity of the master
plan and general well being of the neighborhood.
   B.   Documents: Applications for conditional use permits shall be
accompanied by detailed site plans drawn to scale, statements and other
documents as required by the board of adjustment to assist in arriving at the
appropriate decision. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
   C.   Fee: Applications for any conditional use permit shall be accompanied
by the appropriate fee, if any, as determined by resolution of the city
council, no part of which is returnable. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended;
amd. 2007 Code)
   D.   Public Hearing: No public hearing need be held; however, a hearing may
be held when the board of adjustment shall deem such a hearing to be necessary
and in the public interest.
      1.   The board of adjustment may delegate to the building inspector the
holding of the hearing.
      2.   The building inspector shall submit to the board of adjustment a
record of findings and recommendations relative thereto, for the consideration
of the board of adjustment.
      3.   Such hearing, if deemed necessary, shall be held not more than
thirty (30) days from the date of application. The particular time and place
shall be established by the building inspector.
      4.   The building inspector shall cause notice of hearing to be posted on
any affected property for not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of said
hearing and by any other method the board of adjustment may provide. Failure of
the property owners to receive notice of said hearing shall in no way effect
the validity of action taken. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-9-3: DETERMINATION:
The board of adjustment, or upon authorization, the building inspector, may
permit a conditional use to be located within any district in which the
particular conditional use is permitted by the use regulations of this title.
In authorizing any conditional use, the board of adjustment shall impose such
requirements and conditions as required by law and any conditions as may be
necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public welfare.
   A.   The board of adjustment shall establish policies regarding landscaping,
fencing, lighting, ingress/egress, height of buildings, etc., to guide the
decision of the building inspector to ensure consistency in the issuance of
conditional use permits.
   B.   The building inspector is authorized to bring any conditional use
permit application before the board of adjustment if, in his opinion, the
general public interest will be better served by review by the board of
adjustment.
   C.   The board of adjustment shall not authorize a conditional use permit
unless the evidence as presented is such to establish that:
      1.   The proposed use at the particular location is necessary or
desirable to provide a service or facility which will contribute to the general
well being of the neighborhood and the community; and
      2.   Such use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case,
be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons residing or
working in the vicinity, or injurious to property or improvements in the
vicinity; and
      3.   The proposed use will comply with regulations and conditions
specified in this title for such use; and
      4.   The proposed use will conform to the intent of the master plan.
   D.   The board of adjustment and/or the building inspector, as the case may
be, shall consider the following in making its determination of whether to
grant a conditional use. These are meant by way of example and not by
limitation:
      1.   Effect the proposed use has on neighboring property, i.e., whether
such use is in harmony with it or would have an adverse effect on the
neighborhood;
      2.   Effect the proposed use has on the future development of the area;
      3.   Traffic congestion or hazard;
      4.   Public convenience or welfare;
      5.   Public safety (gasoline storage, poisons, explosives, etc.);
      6.   Regulation of competitive uses;
      7.   Concept of best and highest use;
      8.   Municipal services - are they adequate to service and supply the
proposed use and all ramifications thereof (e.g., water supply, schools, sewer,
fire and police). (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-9-4: APPEAL OF DECISION:
   A.   Authorized:
      1.   Board Of Adjustment: Any person shall have the right to appeal the
decision of the building inspector to the board of adjustment by filing a
letter with the board of adjustment within five (5) days of the building
inspector's action, stating the reason for said appeal and requesting a hearing
before the board of adjustment at the earliest regular meeting of the board.
      2.   City Council: Any person shall have the right to appeal to the city
council at any regular meeting thereof within ten (10) days following the date
upon which the decision from which appeal is being taken is made by the board
of adjustment. After receiving said appeal, the city council may reaffirm the
board of adjustment decision or set a date for public hearing.
   B.   Notification Of Board Of Adjustment: The city council shall notify the
board of adjustment of the date of said review in writing at least seven (7)
days preceding said date set for hearing so that said board of adjustment may
prepare the record for said hearing.
   C.   Determination Of City Council: The city council, after proper review of
the decision of the board of adjustment, may affirm, reverse, alter or remand
for further review and consideration any action taken by said board of
adjustment. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-9-5: INSPECTION:
Following the issuance of a conditional use permit by the board of adjustment,
the building inspector shall approve an application for a building permit and
shall ensure that development is undertaken and completed in compliance with
said permit. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-9-6: TIME LIMIT:
Unless there is a substantial action under a conditional use permit within a
maximum period of one year of its issuance, the conditional use permit shall
expire. The board of adjustment may grant a maximum extension of six (6) months
under exceptional circumstances and when deemed to be in the public interest.
(Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-9-7: TEMPORARY CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
A conditional use permit for temporary uses may be issued pursuant to the above
provisions for a maximum period of six (6) months, with renewals at the
discretion of the board of adjustment for not more than three (3) successive
periods thereafter. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
CHAPTER 10
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
SECTION:
10-10-1: Nonconforming Uses
10-10-2: Nonconforming Structures
10-10-1: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   Defined 1 : A "nonconforming use" shall be any use which, on the
effective date hereof, or as a result of subsequent amendments thereto, does
not conform to the permitted uses established for the district in which the
"nonconforming use" is located.
   B.   Regulations:
      1.   A nonconforming use may be continued on the same land area and the
same floor area as that which existed on the date when the use first became
nonconforming.
      2.   A permitted use shall not be considered nonconforming for failure to
comply with off street parking requirements and sign regulations.
      3.   A nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use or to any use
which is a permitted use in a more restrictive district than the district in
which the nonconforming use is located.
      4.   The area occupied by a nonconforming use may not be enlarged or
extended by more than twenty five percent (25%) of the total area of the use
existing at the time it became nonconforming.
      5.   A nonconforming use which has been abandoned shall not thereafter be
returned to such nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall be considered
abandoned when:
         a.   The intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent; or
         b.   The characteristic equipment and the furnishings of the
nonconforming uses have been removed and have not been replaced by similar
equipment and furnishings within one year, subject to subsection B5c of this
section; or
         c.   The building or premises are left vacant for a period of one year
or more, subject to subsection B5d of this section; or
         d.   The use has been replace by a conforming use.
In regards to subsections B5b and B5c of this section, if a statement of intent
to resume operations is filed with the board of adjustment before the
expiration of the one year period, the period of discontinued use may be
extended for an additional period not to exceed six (6) months. In no event,
however, regardless of expressed intent, shall such discontinuance extend
beyond a period of eighteen (18) consecutive months without the right to
continue the nonconforming use being permanently terminated.
      6.   A nonconforming use shall terminate if the structure in which it is
operated is damaged or destroyed from any cause whatsoever and the cost of
repairing the damage exceeds sixty percent (60%) of the replacement cost of the
structure on the date of the damage. However, if a statement of intent to
repair the damaged structure is filed with the board of adjustments within
thirty (30) days of the date of damage, and if such repair is begun within
ninety (90) days of such date, the nonconforming use may be continued. The area
of nonconforming use may not be enlarged or extended by more than the
percentage set forth in subsection B4 of this section. Also, the owner, lessee
or user of the particular structure must use his best efforts to see that the
repairs are completed within six (6) months of the date of damage. The board of
adjustment may, for good cause shown, and the owner, lessee or user shall have
the burden of showing that he has diligently pursued the completion of the
repairs, allow a maximum of six (6) 30-day extensions for the completion of the
repair work. In no event, however, except upon a showing by the owner, lessee
or user that he has diligently pursued having the repairs completed and
otherwise used his best efforts to comply with the time limits of this section;
and a showing of extraordinary circumstances that have prevented completion of
the work within said time limits; and a showing that to terminate the right to
continue the nonconforming use would result in an extreme hardship to the
owner, lessee or user, shall the right to continue the nonconforming use
continue beyond one year from the date of damage. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as
amended)
 
Notes
1 1. See also definition at section
  10-2-1 of this title.
10-10-2: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
   A.   Defined: A "nonconforming structure" shall be any structure which on
the effective date hereof, or as the result of subsequent amendments thereto,
does not comply with the provisions of this title relating to setbacks, height
and land area coverage.
   B.   Regulations:
      1.   A nonconforming structure may be altered, repaired or enlarged,
provided its degree of nonconformity is not increased.
      2.   A nonconforming structure found to be unsafe by the building
inspector may be restored to a safe condition. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as
amended)
CHAPTER 11
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
10-11-1: General Requirements
10-11-2: Specifications
10-11-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Specified: For all permitted uses which are established after the
effective date hereof, off street parking and loading in the amounts specified
for permitted uses in chapters 5 through 8, including the articles therein, of
this title, shall be provided and maintained.
   B.   Applicability: These requirements shall not be retroactive in uses
existing on the effective date hereof, but shall apply to any expansion of
these uses which takes place after that date.
   C.   Same Lot And Ownership: Off street parking and loading facilities shall
be provided on the same zone lot and under the same ownership as the permitted
use for which the parking is required.
   D.   Joint Use: Parking spaces required by each of two (2) or more permitted
uses located on the same zone lot need not be separated and may be used
jointly. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-11-2: SPECIFICATIONS:
Off street parking and loading required by this title shall be maintained in
accordance with the following specifications:
   A.   Sizes: Individual parking and loading spaces shall be at least two
hundred (200) square feet in size; and
   B.   Use: Parking and loading areas provided under the requirements of this
title shall not be used for the sale, repair or servicing of vehicles and
equipment; and
   C.   Grading; Drainage: Parking and loading areas shall be graded for proper
drainage and provided with an all weather surface of gravel, asphalt or
concrete; and
   D.   Usable, Accessible: Each parking or loading space must be usable and
readily accessible; and
   E.   Entrances, Exits: Parking and loading areas shall be provided with
entrances and exits located so as to minimize traffic congestion. (Ord. 1978-1,
3-8-1978, as amended)
CHAPTER 12
SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-12-1: Scope Of Regulations
10-12-2: General Requirements
10-12-3: R-1 Residential District
10-12-4: R-2 Residential District
10-12-5: C Commercial District
10-12-6: I Industrial District
10-12-7: O Open Space District
10-12-8: MH Mobile Home District
10-12-9: Joint Identification Signs
10-12-10: Sign Area Measurement
10-12-1: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
These regulations shall apply to signs erected, altered and maintained by and
for permitted uses in all districts. Signs governed by several ordinances shall
comply with all such regulations. The following sign types shall be deemed to
be outside the scope of these regulations:
   A.   Signs required by law or authorized for a public purpose.
   B.   Nameplates and addresses.
   C.   Cornerstones and historical markers.
   D.   Building name signs.
   E.   Decorations.
   F.   Window displays.
   G.   Real estate "for sale", rental or lease signs.
   H.   Informal and directional signs.
   I.   Danger or warning signs of a cautionary nature.
   J.   Traffic signs.
   K.   Religious symbols. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-12-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Business License Required: All businesses shall have a current business
license with the city to apply for/or maintain a business sign. This is to
include a home business.
   B.   Location: Signs shall be allowed only for and in conjunction with a
permitted use and shall be located on the same zone lot as the permitted use,
except as provided for herein under C commercial district and I industrial
district.
   C.   Plan Review Required: Signs controlled by this section shall be erected
only after the approval by the building inspector of a plan review therefor
prior to issuing the sign permit. Required information for a plan review:
      1.   Plot plan of property, including existing structures, proposed
location of sign with its height and size detailed. Measurements from both
property lines and structures will be shown.
      2.   Scaled drawing of sign showing all lettering, images and other
methods of advertising.
      3.   Total cost of project, including all labor and material, even for
self-installations.
   D.   Fees: Sign permit fees are fifteen dollars ($15.00) for all signage,
with a total cost of five hundred dollars ($500.00). All signage costing over
five hundred dollars ($500.00) is subject to the current building permit fee
schedule, approximately one and one-half percent (11/2%) of the total cost as
revised by the mayor and city council.
   E.   Maintenance: Signs shall be maintained in a good state of repair.
Broken signs, signs unreadable because of deterioration, signs on vacant
buildings may be ordered repaired or removed by the building inspector.
   F.   Advertising: All advertising shall be subject to city ordinances. (Ord.
1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-12-3: R-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   Home occupations shall be permitted a choice of one of two (2) possible
sign types outlined as follows:
      1.   Freestanding; Requirements:
         a.   Maximum size: Four (4) square feet per side.
         b.   Maximum height: Six feet (6').
         c.   Located only on zone lot (private property).
         d.   Method of illumination shall not exceed forty (40) watts maximum.
Illumination shall be inside or aimed at the signage.
         e.   All signs must meet all general sign requirements (section
10-12-2 of this chapter).
      2.   Attached To Dwelling Unit; Requirements:
         a.   Shall not be on or attached to roof.
         b.   May hang on eaves.
         c.   May project from face or side of structure.
         d.   Prefer that signage be mounted flush to structure wall.
         e.   Maximum size: Eight (8) square feet.
         f.   Method of illumination shall not exceed forty (40) watts maximum.
Illumination shall be inside or aimed at signage.
         g.   All signs must meet all general sign requirements (section
10-12-2 of this chapter).
   B.   Sign Area: All permitted uses other than dwellings shall be permitted
signs totaling twenty (20) square feet in total sign area. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-
1978, as amended)
10-12-4: R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   Home Occupations: Home occupations shall be permitted a choice of one
of two (2) possible sign types outlined as follows:
      1.   Freestanding; Requirements:
         a.   Maximum size: Four (4) square feet per side.
         b.   Maximum height: Six feet (6').
         c.   Located only on zone lot (private property).
         d.   Method of illumination shall not exceed forty (40) watts maximum.
Illumination shall be inside or aimed at the signage.
         e.   All signs must meet all general sign requirements (section
10-12-2 of this chapter).
      2.   Attached To Dwelling Unit; Requirements:
         a.   Shall not be on or attached to roof.
         b.   May hang on eaves.
         c.   May project from face or side of structure.
         d.   Prefer that signage be mounted flush to structure wall.
         e.   Maximum size: Eight (8) square feet.
         f.   Method of illumination shall not exceed forty (40) watts maximum.
Illumination shall be inside or aimed at signage.
         g.   All signs must meet all general sign requirements (section
10-12-2 of this chapter).
   B.   Sign Area: All permitted uses other than one- and two-family dwellings
shall be permitted signs totaling forty (40) square feet in total sign area.
(Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-12-5: C COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   On Premises Signs: On premises signs are based on the following
formula: One square foot of sign for each linear foot of business frontage up
to a maximum of two hundred twenty five (225) square feet. Properties having
five hundred (500) linear feet or more of business frontage shall be allowed
one hundred (100) square feet of additional signage.
   B.   Portable Signs: Portable sign requirements:
      1.   Signs shall only be placed in front of the business.
      2.   Maximum area of sign face shall not exceed twenty four (24) square
feet per side.
      3.   Signs shall not interfere with public access, such as: sidewalks,
roads, driveways, traffic, etc.
      4.   Signs shall only be allowed during business operation. When closed,
signs shall be taken down and stored on the business property.
      5.   All signs must meet all general sign requirements (section
10-12-2 of this chapter).
   C.   Off Premises Signs: Off premises signs will be allowed under the
following guidelines: Zone lots having business frontage of one hundred fifty
(150) to five hundred (500) linear feet be allowed one off premises sign up to
a maximum of sixteen (16) square feet. Zone lots with five hundred (500) linear
feet or more of business frontage be allowed one off premises sign up to a
maximum of thirty two (32) square feet.
   D.   Maximum Height: The maximum height for any sign shall not exceed thirty
feet (30'). (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-12-6: I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   On Premises Signs: On premises signs are based on the following
formula: One square foot of sign for each linear foot of business frontage up
to a maximum of two hundred twenty five (225) square feet. Properties having
five hundred (500) linear feet or more of business frontage shall be allowed
one hundred (100) square feet of additional sign.
   B.   Off Premises Signs: Off premises signs will be allowed under the
following guidelines: Zone lots having business frontage of one hundred fifty
(150) linear feet be allowed one off premises sign up to a maximum of sixteen
(16) square feet; and zone lots with five hundred (500) linear feet or more of
business frontage be allowed one off premises sign up to maximum of thirty two
(32) square feet.
   C.   Maximum Height: The maximum height for any sign shall not exceed thirty
feet (30'). (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-12-7: O OPEN SPACE DISTRICT:
   A.   Permitted Uses: All permitted uses shall be permitted signs totaling
one hundred (100) square feet in total sign area.
   B.   Maximum Height: The maximum height for any sign shall not exceed twenty
feet (20'). (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-12-8: MH MOBILE HOME DISTRICT:
   A.   Home Occupations: Home occupations shall be permitted a choice of one
of two (2) possible sign types outlined as follows:
      1.   Freestanding; Requirements:
         a.   Maximum size: Four (4) square feet per side.
         b.   Maximum height: Six feet (6').
         c.   Located only on zone lot (private property).
         d.   Method of illumination shall not exceed forty (40) watts maximum.
Illumination shall be inside or aimed at the signage.
         e.   All signs must meet all general sign requirements (section
10-12-2 of this chapter).
      2.   Attached To Dwelling Unit; Requirements:
         a.   Shall not be on or attached to roof.
         b.   May hang on eaves.
         c.   May project from face or side of structure.
         d.   Prefer that signage be mounted flush to structure wall.
         e.   Maximum size: Eight (8) square feet.
         f.   Method of illumination shall not exceed forty (40) watts maximum.
Illumination shall be inside or aimed at signage.
         g.   All signs must meet all general sign requirements (section
10-12-2 of this title).
   B.   Sign Area: All other permitted uses shall be permitted signs totaling
one hundred (100) square feet in total sign area.
   C.   Maximum Height: The maximum height for any sign shall not exceed twenty
feet (20'). (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-12-9: JOINT IDENTIFICATION SIGNS:
Under section
10-12-3 of this chapter, a sign or signs are allowed only for and in
conjunction with a permitted use. This section is intended to allow additional
sign area for the identification for building complexes of two (2) or more
permitted uses on the same zone lot where the combination of uses desires to be
identified by a single name, symbol or other designation. This sign area shall
be in addition to the sign area allowed to individual uses for identification
and shall be subject to the following provisions:
   A.   Message Not Repeated: The sign message shall not repeat the message of
a sign allowed any of the permitted uses in the complex thereby adding to the
allowable sign message area for that use.
   B.   Area Of Sign: For each such combination of permitted uses, there shall
be allowed one joint identification sign not exceeding one hundred (100) square
feet in area.
   C.   Maximum Height: The maximum height for any such sign shall not exceed
thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-12-10: SIGN AREA MEASUREMENT:
   A.   The structure or bracing of any sign shall be omitted from measurement
unless such structure or bracing has been made an integral part of the message.
   B.   Where a sign has two (2) or more display faces, the area of all such
faces shall be measured, unless such faces join back to back, are parallel to
each other and are no more than twenty four inches (24") apart.
   C.   The area of any backing or background material that is a part of the
sign display shall be included in the sign area to be measured.
   D.   The area of any sign shall be measured by determining the sum of the
area of each square, rectangle, triangle, circle or portion or combination
thereof that encompasses the outer limits of all portions of the sign. (Ord.
1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
CHAPTER 13
DEVELOPMENT PLANS
SECTION:
10-13-1: Purpose
10-13-2: Submittal And Contents
10-13-3: Review And Approval
10-13-4: Significance
10-13-1: PURPOSE:
Under the normal provisions of this title, a zone lot must be designated and
maintained for each structure containing a permitted use. Pursuant to the
procedures hereinafter set forth, two (2) or more structures any be erected and
maintained on the same zone lot and several zone lots containing individual
structures may be combined into one development complex. This procedure is
intended to permit developments of several structures containing the same or
different uses while yet maintaining adequate standards for the preservation of
the public health, safety and welfare. This chapter alters no other provisions
of this title other than the requirements that a separate zone lot be
maintained for each structure containing a permitted use. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-
1978, as amended)
10-13-2: SUBMITTAL AND CONTENTS:
A development plan shall be filed with the building inspector in any instance
where two (2) or more structures containing permitted uses are to occupy a
single zone lot. Such a filing shall include:
   A.   Statement Of Ownership: A statement certifying that the signatories are
the owners of the tract described and agree to be bound by the provisions of
the development plan.
   B.   Plat: Plats or plans drawn to scale showing at least the following
detail:
      1.   The legal description of the land area included in the proposed zone
lot; and
      2.   The land area to be included in the development plan; and
      3.   The proposed finish grade for the designated area; and
      4.   The location of each existing and proposed structure with a notation
as to the permitted uses which will occupy the structures; and
      5.   All public and private streets immediately adjacent to and within
the site, including those proposed; and
      6.   All pedestrian areas and open areas; and
      7.   Location and height of all fences and walls; and
      8.   Location, size and height of all signs; and
      9.   Type of surfacing, such as paving, turf, gravel; and
      10.   Location of all fire hydrants. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-13-3: REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
The building inspector will receive all development plans submitted pursuant to
this chapter and shall review them for completeness. If such plans are found
complete, he shall transmit them with any comments to the planning commission.
The planning commission may confer with any agency or person in its review of
the development plan, and after such review will approve or disapprove the
plan. Approvals may be accompanied by conditions or limitations. The approved
plan shall then be returned to the building inspector for the issuance of
proper permits and for recording and filing. The planning commission's review
of the development plan shall be based on the following standards:
   A.   The structures noted on the plan must meet all of the limitations as to
height, setback, lot coverage and other regulations governing in the zoning
district in which the development plan is located.
   B.   Adequate provisions must be made for:
      1.   Proper grading, paving, gutters and treatment of turf to handle
storm water and prevent erosion.
      2.   Pedestrianways and open spaces which are safe and convenient and
separated from vehicular traffic, loading and parking.
      3.   Safe and efficient vehicular circulation both on the site and at
entrances to the public street system.
      4.   Safe play and recreational areas for residential complexes intended
for family occupancy.
      5.   In commercial complexes, screening or planting to shield any
adjacent residential areas from the visual encroachment of commercial
architecture and activity.
   C.   Buildings shall not be so arranged that any inhabited building is
inaccessible by emergency vehicles.
   D.   Buildings containing dwelling units shall be so arranged so that
windows and entrances are assured adequate exposure to light and air and
oriented to preserve visual and audible privacy between adjacent buildings.
(Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-13-4: SIGNIFICANCE:
Development plans, approved by the planning commission and recorded and filed
by the building inspector, shall be binding upon the owner or owners of the
land included in the plan, and all permits and certificates shall be issued in
accordance with the recorded plan. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
CHAPTER 14
LANDSCAPING
SECTION:
10-14-1: Plot Plan Required
10-14-2: R-1 Single-Family Dwellings
10-14-3: R-2 Single- And Two-Family Dwellings And Multiple Dwellings
10-14-4: MH Mobile Home Park
10-14-5: C Commercial
10-14-6: I Industrial
10-14-7: Q Quasi
10-14-8: P Public
10-14-9: O Open Space
10-14-10: Landscaping Maintenance
10-14-1: PLOT PLAN REQUIRED:
In an effort to beautify and upgrade the general appearance and living
environment within the city, a landscaping plot plan is required as part of the
information necessary for obtaining a building permit in all zones and/ or
districts of the city. The intention of this provision is not to dictate the
type or style of landscaping, but to provide minimum allowable amounts of zone
lot coverage for landscaping in all zoning districts. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978,
as amended)
10-14-2: R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS:
At least seventy percent (70%) of the area contained within the required front
and side yards shall be landscaped. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-14-3: R-2 SINGLE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS AND MULTIPLE DWELLINGS:
At least seventy percent (70%) of the area contained within the required front
and side yards shall be landscaped. Multiple-family dwelling unit open space
requirements are in addition to minimum landscape requirements for the R-
2 zone. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-14-4: MH MOBILE HOME PARK:
All area not required to meet off street parking, mobile home space and access
requirements, shall be landscaped, providing a minimum of one thousand (1,000)
square feet of landscaping per unit space. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-14-5: C COMMERCIAL:
A fifteen foot (15') landscaping strip is required along all property
boundaries adjoining city streets. Smaller amounts of landscaping may be
allowable in the historical business district due to:
   A.   Irregular shaped lots, lots having under two thousand (2,000) square
feet and narrow frontages, based on a case by case review of plot plans by the
city planner; also
   B.   All property not required for off street parking, building space or
accessory uses shall be landscaped. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-14-6: I INDUSTRIAL:
A fifteen foot (15') landscaping strip is required along all property
boundaries adjoining city streets, except zone lots having under two thousand
(2,000) square feet total area. All property not required for off street
parking, building space or accessory uses shall be landscaped. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-
8-1978, as amended)
10-14-7: Q QUASI:
All area within a zone lot not required for buildings, off street parking and
accessory uses shall be landscaped. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-14-8: P PUBLIC:
All area within a zone lot not required for buildings, off street parking and
accessory uses shall be landscaped. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-14-9: O OPEN SPACE:
Open space is to be kept neat and clean and managed in an organized manner.
(Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-14-10: LANDSCAPING MAINTENANCE:
Required landscaping shall be maintained in a neat, clean and orderly fashion.
This is meant to include proper pruning, mowing lawns, weeding, removal of
litter, fertilizing, replacement of dead plants, and the regular watering of
all plantings. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
CHAPTER 15
ANIMALS 1
SECTION:
10-15-1: Horses
10-15-2: Household Pets
10-15-3: Fowl
10-15-4: Farm Animals
10-15-5: Nonconforming Uses
10-15-6: Other Applicable Ordinances
10-15-7: Temporary Permit For 4-H Participants
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 5, chapter 2 of this code for animal control provisions.
10-15-1: HORSES:
Horses for use of occupants of a residential zone lot and their guests may be
kept so long as they constitute no nuisance or health hazard; and provided,
that at least one-half (1/2) acre of pasture area is available for each horse.
(Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-15-2: HOUSEHOLD PETS:
Pets, such as dogs and cats, which are frequently kept within a dwelling, shall
be permitted. Dogs off the premises at which they are housed shall be on a
leash or under the control of a person. See chapter 5, title 2 of this code.
(Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-15-3: FOWL:
Fowl which are contained within a building erected or modified for that purpose
and which is no more than two hundred (200) square feet in size, and which fowl
are not raised for commercial purposes, shall be permitted; provided, that they
do not constitute a nuisance of noise or odor. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as
amended)
10-15-4: FARM ANIMALS:
Farm animals, such as cows, pigs, sheep and goats, shall not be permitted
within the city limits (see section
10-15-7 of this chapter). (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-15-5: NONCONFORMING USES:
Animal use established prior to the adoption of this animal ordinance can be
maintained as a nonconforming use under the following guidelines:
   A.   Animals are kept on the premises a minimum of one day each calendar
year, or the intent to keep animals on the premises are maintained in a useable
condition.
   B.   Established animal containment facilities be maintained so as not to
distract from surrounding properties for any of the following reasons:
      1.   Appearance.
      2.   Sound.
      3.   Smell.
      4.   Treatment of animals.
   C.   When it has been established that one or both of the guidelines for
maintaining a nonconforming animal use privilege has not been met, then the
animal privilege for that property is lost and it shall comply to the
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
10-15-6: OTHER APPLICABLE ORDINANCES:
The conditions of all other applicable city ordinances shall be met before the
harboring of any animal will be allowed as an accessory use. (Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-
1978, as amended)
10-15-7: TEMPORARY PERMIT FOR 4-H PARTICIPANTS:
A temporary permit allowing 4-H participants to harbor farm animals for the
necessary time to complete their project, subject to section
10-15-6 of this chapter. This permit is available at the city office.
   Temporary Animal Permit
Owner name    
Address    
Type of animal    
Requested time period starts                        ends    
Approved       
Not approved       
City planner
Comments:    
(Ord. 1978-1, 3-8-1978, as amended)
CHAPTER 16
VARIANCES
SECTION:
10-16-1: Minor Variances
10-16-1: MINOR VARIANCES:
   A.   The land use authority will grant a variance of up to ten percent (10%)
on any one or two (2) requirements with regards to area, lot coverage, width,
setback, height or parking if all other requirements of the zoning district are
met. (Ord. 2013-2, 8-13-2013)
CHAPTER 17
COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS, ANTENNAS, AND BASE UNIT REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
10-17-1: Purpose
10-17-2: Definitions
10-17-3: Permitted Uses Exempt From Administrative Review And Approval
10-17-4: Conditional Uses
10-17-5: Specific Standards For Conditional Uses
10-17-6: Development Standards
10-17-7: Obsolete Or Unused Towers
10-17-1: PURPOSE:
Regulations governing communication towers, antennas, and base units are
established to provide for appropriate locations for communications towers,
antennas, and base units, to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses, to
promote the co-location of communication antennas, and to preserve the City's
ability to provide a public safety communication system. (Ord. 2018-3, 11-13-
2018)
10-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words shall mean:
COMMUNICATION ANTENNA: A device intended for receiving or transmitting
television, radio, digital, microwave, cellular, personal communication service
(PCS), paging or similar forms or wireless electronic communication, including
but not limited to directional antennas such as panels, microwave dishes and
satellite dishes, and omnidirectional antennas, such as whip antennas.
COMMUNICATION TOWER: Any pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof,
including support lines, cables, wires, braces and mast, designed and
constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas,
including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers or monopole towers. A
communication tower may include, but not be limited to, radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, and personal communication service towers.
COMMUNICATION TOWER AND ANTENNA HEIGHT: The height of a freestanding
communication tower and antenna shall be measured as the distance from the
ground level to the highest point on the tower, including the antenna. The
height of a rooftop communication antenna shall be measured as the distance
from the point where the base of the tower and antenna is attached to the roof,
to the highest point on the supporting structure, including the antenna.
INSTITUTIONAL USE: Educational facilities, parks, cemeteries, golf courses,
sport arenas, religious institutions, athletic fields, and publicly owned
property.
PUBLIC SAFETY COMMUNICATION SYSTEM: A communication system owned or operated by
a governmental entity such as a law enforcement agency, Public Works
Department, Municipal transit authority, or medical facility.
PUBLICLY OWNED PROPERTY: Land, buildings, or structures owned by any
governmental body or public agency including City, County, State, or Federally
owned properties, other than public rights- of-way.
TRANSMISSION EQUIPMENT: Any equipment that facilitates transmission for
wireless communication, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers,
antennas, and other relevant equipment associated with and necessary to their
operation, including coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power
supply. (Ord. 2018-3, 11-13-2018)
10-17-3: PERMITTED USES EXEMPT FROM ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
   A.   Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary, communication
towers and antennas designed for private reception of television and radio
signals, used for amateur or recreational purposes, and facade mounted
communication antennas attached to existing City-owned light poles and traffic
signals in public rights-of-way, shall be permitted in all districts, provided
such antennas and towers comply with this Code, and the following:
      1.   Notwithstanding the height limitations of the zoning district,
freestanding towers and antennas shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height and rooftop mounted antennas shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in
height.
      2.   Antennas shall not exceed one meter (1 m) in diameter in Residential
Districts and two meters (2 m) in diameter in all other districts.
      3.   Towers and antennas shall not be located in any required front, side
or rear setback.
      4.   Only one freestanding tower and antenna shall be allowed per
residential zoning lot. (Ord. 2018-3, 11-13-2018)
10-17-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   The following communication towers, antennas, and base units may be
allowed as a conditional use.
      1.   Freestanding communication towers and antennas, including antennas
mounted on light poles and similar structures. These towers will not be allowed
in Residential Zones.
      2.   Rooftop mounted communication towers and antennas exceeding fifteen
feet (15') in height.
      3.   Communication towers and antennas designed for private reception of
television and radio signals and used for amateur or recreational purposes
which exceed thirty five feet (35') in height if freestanding or fifteen feet
(15') in height if rooftop mounted, or antennas which exceed one meter (1 m) in
diameter in residential districts and two meters (2 m) in diameter in all other
districts.
      4.   Communication towers and antennas that use any portion of a
structure, other than the roof for structural support and are not a facade
mounted communication antenna.
      5.   Exceptions are communication antennas and transmission equipment
mounted to City-owned light poles or traffic signal davits in public right-of-
ways for which a valid attachment permit has been granted. (Ord. 2018-3, 11-13-
2018)
10-17-5: SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   Conditional Use Standards:
      1.   Tower Type: Communication towers shall be of a monopole design. The
City Planner may consider the substitution of alternative tower types in cases
where structural, radio frequency, and design considerations, location or the
number of co-locators suggests a tower other than a monopole.
      2.   Co-Location: Shared use of existing communication towers shall be
preferred to the construction of a new tower.
      3.   Height Of Freestanding Towers And Antennas:
         a.   Commercial Districts: The height of freestanding communication
towers and antennas located in a Commercial District shall not exceed one
hundred feet (100').
         b.   Excess Height: The City Planning Commission may increase the
height of freestanding towers and antennas, provided that such increase shall
not exceed the maximum height by more than fifty percent (50%). The applicant
shall submit an inventory of existing and approved communication towers within
a one mile radius of the proposed site outlining opportunities for shared use
as an alternative to the construction of a new tower, and shall demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the City Planning Commission the following:
            (1)   The proposed antenna cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower due to one or more of the following reasons:
               (A)The unwillingness of the owner of the existing or approved
tower to co-locate an additional antenna.
               (B)The planned antenna would exceed the structural capacity of
an existing or approved tower.
               (C)The planned antenna would cause radio frequency interference
with other existing or planned equipment, which cannot be reasonably prevented.
               (D)Other reasons affecting technical performance, system
coverage, and system capacity make it impractical to place the proposed
equipment on existing or approved towers.
               E)The proposed co-location on an existing or approved tower
would not conform to the requirements of this title.
            (2)   The surrounding topography, structures, vegetation, and other
factors make a tower that complies with the height regulations impractical.
            (3)   The proposed tower is designed to structurally accommodate
both the applicant's antenna and at least one additional user. The applicant
shall submit a letter indicating the proposed tower is available for co-
location with a phone number for interested parties to call. (Ord. 2018-3, 11-
13-2018)
10-17-6: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   All Permitted And Conditional Use Towers, Antennas, And Base Units:
      1.   Encroachments And Setbacks:
         a.   The tower site and setback shall be of adequate size to contain
guyed wires, debris, and the tower in the event of a collapse.
         b.   Communication towers shall maintain a minimum distance from the
nearest residential structure equal to twice the height of the tower. For the
purposes of this chapter, residential structures shall also include any parking
structure attached to a principal residential structure.
         c.   No part of any communication tower, antenna, base unit,
equipment, guyed wires, or braces shall extend across or over any part of the
public right-of-way, except communication antennas and transmission equipment
mounted to City-owned light poles or traffic davits in public rights-of-way for
which a valid attachment permit has been granted.
         d.   Communication towers, antennas, and base units shall comply with
applicable regulations as established by the Federal Aviation Administration.
      2.   Compatibility With Nearby Properties: Communication towers,
antennas, and base units shall utilize building materials, colors, and textures
that are compatible with the existing principal structure and that effectively
blend the tower facilities into the surrounding setting and environment to the
greatest extent possible. Metal towers shall be constructed of, or treated
with, corrosive resistant material.
      3.   Base Units: Base units shall not exceed five hundred (500) square
feet of gross floor area.
      4.   Security: All sites shall be reasonably protected against
unauthorized climbing. The bottom of the tower, measured from ground level to
twelve feet (12') above ground level, shall be designed in a manner to
discourage unauthorized climbing.
      5.   Signage: Advertising or identification of any kind on towers,
antennas, and base units shall be prohibited, except for applicable warning and
equipment information signage required by the manufacturer or by Federal,
State, or local regulations.
      6.   Lighting: Communication towers and antennas shall not be illuminated
by artificial means, except when mounted on an existing light pole or where the
illumination is specifically required by the Federal Aviation Administration or
other Federal, State, or local regulations.
      7.   Radio Frequency Emissions And Noninterference: The applicant shall
comply with all applicable Federal Communication Commission standards. (Ord.
2018-3, 11-13-2018)
10-17-7: OBSOLETE OR UNUSED TOWERS:
All obsolete or unused communication towers, antennas and base units or
accessory facilities shall be removed within twelve (12) months of the
cessation of operations unless an extension is approved by the City Planning
Commission. If an extension is not approved, such towers, antennas and base
units shall be deemed a nuisance, and the City may act to abate such nuisance
and require their removal at the property owner's expense. The operator shall
provide the City with a copy of the Federal Communication Commission notice of
intent to cease operations at the same time it submits such notice to the FCC.
In the case of multiple operators sharing the use of a single tower, this
provision shall not become effective until all operators cease operation for a
period of twelve (12) consecutive months, provided each operator shall provide
the City with notice of intent to cease operations. After the facilities are
removed, the owner or operator of the site shall restore the site to its
original, or to an improved, condition. (Ord. 2018-3, 11-13-2018)
CHAPTER 18
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
10-18-1: Purpose
10-18-2: Definitions
10-18-3: Condominiums, Townhouses To Be Developed As Planned Unit Developments
10-18-4: Planned Unit Developments To Meet Use Limitations Of Districts Wherein
Located
10-18-5: Conditions For Approval
10-18-6: Open Space
10-18-7: Plan Approval
10-18-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The following Ordinance may be used in the following zoning Districts:
      1.   R-1 Residential
      2.   R-2 Residential
      3.   MH - Residential
      4.   C - Commercial
      5.   I  -  Industrial
   B.   The purpose of planned unit developments is to permit flexibility in
land use and to allow diversification in the interrelationships of various uses
and structures with their sites and thus offers an alternative method to the
traditional type of development. The application of planned unit development
concepts is intended to encourage neighborhoods, housing, design, open space,
and facilities compatible with the present living environment in the City as
described by the General Plan, and each zoning district while at the same time
ensuring compliance with practices which will assure the health, safety, and
public welfare of the future inhabitants of the planned unit development. In
exchange  for the additional services provided by the developer in a planned
unit development, this ordinance will allow for increased density of buildings
and more flexible uses of land in harmony with the zoning district allowed
uses. (Ord. 2019-3, 10-22-2019)
10-18-2: DEFINITIONS:
Minor Planned Unit Development (PUD) is defined as being three acres or less in
land area and six or less dwelling units. Major PUD is defined as being larger
than three acres in land area or more than six dwelling units. (Ord. 2019-3,
10-22-2019)
10-18-3: CONDOMINIUMS, TOWNHOUSES TO BE DEVELOPED AS PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
Where, in the opinion of the Planning Commission or City Council, the unique
features of a condominium project (i.e., ownership, financing, topography,
types of land uses, etc.) require more flexibility in design solutions in order
to protect the public interest.  The proposed condominium project shall comply
with the provisions of this ordinance and contrary provisions of other
ordinances adopted by the City may be waived by the City Council. 
All condominiums, townhouses and similar developments will be based on private
property ownership following the footprint of each individual unit and all
other property will be commonly owned or dedicated to a specific use, or have
covenants that safeguard the unit's property value, maintain quality living
conditions, and address property maintenance and use. (Ord. 2019-3, 10-22-2019)
10-18-4: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS TO MEET USE LIMITATIONS OF DISTRICTS WHEREIN
LOCATED:
No permit for a planned unit development shall be granted unless such
development will meet the use limitations of the zoning district in which it is
to be located, and meet the density and other limitations of such districts,
except as such requirements may be lawfully modified as provided by this
ordinance or by district regulations. Compliance with the regulations of this
Code in no sense excuses the development from the applicable requirements of
the subdivision regulations, except as modifications thereof are specifically
authorized in the approval of the application for a planned unit development.
(Ord. 2019-3, 10-22-2019)
10-18-5: CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL:
No planned unit development shall have an area less than that approved by the
City Council or Planning Commission as adequate for the proposed development.
The City Council or Planning Commission shall require such arrangements of
structures and open spaces as necessary to assure that adjacent properties will
not be adversely affected. Where feasible, buildings of least height and the
least density of buildings and uses shall be arranged around the boundaries of
the development.  Lot dimensions, setbacks, structure height, and coverage
requirements shall be determined by the approval of the preliminary design
plan.  All plans must be prepared by a qualified professional team.  A
qualified professional team is defined as a State licensed architect or
engineering firm. (Ord. 2019-3, 10-22-2019)
10-18-6:OPEN SPACE:
   A.   The proposed PUD would ensure the concentration of open space (if any)
into more workable or usable areas and would preserve the natural resources of
the site.
   B.   Preservation, maintenance and ownership of required open spaces within
the development may be accomplished by: 
      1.   Dedication of the land to the City as a public park or parkway
system, including a certificate of title insurance.
      2.   Granting to the City a permanent, open space easement on and over
the said private open spaces to guarantee that the open space remains
perpetually in recreational or park use, with ownership and maintenance being
the responsibility of an Owners' Association established with Articles of
Association and By-Laws which are satisfactory to the City Council.
      3.   Granting to the City a permanent, open space easement on and over
the said private open spaces to guarantee that the open space remains
perpetually in recreational or park use, to be maintained from the proceeds of
a perpetual maintenance trust fund established by the developer in an amount
satisfactory to the City Council. (Ord. 2019-3, 10-22-2019)
10-18-7: PLAN APPROVAL:
Minimum plans must provide the following information and receive the following
approvals :
   A.   Minor PUD   
      Land use authority: Planning Commission
      Approvals:   Land use design by Blanding City Planning Director
            Utilities and Public Works by Blanding City Engineer or Public
Works Director
      1.   Complete site plan to scale showing the entire site plus 100 feet of
the surrounding properties.
      2.   Building footprints, complete height and square footage.
      3.   Parking and streets with grades and cross slopes.
      4.   Storm drainage system and how it ties into current or future City
system.
      5.   Breakdown of all land uses by percentage of total lot coverage such
as:  buildings, open space, parking, roadways, recreation areas, trails, all
other dedicated uses.
      6.   Property contours at two-foot intervals.
      7.   All proposed utility improvements with locations, depths, and line
sizes and material type.
      8.   All utilities will be underground unless approved alternate location
by the City Engineer or Public Works Director.
      9.   All streets whether public or private will be dedicated to the City
and or identified as utility rights-of-way for city approved utilities.
   B.   Major PUD
      Land use authority: City Council
      Approvals:   Land use design by Blanding City Planning Director
            Utilities and Public Works by Blanding City Engineer or Public
Works Director
      1.   Complete site plan to scale showing the entire site plus 100 feet of
the surrounding properties.
      2.   Building footprints, complete height and square footage.
      3.   Parking and streets with grades and cross slopes.
      4.   Storm drainage system and how it ties into current or future City
system.
      5.   Breakdown of all land uses by percentage of total lot coverage such
as:  buildings, open space, parking, roadways, recreation areas, trails, all
other dedicated uses.
      6.   Property contours at two-foot intervals.
      7.   All proposed utility improvements with locations, depths, and line
sizes and material type.
      8.   All utilities will be underground unless approved alternate location
by the City Engineer or Public Works Director.
      9.   All streets whether public or private will be dedicated and or
identified as utility rights-of-way for city approved utilities. (Ord. 2019-3,
10-22-2019)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Definitions Enumerated
11-1-1: DEFINITIONS ENUMERATED:
The following terms, as used in this title, shall have the respective meanings
hereinafter set forth:
CITY: Blanding City, Utah.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of Blanding City, Utah.
CITY ENGINEER: City engineer, public works director, community development
director.
COUNTY: San Juan County, Utah.
GENERAL PLAN: A broad statement of community goals relating to land and land
development and related human and social impacts as identified by community
representatives. The general plan may include information represented by maps,
documents, pictures, graphics, and any other material, media or information,
whether electronic or hard copy, which has been approved and/or adopted by
ordinance or resolution by the legislative body having jurisdiction.
MINOR SUBDIVISION: A subdivision that when completed does not create more than
a total of three (3) lots, and none of the lots are larger than one acre total
size.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm or association of
individuals, however styled or designated.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Blanding City planning commission.
PLANNING DEPARTMENT: City planner, planning staff, community development
director.
SUBDIVISION: A. Any land that is divided, resubdivided or proposed to be
divided into two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots or other
division of land, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for offer,
sale, lease or development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all
other plans, terms and conditions.
B. "Subdivision" includes:
   1. The division or development of land, whether by deed, metes and bounds
description, devise and testacy, map, plat or other recorded instrument; and
   2. Except as provided in subsection C of this definition, divisions of land
for residential and nonresidential uses, including land used or to be used for
commercial, agricultural and industrial purposes.
C. "Subdivision" does not include:
   1. A bona fide division or partition of agricultural land for the purpose of
joining one of the resulting separate parcels to a contiguous parcel of
unsubdivided agricultural land, if neither the resulting combined parcel nor
the parcel remaining from the division or partition violates an applicable land
use ordinance;
   2. A recorded agreement between owners of adjoining unsubdivided properties
adjusting their mutual boundary if:
      a. No new lot is created; and
      b. The adjustment does not violate applicable land use ordinances; or
   3. A recorded document, executed by the owner of record:
      a. Revising the legal description of more than one contiguous
unsubdivided parcel of property into one legal description encompassing all
such parcels of property; or
      b. Joining a subdivided parcel of property to another parcel of property
that has not been subdivided, if the joinder does not violate applicable land
use ordinances.
D. The joining of a subdivided parcel of property to another parcel of property
that has not been subdivided does not constitute a "subdivision" as to the
unsubdivided parcel of property, or subject the unsubdivided parcel to the city
subdivision ordinance. (Ord. 2008-5, 5-13-2008)
CHAPTER 2
PROCESS STEPS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Review And Approval Process
11-2-2: Minor Subdivision Process And Requirements
11-2-1: REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS:
Subdivision proposals, with the exception of minor subdivisions, must follow
the review and approval process outlined below:
   A.   Scoping Meeting: The developer/owner shall schedule scoping meeting(s)
with planning and public works departments to verify suitability of land
proposed for subdividing. Items to be discussed include, but are not limited
to, the following:
      1.   Review and approval process;
      2.   General plan;
      3.   Zoning ordinance;
      4.   Utilities;
      5.   Physical land features;
      6.   Transportation patterns.
   B.   Preliminary Plan Review:
      1.   Content: The preliminary plan must include the following:
         a.   Twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36") plat(s) of
proposed land to be subdivided to scale (not smaller than 100 feet to the
inch), which will show all public and private land and proposed use (such as
park, street, etc.).
         b.   Twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36") plat(s)
identifying all existing and proposed utilities and storm drainage, and their
proposed location, classification, material and burial depth.
         c.   One sheet must show how the proposed subdivision aligns with
roads and neighboring development. This must be based on what actually exists
on the ground, not what the county plats show, which must be to scale.
         d.   The plats shall include:
            (1)   Zoning designation(s);
            (2)   Subdivision name;
            (3)   Street number(s);
            (4)   Park name(s);
            (5)   Storm water treatment;
            (6)   Transportation types and location;
            (7)   Restrictive covenants;
            (8)   North arrow and date.
      2.   Review; Approval: The preliminary plan will be reviewed and approved
by the following:
         a.   Planning department;
         b.   Public works department;
         c.   Planning commission.
The preliminary plan shall be approved by all foregoing departments based on
the conditions contained herein. A copy of the preliminary plan endorsed by all
three (3) departments must be completed prior to the developer proceeding with
final plans.
      3.   Clustering; Open Space And Public Use Areas: Consideration shall be
given to clustering in residential, commercial and industrial zones to allow
open space and sites for schools, parks, playgrounds and other areas for public
use. Provisions shall be made for access for operation, maintenance and
ownership and shall be included in the preliminary plan in order for proper
review by planning, public works and the planning commission.
   C.   Final Plan Review And Approval By City Council:
      1.   Plan Content: The final plan will include all information found in
the preliminary plan, plus all changes required by planning, public works and
the planning commission to the preliminary plan.
      2.   Land Survey: The final plan must also be based on a physical land
survey that marks all property boundaries. This land survey must be based on
what actually exists on the ground and not upon county plats. It also must
align with the surrounding development for streets, parks, storm drainage,
waterways, etc. This survey shall be done by a state licensed surveyor.
      3.   Performance Guarantee: A performance guarantee shall be in place to
assure completion of all physical improvements indicated on approved plans.
         a.   Amount Equal To One Hundred Ten Percent Of Value Of Improvements:
In lieu of the completion of the required improvements, the subdivider shall
provide a performance guarantee in an amount equal to one hundred ten percent
(110%) of the value of the improvements required by this section as estimated
by the subdivider and approved by the city engineer.
The subdivider(s) shall guarantee the installation by one of the methods
specified as follows:
            (1)   Cash Deposit: A deposit of cash in a separate escrow account
in an amount not less than one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost
of performing the work for which the guarantee is required. Said account shall
be made with a financial institution acceptable to the city and shall be
established in the city's name and shall be in the sole control of the city.
Any interest derived from the account shall inure to the benefit of the
subdivider.
            (2)   Performance Bond: A performance bond in an amount not less
than one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost of performing the
work for which the guarantee is required, as established by the city. If the
developer provides a corporate bond, the bond shall be executed by a surety
company duly authorized to do business in the state. It shall be payable to the
city; filed in the office of the city recorder/clerk.
         b.   Approval Of City Attorney: The form of any guarantee of
improvements submitted under this section shall be reviewed and approved by the
city attorney before acceptance of the guarantee or security by the city.
         c.   Duration After Approval: The duration of a surety bond shall be
for two (2) years from the date of approval of the final plat of the
subdivision by the city council, or such greater or lesser time as is required
to complete the said improvements.
         d.   Partial Release Permitted: Where a guarantee is posted for the
purpose of ensuring the timely installation of required improvements in a
subdivision, planned unit development or similar project, the city may
authorize a release of a portion of the guarantee in an amount commensurate
with the proportion of improvements completed.
         e.   Final Inspection: After the completion of all subdivision
improvements, the subdivider shall make a written request to the city engineer
for a final inspection to be made by all affected city departments. Upon
receipt of inspection reports from all affected departments, a summary of the
final inspections shall be provided by the city engineer specifying the
acceptability of all subdivision improvements.
         f.   Warranty Period; Release: Once all improvements are approved by
the city engineer, the one year warranty period shall begin, and any guarantee
filed with the city with regard to such improvements shall be released,
provided at least ten percent (10%) of the guarantee amount is held to
guarantee the quality of workmanship and materials during the one year warranty
period. In all subdivisions, a ten percent (10%) guarantee of improvements, in
the form of a cash deposit, corporate performance bond or escrow agreement
shall be posted to guarantee the required improvements for the one year
warranty period.
         g.   Default; Forfeiture Of Bond: In the event the subdivider is in
default, fails or neglects to satisfactorily install the required improvements
within two (2) years from the date of approval of the final plat by the city
council, or to pay all liens in connection therewith, the city council may
declare the bond or other assurance forfeited and the city council may install
or cause the required improvements to be installed, using the proceeds of the
collection of the bond to defray the expense thereof.
      4.   Land For Public Purposes: Land for public purposes such as streets,
parks, open space, alleyways, waterways, greenbelts, etc., shall be clearly
identified and will be deeded to the city after all physical improvements
identified on the approved plans have been completed, inspected and approved by
the city.
      5.   Phases: In order to help facilitate organized and orderly growth
within the scope of the city's ability to oversee development of utilities and
general infrastructure, subdivisions of more than twenty five (25) lots shall
be developed and sold in phases. No phase shall include more than twenty five
(25) lots. Each phase must have sixty percent (60%) of the lots (15 lots)
developed with the improvements completed/installed prior to sale of lots in
the next phase. The developer is responsible for verification of the sixty
percent (60%) development prior to additional sales. This requirement shall be
strictly enforced.
      6.   City Council Review: The city council shall consider approval of a
proposed subdivision only after the following requirements have been met:
         a.   Approval by planning department;
         b.   Approval by public works department;
         c.   Approval by planning commission;
         d.   Public hearing advertised two (2) weeks in a local paper;
         e.   Final approval shall be considered at the next scheduled city
council meeting after the public hearing.
      7.   Final Approval: Final approval shall always be subject to compliance
with all requirements outlined in this title. (Ord. 2008-5, 5-13-2008)
11-2-2: MINOR SUBDIVISION PROCESS AND REQUIREMENTS:
Minor subdivision proposals shall be subject to the following process and
requirements for approval and not the subdivision ordinance in its entirety
unless specifically referenced in other sections:
   A.   Plat: Provide a subdivision plat for the county of the subdivision and
each lot within the subdivision on a twenty four inch by thirty six inch
(24" x 36") Mylar sheet.
   B.   Departmental Approval: Receive approval from the planning and public
works departments, including verification regarding utility availability to the
subdivision and the subdivider's responsibility regarding the same, as well as
the subdivider's responsibilities regarding improvements to the public right of
way (i.e., road work, sidewalk, curb and gutter).
   C.   Planning Commission Approval Following Public Meeting: Receive approval
from the planning commission after holding a public meeting notifying the
public of the proposed subdivision and giving them the opportunity to comment.
   D.   Rights Of Way And Easements: Verify that all needed rights of way and
easements exist or have been obtained by the subdivider.
   E.   Requirements: Minor subdivisions must all comply with the following:
      1.   Minor subdivisions are only allowed along existing and city accepted
street rights of way.
      2.   Curb and gutter is required if it does not already exist. The city
strongly encourages the placement of sidewalk along the property frontage. The
city will participate in the placement of curb, gutter and sidewalk if
completed under the terms of a city council approved participation program (if
any exist at the time). The city will not issue an occupancy permit or allow
occupancy without the curb and gutter completed.
      3.   a. City utilities shall be installed and stubbed to each lot as
defined below at the time a building permit is requested:
            (1)   City water main in the street in front of the lot and a
lateral stubbed to the lot. Size is determined by the city (8 inch minimum)
according to the master water plan or study as approved by city council from
time to time.
            (2)   City sewer main in the street in front of the lot and a
lateral stubbed to the lot. Size is eight inch (8") minimum or larger as
identified by master sewer plan or study as approved by city council from time
to time.
            (3)   Electricity placed underground or overhead if approved by the
city and extended to each lot prior to occupancy. The city may participate in
development of electricity in a minor subdivision if done through a city
council approved participation program (if any exist at the time) when the
subdivision is within two hundred (200) yards of the existing infrastructure.
Design will be determined by the city through the design and estimate process.
The developer shall pay for the cost of the design and estimate.
            (4)   Natural gas main shall be in the street in front of the lot
and a lateral stubbed to the lot. Size is determined by the city according to a
master gas plan or study as approved by city council from time to time.
         b.   The city will provide engineering direction and oversight on all
city utility lines and extensions based on available staff time and other
project priorities as determined at the sole discretion of the city.
         c.   All city utility hookup fees must be paid at the same time a
building permit is requested.
         d.   City utility service laterals in a minor subdivision may be
extended anytime after minor subdivision approval but must be completed prior
to occupancy.
         e.   When the minor subdivision development is not along an existing
paved right of way the city will participate in the cost of street improvements
for a minor subdivision contingent upon the following criteria:
            (1)   Capital amounts have been approved for asphalt paving by city
council in the current year fiscal budget, and budgeted funds have not all been
expended.
            (2)   Street rights of way are existing and approved by the city.
            (3)   All city utilities are in place in the street rights of way
and are complete including service laterals and tracer wires.
            (4)   The subbase and base road construction has been completed to
city specifications and the city has approved the road as ready to receive
asphalt.
            (5)   The street to be improved abuts an existing city street where
asphalt paving is existing.
         f.   The city will participate in road excavation, road base, gravel
placement and asphalt when the development is along an existing paved road and
curb and gutter is completed. Said participation is subject to city funding
restraints, scheduling of engineering and completion of all city utilities and
service laterals.
         g.   The city will not participate in any road work, road
improvements, or curb, gutter and sidewalk until all city utility main lines
and service laterals have been installed, inspected and approved by the city.
         h.   Minor subdivision lots shall not receive approval for a building
permit without an all weather road surface meeting city standards (i.e., road
base and gravel placed and compacted on at least 50 percent of the road width
from the adjoining improved road the full length of the lot requesting a
building permit).
         i.   Lots abutting an existing paved road without curb and gutter may
be issued a building permit. It will be the property developer's/owner's
responsibility to provide road base and gravel to allow access to the lot until
such time as it is curbed and then paved.
      4.   Blanding City planning commission is the land use authority for
minor subdivisions (see definition of minor subdivisions in section
11-1-1 of this title). Subject to state law Blanding City planning commission
after reviewing the proposed minor subdivision in a public meeting and
verifying the following items have been reviewed or completed may grant
approval of the proposed minor subdivision:
Reviewed - Zoning
Reviewed - Lot size
Reviewed - Street frontage
Reviewed - Buildable lot characteristics
Reviewed - Compatibility with general plan
Reviewed - Accessibility to culinary water
Reviewed - Accessible to sanitary sewer
Reviewed - Accessible to other utilities
Reviewed - Other applicable ordinances
Completed - Land survey with plat showing all lots with dimensions
Completed - Approval of Blanding City engineer
Completed - Approval of community development director or planning department
(Ord. 2008-5, 5-13-2008)
CHAPTER 3
PLANNING; ZONING
SECTION:
11-3-1: Compliance Required
11-3-2: Blocks
11-3-3: Subdivision Lots Including Minor Subdivisions
11-3-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   All subdivision of land in the city must be in harmony with the purpose
and intent of the general plan. The planning department shall review all
proposals and report their findings to the planning commission and mayor and
city council during the plan review process.
   B.   All subdivisions shall comply with all zoning requirements for the
zoning district or districts in which the land being subdivided is located.
(Ord. 2008-5, 5-13-2008)
11-3-2: BLOCKS:
   A.   Residential Length: Residential blocks shall not exceed five hundred
twenty feet (520') standard as measured from center of the block intersection
to the opposite center of the block intersection. Some variation may be allowed
subject to topography and other physical land features on a case by case basis,
subject to being identified in the scoping meeting and approved by the planning
department, public works department and planning commission.
   B.   Commercial, Industrial Length: Commercial and industrial blocks shall
not exceed one thousand three hundred feet (1,300') in length.
   C.   Width: The width of blocks generally shall be sufficient to allow two
(2) tiers of lots.
   D.   Parking And Delivery Facilities: Blocks intended for commercial or
industrial use shall be designed specifically for such purposes with adequate
space set aside for off street parking and delivery facilities.
   E.   Road Plan: All subdivisions shall follow a grid pattern layout running
east and west or north and south, and shall be in harmony with a master road
plan adopted by the city. Any variation from this will only be allowed subject
to unusual physical land features and must meet the approval of the planning
department, engineering department and planning commission. (Ord. 2008-5, 5-13-
2008)
11-3-3: SUBDIVISION LOTS INCLUDING MINOR SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   The lot arrangement and design shall be such that lots will provide
satisfactory and desirable sites for buildings and be properly related to
topography and other physical land features to provide a quality and
sustainable living and work environment, as well as maintain property values.
   B.   All lots shown on the subdivision plan must conform to the minimum
requirements of the zoning ordinance for the zone in which the subdivision is
located.
   C.   Each lot shall abut on a street dedicated by the recording of the
subdivision or on an existing dedicated public street.
   D.   Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient for maintenance of
required building setback lines on both streets.
   E.   Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles or radial to
the street line.
   F.   All property in a subdivision shall be utilized and/or dedicated to a
public or private purpose in harmony with the general plan and this title.
   G.   Where the land covered by a subdivision includes two (2) or more
parcels in separate ownership and the lot arrangement is such that a property
ownership line divides one or more lots, the land in each lot so divided shall
be transferred by deed to either single or joint ownership before approval of
the final plat and such transfer verified by copy of deed or deeds to the
planning commission or planning department. (Ord. 2008-5, 5-13-2008)
CHAPTER 4
TRANSPORTATION
SECTION:
11-4-1: Applicability
11-4-2: Streets
11-4-3: Relation To Adjoining Streets And Property
11-4-4: Land Survey
11-4-1: APPLICABILITY:
Transportation shall include any and all forms of transportation, including,
but not limited to, walking, running, biking, riding, driving, etc. These forms
of transportation shall be allowed on all public ways, including, but not
limited to, streets, alleyways, paths, open spaces, etc., based on reasonable
use of established rules or laws for the route taken, and open to all uses
unless restricted at time of acceptance. (Ord. 2008-5, 5-13-2008)
11-4-2: STREETS:
All new streets shall conform to the master street plan and the requirements
and definitions below:
   A.   Master Street Plan: A plan labeled and/or adopted by the city council
as the master street plan for the city, which includes maps or reports, or
both, or such other plan as may be amended from time to time by the city
council.
   B.   Major Street: A street, existing or proposed, which serves or is
intended to serve as a major trafficway and is designated on the master street
plan as a controlled access highway, major street, parkway or other equivalent
term to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the street
plan. (Rights of way from 100 to 400 feet wide.)
   C.   Collector Street: A street, existing or proposed, of considerable
continuity, which serves or is intended to serve as the principal trafficway
between large and separated areas or districts and which is the main means of
access to the major street system. (Rights of way from 60 to 100 feet wide.)
   D.   Minor Street: A street, existing or proposed, which is supplementary to
a collector street and of limited continuity which serves or is intended to
serve the local needs of a neighborhood. (Rights of way from 50 to 80 feet
wide.)
   E.   Cul-De-Sacs (Dead End Streets): Cul-de-sacs (dead end streets) shall be
used only where unusual physical land conditions exist which make other street
design impractical or impossible. Each cul-de-sac must be terminated by a
turnaround of not less than one hundred feet (100') in diameter. If surface
water drainage is into the turnaround due to the grade of the street, necessary
catch basins and drainage easements shall be provided.
   F.   Alleys: Alleys shall have a minimum width of twenty feet (20'). Alleys
may be required in the rear of commercial lots, but will not be accepted in
residential districts except under unusual conditions where such alleys are
considered necessary by the planning commission.
   G.   Paths: Paths shall include two (2) designations:
      1.   Pedestrian paths for the exclusive use of humans (minimum width of 3
feet and up).
      2.   Multiple use paths for walking, biking, equestrian riding,
rollerblading, skating, walking of pets, etc. (minimum width of 5 feet and up).
The numbers, widths, lengths, bearings and curve data on centerlines of
proposed streets, alleys and easements; and also the boundaries, bearings and
dimensions of all portions within the subdivision, as intended to be dedicated
to the use of the public; the lines, dimension, bearings and numbers of all
lots, blocks and parts reserved for any reason within the subdivision shall be
included. All lots and blocks are to be numbered consecutively under a definite
system approved by the city engineer and/or planning department. All proposed
streets shall be numbered in accordance with and in conformity with the adopted
street numbering system of the city 1 .
   H.   Street Construction: It is not the intent of the city to participate in
the cost of street improvements for anything but minor subdivisions. See
section
11-2-2, "Minor Subdivision Process And Requirements", of this title. (Ord.
2008-5, 5-13-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 7, chapter 8 of this code.
11-4-3: RELATION TO ADJOINING STREETS AND PROPERTY:
   A.   The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for
the continuation of the existing streets in adjoining area(s) (or their proper
protection where adjoining land is not subdivided) insofar as such may be
deemed necessary by the planning commission for reasonable public requirements.
The street arrangement should be such as to cause no unnecessary hardship to
owners of adjoining property when they plat their land and seek to provide for
convenient access to it.
   B.   Minor streets shall approach the major or collector streets at an angle
of no less than eighty degrees (80o).
   C.   Subdivisions shall be laid out to not adversely impact adjoining
property and the potential for its future development. (Ord. 2008-5, 5-13-2008)
11-4-4: LAND SURVEY:
   A.   Required: All subdivisions, including minor subdivisions, shall be
surveyed and permanently marked by brass or aluminum survey markers on corners
of all lots. Subdivisions shall be laid out to conform to existing surrounding
development such as streets, existing or proposed, in the master street plan,
physical land features and adjoining open space or other public areas. (Ord.
2015-1, 4-14-2015)
   B.   Drawing: Based on the above described survey a twenty four inch by
thirty six inch (24" x 36") mylar showing all property boundaries shall be
submitted with measurements and distances, including a legal description of all
property included in the subdivision, with clear identification of proposed use
of all property, both public and private.
   C.   Licensed Land Surveyor: All survey work shall be completed by a state
licensed land surveyor and properly stamped and verified by the same. (Ord.
2008-5, 5-13-2008)
CHAPTER 5
IMPROVEMENTS; UTILITIES
SECTION:
11-5-1: Required Improvements
11-5-2: Utilities
11-5-3: Water
11-5-4: Sewer
11-5-5: Electricity
11-5-6: Natural Gas
11-5-7: Private Utilities
11-5-1: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Specified: The owner of any land to be subdivided shall be required to
install the following improvements under the specifications and inspection of
the city:
      1.   Street development, including design, grading, base preparation and
surfacing, subject to participation by the city as listed in subsection 11-4-2H
of this title.
      2.   Type A high back curb and gutters.
      3.   Street drainage and drainage structures.
      4.   Sidewalk widths. Residential four foot (4') minimum. Commercial,
industrial five foot (5') minimum.
      5.   Street signage. Traffic control signs or signals, address signs,
street numbers, etc.
   B.   Minor Subdivisions: The city may participate in the development of the
curb, gutter and sidewalk within a minor subdivision, if done through a city
council approved concrete participation program (if any exist at the time),
when the minor subdivision abuts an existing improved right of way and funds
for the same have been allocated in the current year fiscal budget and budgeted
funds have not all been expended. (Ord. 2008-5, 5-13-2008)
11-5-2: UTILITIES:
   A.   City Specifications: All utilities shall be extended by the developer
to the far end of their development or mid property if potential for continued
extension does not exist as approved by the Blanding City engineer in
accordance with city specifications. This utilities section applies to minor
subdivisions.
   B.   Required Utilities: The following utilities shall be provided by the
developer on all lots in approved subdivisions:
      1.   Water 1 ;
      2.   Sewer 2 ;
      3.   Electricity 3 ;
      4.   Natural gas 4 ;
      5.   Communication system 5 ;
      6.   Cable services are optional. If installed the system must be
underground and in street right of way.
   C.   City Approval Required: The city shall approve all utility system main
lines. In the best interest of the city and its overall infrastructure needs,
the city shall determine the size of main lines or capacity of other utilities.
The city may participate on a cost share basis (this will be determined for
each utility system based on a system design/plan and development use/
requirements). This will be done on a case by case basis after review and
recommendations by the city engineer and planning department to the mayor and
city council, who shall approve all such utility expenditures in a regular city
council meeting. All utilities placed underground in the street rights of way
shall be completed, including service laterals and tracer wires prior to base
preparation. (Ord. 2008-5, 5-13-2008)
 
Notes
  1. City utility service laterals and required communication systems in a
1 minor subdivision may be extended anytime after minor subdivision approval
  but must be completed prior to occupancy.
  2. City utility service laterals and required communication systems in a
2 minor subdivision may be extended anytime after minor subdivision approval
  but must be completed prior to occupancy.
  3. City utility service laterals and required communication systems in a
3 minor subdivision may be extended anytime after minor subdivision approval
  but must be completed prior to occupancy.
  4. City utility service laterals and required communication systems in a
4 minor subdivision may be extended anytime after minor subdivision approval
  but must be completed prior to occupancy.
  5. City utility service laterals and required communication systems in a
5 minor subdivision may be extended anytime after minor subdivision approval
  but must be completed prior to occupancy.
11-5-3: WATER:
All water mains shall be a minimum of eight inches (8"). All water laterals
shall be a minimum of three-fourths inch (3/4"). Laterals shall be terminated
in a city approved vault with an approved backflow device on or just inside the
lot line. Water main improvements shall include a complete fire hydrant
assembly every five hundred feet (500') or as approved, with an auxiliary
valve. All materials used shall be preapproved. No substitutes will be accepted
without prior approval by the city. (Ord. 2008-5, 5-13-2008)
11-5-4: SEWER:
All sewer mains shall be a minimum of eight inches (8"). All sewer laterals
shall be a minimum of three inches (3") for residential and four inches (4")
for commercial. All sewer laterals shall be extended beyond the property line a
minimum of five feet (5'). (Ord. 2008-5, 5-13-2008)
11-5-5: ELECTRICITY:
New power lines in subdivisions shall be placed underground except minor
subdivisions can be run overhead if approved by the city. A preliminary plan
showing total layout of the proposed subdivision with all electrical primary
and secondary lines as well as all transformers clearly designated shall be
submitted to Blanding City Power Company. Blanding City Power Company will
establish a cost estimate in a reasonable time period. Based on cost estimate,
subdivider shall pay one-half (1/2) (50 percent) up front prior to electrical
work starting. The remaining one-half (1/2) (50 percent) shall be paid in full
within sixty (60) days of completion. The city may participate in development
of electricity in a minor subdivision if done through a city council approved
participation program (if any exist at the time) when the subdivision is within
two hundred (200) yards of the existing infrastructure. (Ord. 2008-5, 5-13-
2008)
11-5-6: NATURAL GAS:
A preliminary plan showing all public and private lot lines, including a layout
for main and service laterals to each lot, shall be submitted to Blanding City
Gas Company. Blanding City Gas Company will establish a cost estimate within a
reasonable time period. Based on cost estimate, subdivider shall pay one-half
(1/2) (50 percent) up front prior to gas line installation. The remaining one-
half (1/2) (50 percent) shall be paid in full within sixty (60) days of
completion. (Ord. 2008-5, 5-13-2008)
11-5-7: PRIVATE UTILITIES:
Private utilities are optional. If provided, private utilities such as
communication, cable, etc., shall be brought to each lot in the subdivision.
This shall be verifiable by a signed contract or letter from the company
supplying the service. (Ord. 2008-5, 5-13-2008)
CHAPTER 6
AMENDMENT PROCESS; ENFORCEMENT; PERMITS
SECTION:
11-6-1: Amendment Process; Mandatory Review
11-6-2: Enforcement And Permits
11-6-3: Penalty
11-6-1: AMENDMENT PROCESS; MANDATORY REVIEW:
   A.   Any person may initiate a review and possible change to this title.
Proposed changes must be submitted in writing setting forth the reasons for the
proposed change with clear detail to the planning department. The planning
department will review and submit to the planning commission any legitimate
request for change. The planning commission may recommend a change based on a
review of the information submitted or may deny the request. If the planning
commission recommends a change, such recommendation will go to the city
council, who will set a public hearing date. After advertising the proposed
change in a local paper for at least two (2) weeks, the city council will hold
a public hearing. The city council shall then make their decision at the next
meeting after considering public input. The city council can initiate a change
at any time, and may include a six (6) month moratorium on approval of
subdivisions.
   B.   The city council requires a mandatory review of this title every five
(5) years from the date of adoption to make certain that this title effectively
represents community objectives outlined in the city general plan. (Ord. 2008-
5, 5-13-2008)
11-6-2: ENFORCEMENT AND PERMITS:
No representative of the city shall grant any permit or license for the use of
any building or land if such use would be in violation of this title. (Ord.
2008-5, 5-13-2008)
11-6-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this title shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding four hundred ninety nine dollars
($499.00), or imprisonment in the county jail for ninety (90) days, or by both
fine and imprisonment. Each day the offending condition is allowed to exist
shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, any person violating any
provisions of this title shall be required to correct, at their expense, any
violations so that the subdivision is in compliance. (Ord. 2008-5, 5-13-2008)
TITLE 12
MODULAR HOUSING
CHAPTER 1
MODULAR HOUSING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
12-1-1: Definitions
12-1-2: Age Of All Modular Housing
12-1-3: Style
12-1-4: Location/Size
12-1-5: Amendment Process
12-1-6: Enforcement Of Permits
12-1-7: Penalty
12-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
MODULAR HOUSING: Shall include the following:
A. Trailer, singlewide (zone allowed MH).
B. Doublewide, at least two (2) sections a minimum of ten feet (10') wide. This
does not include trailers with popouts or foldouts (zones allowed R-1, R-2, MH,
C).
C. Fabricated (manufactured), at least two (2) sections a minimum of ten feet
(10') wide. This does not include trailers with popouts or foldouts (zones
allowed R-1, R-2, MH, C).
PERMANENT FOUNDATION: Based on the following materials and requirements for
Blanding City:
Materials allowed:
Brick.
Cement block.
Concrete.
Insulated concrete.
         Requirements:
Local building code.
Local frost protection for habitable structures.
Thirty inches (30") below finished grade subject to plan review.
Architect or engineered stamped foundation plan still requires perimeter wall
constructed of materials listed above.
Tie downs based on manufacturer's recommendations to sustain a minimum eighty
(80) miles per hour wind speed in class "C" exposure. This must be submitted in
the design specifications with other information required to obtain a permit.
(Ord., 5-28-1997)
12-1-2: AGE OF ALL MODULAR HOUSING:
As of the adoption date hereof, no modular housing older than 1976 and having a
HUD label, sticker, tag or other HUD identification indicating that it was
constructed to minimum HUD standards for health and life safety, shall be moved
into Blanding City, moved within Blanding City or relocated in any fashion,
method or style. (Ord., 5-28-1997)
12-1-3: STYLE:
Different styles of modular housing will be allowed to locate only in certain
zoning districts. Blanding City encourages pitched roofs and a good grade of
siding on all modular housing. All modular housing shall be secured and skirted
or placed on a permanent foundation depending upon location and/or zoning
district. (Ord., 5-28-1997)
12-1-4: LOCATION/SIZE:
The location, style, size and type of modular housing allowed in each of
Blanding City's zoning districts shall be as follows:
 
R-1 Residential district:  
   Allowed                    Yes
   Style                      Pitched roofs, siding, stucco, brick, carport
                                 or garage required
   Types allowed              Doublewides, fabricated, manufactured
   Size                       Minimum of 1,100 square feet
                                 Must have "permanent foundation" (see
   Foundation                 definition in section
                                 12-1-1 of this chapter)
                                 Allowed in any R-1 district not having
   Location                   restrictive covenants that prohibit that
                                 housing type or style
   Building permit required   Yes
R-2 Residential district:         
   Allowed                    Yes
   Style                      Pitched roofs, siding, stucco, brick
                                 Optional: Carport or garage
   Types allowed              Doublewides, fabricated, manufactured
   Size                       Minimum of 700 square feet
                                 Must have "permanent foundation" (see
   Foundation                 definition in section
                                 12-1-1 of this chapter)
                                 Allowed in any R-2 district not having
   Location                   restrictive covenants that prohibit that
                                 housing type or style
   Building permit required   Yes
MH Mobile home district or park:  
   Allowed                    Yes
                                 Flat or pitched roofs, metal siding, siding,
   Style                      stucco, brick
                                 Optional: Carport or garage
   Types allowed              Singlewides, camp trailers, doublewides,
                                 fabricated, manufactured
   Size                       No minimum square footage required
                                 Skirting and tie downs subject to city
   Foundation                 approval. Any trailer located for longer than
                                 90 days shall be considered permanent and
                                 require skirting and tie downs
                                 Allowed in any MH district or park subject to
   Location                   individual park rules and MH district not
                                 having restrictive covenants that prohibit
                                 that housing type or style
   Setup inspection required  Yes
C Commercial district:            
   Allowed                    Yes
   Style                      Pitched roofs, siding, stucco, brick
                                 Optional: Carport or garage
   Types allowed              Doublewides, fabricated, manufactured
   Size                       Minimum of 700 square feet
                                 Must have "permanent foundation" (see
   Foundation                 definition in section
                                 12-1-1 of this chapter)
                                 Allowed in any commercial district subject to
   Location                   a residential agreement of understanding being
                                 signed, and not having restrictive covenants
                                 that prohibit that housing type or style
   Building permit required   Yes
I Industrial district:            
   Allowed                    No
O Open space district:            
   Allowed                    No
RV Parks:                         
   Allowed                    Yes
   Style                      Flat or pitched roofs, metal siding (subject
                                 to individual park rules)
   Types allowed              Camp trailers, all makes and models of RVs
                                 (subject to individual park rules)
   Size                       No minimum square footage required
   Foundation                 Not required
   Location                   Allowed in any RV park having a business
                                 license, subject to individual park rules
   Setup inspection required  No
 
(Ord., 5-28-1997)
12-1-5: AMENDMENT PROCESS:
Any person may initiate a review and possible change to this chapter. They must
submit the proposed change(s) in writing with reasons for the requested change
(s) listed with clear detail to the planning department. The planning
department will review and submit to the planning commission any legitimate
request for change. The planning commission may recommend a change(s) based on
a review of the information submitted or may deny the request. If the planning
commission recommends a change, that recommendation will go to the city council
who will set a public hearing date after advertising the proposed change(s) in
a local paper at least two (2) weeks prior to the city council meeting or
public hearing meeting. (Ord., 5-28-1997)
12-1-6: ENFORCEMENT OF PERMITS:
No representative of Blanding City shall grant any permit or license for the
use of any modular building if such use would be in violation of this chapter.
(Ord., 5-28-1997)
12-1-7: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding four hundred ninety
nine dollars ($499.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for three (3) months,
or both fine and imprisonment for each violation. (Ord., 5-28-1997)
