The
Bountiful City
Code
September 11, 2018

1
Bountiful City Code
Title 1 General Provisions .................................................................. 2
Title 2 Administration and City Government ................................. 4
Title 3 City Commissions .................................................................. 15
Title 4 Building Regulations ............................................................. 18
Title 5 Business Regulations ............................................................. 27
Title 6 Public Works and Property ................................................. 76
Title 7 Reserved ............................................................................... 150
Title 8 Public Health ....................................................................... 151
Title 9 Redevelopment Agency ....................................................... 180
Title 10 Criminal Code ................................................................... 193
Title 11 Telecommunications ......................................................... 199
Title 12 Revenue and Taxation ...................................................... 225
Title 13 Traffic Code ....................................................................... 235
Title 14 Land Use Ordinance ......................................................... 246
2
Title 1
General Provisions
Chapter 1: Code Adoption
Chapter 2: Definitions
Chapter 3: City Seal
Chapter 4: Code Violations
Chapter 1: Code Adoption
1-1-101. Adoption of Ordinance.
1-1-102. Construction.
1-1-103. Severability.
1-1-101. Adoption of Ordinance.
These ordinances of the City of Bountiful, Utah, shall be known as "The Bountiful City Code.”
1-1-102. Construction.
(a) The adoption of this Code shall not affect or impair any right which has accrued, any duty which was imposed, any prosecution pending, or any penalty which has or may be applied, under previous ordinances.
(b) All previously existing ordinances which are re-enacted in this Code shall be construed as simply continued herein. All previously existing ordinances inconsistent with the provisions herein are hereby amended or repealed.
(c) This Code shall be subject to the following rules of construction: (i) the singular includes the plural; (ii) words used in the present tense include the past and future tense; (iii) words used in the masculine include the feminine; (iv) the term "may" is permissive, and the terms "must" and "shall" are mandatory.
1-1-103. Severability.
If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, section, chapter or title of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts of this Code. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted each part of this Code irrespective of the validity of any other part.
Chapter 2: Definitions
1-2-101. Definitions.
Unless otherwise clearly intended from its context, in the construction of this Code the following words shall have the meaning stated in this section:
"City" means the City of Bountiful, Utah;
3
"City Council" means the City Council of Bountiful, Utah;
"County" means Davis County, Utah;
"Person" means individuals, bodies politic, corporations, partnerships, or associations;
"Property" means both real and personal property;
"State" means the State of Utah;
"Street" means public streets, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, boulevards, public ways, public places and sidewalks.
Chapter 3: City Seal
1-3-101. City Seal.
The City Seal of Bountiful, Utah, shall be circular in form, one and three-fourths inches in diameter, with a sheaf of wheat in the center thereof, and containing within the circle the words "Bountiful, Utah", "Corporate Seal" and "Incorporated A.D. 1892".
Chapter 4: Code Violations
1-4-101. Code Violations.
Unless expressly stated otherwise, all violations of this Code constitute a class C misdemeanor, which shall be punishable as provided by State law for that classification of offense.
4
Title 2
Administration and City Government
Chapter 1: Governing Body
Chapter 2: Legislation
Chapter 3: Administration
Chapter 4: Appeal Board
Chapter 5: Procurement Code
Chapter 6: Constitutional Taking Guidelines
Chapter 7: Self Insurance
Chapter 8: Appeals to Administrative Law Judge
Chapter 1: Governing Body
2-1-101. Governing Body.
2-1-102. Membership.
2-1-103. Meetings.
2-1-104. Candidate Filing Fee.
2-1-101. Governing Body.
This City shall have a governing body which shall exercise the legislative and executive powers of the municipality, and which may perform such other functions as may be specifically or necessarily implied by law.
2-1-102. Membership.
The governing body shall be a City Council composed of six members, one of whom shall be the Mayor and the remaining five shall be Council members. They shall be elected and shall serve terms of office in the manner prescribed by State law, and, in the event of a vacancy, shall be appointed as prescribed by State Law.
2-1-103. Meetings.
Meetings of the Council shall be held and conducted in accordance with the provisions of State law. Regular meetings of the City Council shall take place at 7:00 p.m. on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month at Bountiful City Hall, 790 South 100 East. Bountiful, Utah.
2-1-104. Candidate Filing Fee.
Individuals filing as candidates for the Bountiful City Council or for Mayor shall pay a $25 fee at the time of filing their candidacy with the City Recorder. This filing fee shall be refundable only if it is determined that the person filing is not qualified to be a candidate, or is found to have improperly filed.
5
Chapter 2: Legislation
2-2-101. Legislative Power.
The legislative power of the City is vested in the governing body, which power shall be exercised through ordinances, as provided by State law.
Chapter 3: Administration
2-3-101. Administrative Powers.
2-3-102. Rules and Regulations.
2-3-103. Creating Offices.
2-3-104. Appointive Officers.
2-3-105. Bonds.
2-3-106. Salaries.
2-3-107. Fiscal Procedures.
2-3-108. Disaster Response.
2-3-109. Government Records Access and Management.
2-3-110. Disposition of City’s Real Property.
2-3-101. Administrative Powers.
The administrative power of the City is vested in the Mayor, as provided by State law.
2-3-102. Rules and Regulations.
Unless otherwise required by law, the governing body may exercise all administrative powers by resolution. It may prescribe rules and regulations which are not inconsistent with State law for the efficient administration, organization, operation, conduct and business of the City.
2-3-103. Creating Offices.
The governing body may create any office deemed necessary for the government of the City, provide for filling vacancies therein, and may prescribe the powers and duties to be performed by its officers and employees.
2-3-104. Appointive Officers.
The governing body shall appoint a qualified person to serve as City Manager. On or before the first Monday in February following a municipal election, the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, shall appoint a qualified person to each of the offices of City Recorder and City Treasurer. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, shall appoint a qualified person to the office of Finance Director. The City Manager shall appoint or remove other Department Heads (who are identified in the Bountiful City Personnel Policies & Procedures Manual). Those officers shall perform such duties as are required by State law and by City ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation.
6
2-3-105. City Manager
(a) The office of City Manager which has heretofore been created shall continue in force and effect as an office of the City.
(b) The appointment of a person to be known as the City Manager shall be by the governing body.
(c) The City Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the governing body, except that the governing body may employ the Manager for a term not to exceed three years. The term of employment may be renewed at any time. Any person serving as Manager of the municipality under this section may be removed with or without cause by a majority vote of the governing body.
(d) The City Manager shall be at all times under the control and supervision of the Mayor and City Council. Subject to such supervision and control, his powers and duties shall be as follows:
(1) (Subject to Section 2-3-104 concerning the appointment and removal of Department Heads) To make appointments and dismiss from employment all non-elective employees, with the recommendation of the various department heads.
(2) To have direct supervision and responsibility over operations in the City office and the departments of police, inspection, parks, streets, cemetery and other public improvements, water, and including as a part thereof direct supervision of the construction, improvements, repairs and maintenance of streets, sidewalks, alleys, lanes, bridges, and other public highways; of storm sewers, drains, ditches, culverts, streams and water courses, of gutters and curbs; of all public buildings, boulevards parks, playgrounds, squares and other grounds belonging to the City, and to collect and dispose of waste material.
(3) To exercise supervision and have responsibility over operation of the Electrical Light and Power System.
(4) To care for and preserve all machinery, tools, appliances and property belonging to the City.
(5) To oversee the issuing of building permits; the inspection of buildings, plumbing and wiring, and plumbing inspector; to direct and oversee all functions of the Police Department.
(6) To create no liability against the City in excess of $10,000.00 without the sanction of the City Council.
(7) To act as purchasing agent for the City and to approve all claims before presentation to the City Council for payment; to see that all goods purchased by and for the City are received as per contract.
(8) To attend all meetings of the City Council with the right to take part in the discussion but not to vote; to recommend to the City Council for adoption of such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient.
7
(9) To serve as Budget Officer.
(10) To prepare the annual budget (to be construed as a financial estimate only) and keep the City Council advised as to the financial condition and needs of the City.
(11) To notify the Mayor and the City Council of any emergency existing in any department under his supervision.
(12) To perform such other duties as may be required of him by Ordinance or Resolution of the City Council.
2-3-106. Bonds; Salaries.
(a) Bonds shall be filed for all elective and appointive officers as required by State law, and in the amounts determined by resolution of the governing body.
(b) Salaries of elective and appointive officers shall be fixed by ordinance by the governing body.
2-3-107. Fiscal Procedures.
(a) The Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act for Utah Cities, which is set forth in Chapter 6 of Title 10 of the Utah Code, is hereby adopted.
(b) There is hereby created the position of Finance Director to perform the financial duties and responsibilities of the City Recorder, the financial administrative duties prescribed in the Uniform Accounting Manual for Utah Cities, and such other duties as may be assigned by the City Manager. The Finance Director shall be a qualified person, appointed and removed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council, and may not assume the duties of the City Treasurer.
2-3-108. Duties When Mayor and City Manager Absent.
If any of the following City officers are unavailable to exercise the powers and duties of the office they hold, then the officers stated below shall, in the order named, exercise the powers and duties of that office until the incumbent officer shall become available:
(a) Mayor: (1st) the Mayor Pro-Tem; (2nd) the senior-most City Council member (in years on the Council) available.
(b) City Manager: The City Manager shall designate an acting city manager to serve in his/her absence or temporary incapacity, to exercise the powers and duties of the position. During such absence or disability, the City Council may change the designation at any time to another officer of the city to serve until the City Manager shall return, or his/her disability shall cease.
2-3-109. Government Records Access and Management.
(a) The Bountiful City Recorder is designated as the Records Officer under the Utah Government Records Access and Management Act.
8
(b) Appeals of decision as to classification, designation and access shall be made to the City Manager.
2-3-110. Disposition of City’s Real Property.
(a) Before disposing of a significant parcel of real property owned by the City, a public hearing for public comment shall be held by the City Council. Before the City may dispose of a significant parcel of real property, the City shall give notice as required by this section.
(b) Notice of that public hearing shall be given by publication in a locally distributed newspaper at least 14 days prior to the hearing.
(c) “A significant parcel of real property” means any parcel that either (a) is larger than ten acres, or (b) has a current market value of $1,000,000.00 or more.
Chapter 4: Appeal Board
Chapter 4: Appeal Board
2-4-101. Appeal Board
2-4-102. Designation of Appeal Board.
2-4-103. Findings.
2-4-101. Appeal Board.
There is hereby established an Appeal Board, pursuant to Section 10-3-1106, Utah Code Annotated.
2-4-102. Designation of Appeal Board.
The Appeal Board shall consist of an impartial Hearing Officer appointed by the City for the purpose of conducting a hearing and ruling on the appeal. The Hearing Officer shall be a person with experience in law, human resources, mediation or arbitration. The Hearing Officer shall be chosen by the City and all costs and expenses of the hearing and any fees paid to the Hearing Officer shall be the responsibility of the City.
2-4-103. Investigation, Decision and Findings.
(a) The Hearing Officer, upon receipt of the assignment from the City, shall forthwith commence an investigation, take and receive evidence and fully hear and determine the matter which relates to the cause for the discharge, suspension, or transfer. The employee who is the subject of the discharge, suspension or transfer may appear in person and be represented by counsel, have a public hearing, confront the witnesses whose testimony is to be considered, and examine the evidence to be considered by the Hearing Officer.
(b) The Hearing Officer shall uphold the disciplinary process and action imposed by the City if the Hearing Officer finds that the City has presented sufficient evidence to justify the
9
discipline imposed. “Sufficient evidence to justify the discipline imposed” means that the City has presented substantial evidence (more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance) that the proposed transfer, suspension or termination is justified under the City’s adopted personnel policies and procedures.
(c) If the Hearing Officer overturns the employee disciplinary action because there is no sufficient evidence to justify the discipline imposed:
(1) If the employee is completely exonerated, he/she shall be reinstated without any loss of pay associated with the disciplinary action, and the disciplinary action shall be removed from the employee’s personnel file;
(2) If the employee is reinstated but the Hearing Officer determines that a lesser disciplinary action is appropriate under the circumstances, the Hearing Officer may reduce the discipline to that lesser action. Such lesser actions may include, but are not limited to, demotion rather than termination, or suspension without pay for a period of time.
(d) The Appeal Board shall adopt written findings in support of its actions.
Chapter 5: Procurement
2-5-101. Scope.
2-5-102. Purchases.
2-5-103. Formal Competitive Bidding.
2-5-104. Performance Bond.
2-5-105. Rejection of Bids or Price Solicitation.
2-5-106. Lowest Responsive Responsible Bidder
2-5-101. Scope.
(a) No purchases shall be made and no encumbrances shall be incurred for the benefit of the City, except as provided in this Chapter.
(b) No purchase shall be made and no encumbrance shall be incurred unless funds sufficient to cover the purchase or encumbrance have been budgeted and are available and the purchase is approved by the appropriate City officials as herein provided.
(c) The City Manager or his designee shall present to the governing body for review all purchases made and contracts awarded pursuant to this Chapter.
(d) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), whenever any purchase or encumbrance is made with State or Federal funds and the applicable State or Federal law or regulations are in conflict with this Chapter to the extent that following the provisions of this Chapter would jeopardize the use of those or future State or Federal funds, such conflicting provisions of this Chapter shall not apply and the City shall follow the procedure required by the State or Federal law or regulation.
2-5-102. Purchases
10
(a) Except as otherwise provided, all purchases of supplies, materials, equipment, and all contracts for services awarded shall be made as follows:
(1) Amounts to be paid by the City of less than $20,000.00, may be approved by the respective department heads or designees authorized by the City Manager or department heads.
(2) Amounts to be paid by the City of $20,000.00 or more, must be approved by the City Council. However, advance approval is not required for emergency expenditures or for actions which require prompt execution to avoid financial harm or loss, or to save cost, as determined by the City Manager. The City Council shall be notified of any such purchases as soon as reasonably possible. Ongoing, routine expenses exceeding $20,000.00 such as utilities, gasoline, natural gas, or electrical energy, which may be approved by the City Manager, department heads, or their designees.
(3) Amounts to be paid by the City of $5,000.00 or more, shall be awarded only after comparative price quotations have been solicited and received.
(b) In order to promote overall economy and the best use for the purposes intended, each department head shall be responsible for assuring that all purchases made and contracts for services awarded by his/her department shall obtain the desired goods and services for the lowest possible price.
(c) Change orders to Council-approved bid awards and contracts must be approved by the City Council if the change is both 10% or more of the original bid award and that change also exceeds $50,000 on construction contracts or $20,000 on other projects or contracts. Change orders involving less than these amounts may be approved by the City Manager when the change is deemed to be in the best interests of the City.
2-5-103. Formal Competitive Bidding
Formal competitive bidding shall be conducted as required by State law.
2-5-104. Performance Bond
A performance bond in an amount as shall be reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the City may be required. The form and amount of said bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids or soliciting price quotation.
2-5-105. Rejection of Bids or Price Solicitation.
Any and all bids or price quotations may be rejected without cause and the City may re-invite bids or re-solicit price quotations.
2-5-106. Lowest Responsive Responsible Bidder
(a) With respect to bids awarded by Bountiful City, the “lowest responsive responsible bidder” shall meet the following criteria:
(1) The bidder must have submitted a bid in compliance with the invitation to bid and within the
11
requirements of the plans and specifications for the project;
(2) The bidder must:
(a) demonstrate that it has the financial strength to do the project;
(b) be appropriately licensed to do the job;
(c) be insurable and have the ability to acquire required bonding and insurance;
(d) have the requisite ability, expertise, equipment, personnel, capacity and skill to do the required work, both in quality and quantity, and in a timely manner;
(e) have a satisfactory record of past performance in similar projects;
(f) have, and have a reputation for, integrity, reliability and good faith in performing work, without a record of contract default, malfeasance, late performance, relationship difficulties or other negative work history;
(g) have a history of cooperation with government officials or other companies, entities or people who have utilized the bidder’s services in the past; and
(h) have a history of good public relations, and courteous and professional treatment of the citizens with whom it deals;
(i) meet such other criteria as may reasonably be required under the circumstances of the project and the history and qualifications of the bidder.
(3) The bidder must furnish a bid bond or equivalent in money as a condition to the award of the contract.
(4) The bidder must furnish required payment and performance bonds.
(b) The lowest responsive responsible bidder may or may not be the lowest bidder. The staff and City Council will exercise reasonable discretion in evaluating these criteria to determine which is the lowest responsive responsible bidder. Informalities and minor discrepancies may be waived by the City Council. Inability, refusal or delay by the bidder in providing proof of meeting these criteria may, at the discretion of the City Council, disqualify a bidder from consideration. The City reserves the right to reject any and all bids.
2-5-107. Personal Use Expenditures.
(a) City officers and employees are granted municipal authority, in the interest of economy and efficiency, to expend public funds or incur indebtedness on behalf of the City for travel -and-training personal use expenditures provided that the officer or employee reimburse the City in full for any expenditure or indebtedness within fourteen (14) days from the date of the expenditure or the date the indebtedness was incurred.
(b) If the City determines that an officer or employee has intentionally made a personal use expenditure in violation of Utah Code 11-57-103 and this Subsection (a); the City shall provide written notice to the officer or employee determined to be in violation and:
(1) require the officer or employee to deposit the amount of the personal use expenditure into the fund or account from which:
(a) the personal use expenditure was disbursed; or
(b) be appropriately licensed to do the job;
12
(2) the officer or employee to remit an administrative penalty in the amount equal to 50% of the personal use expenditure to the City which the City shall deposit into the operating fund of the City.
(4) The bidder must furnish required payment and performance bonds.
(c) Any officer or employee of the City who has been found by the City to have made a personal use expenditure in violation of this Subsection (2) may appeal the finding of the City. A Request for Review before the City Manager may be requested within ten (10) business days after the City has provided written notice as described in Subsection (2). The Request for Review must be submitted to the City Manager in writing. All related documentation must be submitted with the Request. The Requesting party has the burden of proof. The standard of review shall be preponderance of the evidence.
(d) Upon receipt of the Request for Review, the City Manager shall review the Request, including all information submitted with the Request, as well as any relevant City records.
(e) The City Manager shall determine to uphold or overturn the City’s original finding and provide written notice of decision to the requesting party within fourteen (14) days.
Chapter 6: Constitutional Taking Guidelines.
2-6-101. Purpose.
2-6-102. Definition of “Constitutional Taking.”
2-6-103. Policy Considerations.
2-6-104. Appeal.
2-6-105. City Council Hearing.
2-6-101. Purpose.
These guidelines are adopted in this Act are established pursuant to the requirements of §63-90a-3. They are only advisory, and shall not be construed to expand or limit the scope of the City's liability in any claim for a constitutional taking, or to impose any liability upon the City for failure to comply with the guidelines. This chapter does not apply to formal eminent domain proceedings.
2-6-102. Definition of "Constitutional Taking."
The term "constitutional taking" means a governmental action that results in a taking of private property so that compensation to the owner of the property is required by:
(i) the Fifth or Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution of the United States; or (ii) Utah Constitution Article I, Section 22.
2-6-103. Policy Considerations.
It is the policy of the City to carefully consider any matter involving constitutional taking claims, and to afford citizens the right to state their claims in an inexpensive and expeditious manner. It is the intent of this ordinance to preserve the ability of the City to lawfully regulate real property and fulfill its other duties and functions, while at the same time protecting the rights of property owners.
13
2-6-104. Appeal.
(a) Any owner of private property whose interest in the property is subject to a physical taking or exaction by a political subdivision may appeal the political subdivision's decision within 30 days after the decision is made.
(b) The City Council, or an individual or body designated by it, shall hear and approve or reject the appeal within 14 days after it is submitted.
(c) If the legislative body of the political subdivision fails to hear and decide the appeal within 14 days, the decision is presumed to be approved.
(d) The appeal must be made in writing, and filed with the City Recorder 30 days of the decision appealed from.
(e) The appeal must contain the following information:
(1) the name, address and telephone number of the appellant;
(2) a description of the real property involved;
(3) a description of the appellant’s interest in the property, and the names
and addresses of any joint owners;
(4) a detailed description of the grounds for the claim that there has been a constitutional taking;
(5) evidence and documentation as to the value of the property taken, including the date the property was acquired. This should include any evidence of the value of the property at the time of the alleged constitutional taking and after the alleged constitutional taking, and any appraisal(s) of the property within three years prior to the date of the appeal;
(6) information from a title policy or other source showing all recorded liens or encumbrances upon the property;
(7) a statement of whether the property has been for sale during the last three years, and if so, the price asked;
(8) any other information reasonably requested by the City Council to assist in making a determination in the claim of a constitutional taking.
2-6-105. City Council Hearing.
The City Council shall review the facts and information presented by the appellant to determine whether the protested action of the City is a constitutional taking. In doing so, they shall consider:
(a) Whether a legitimate governmental interest exists for the action taken by the City.
14
(b) Whether the physical taking or exaction of the private real property bears an essential nexus to that legitimate governmental interest.
(c) Whether the property and exaction taken is roughly proportionate and reasonably related, on an individual property basis, both in nature and extent, to the impact caused by the activities that are the subject of the decision being reviewed.
(d) Other considerations required by applicable law.
Chapter 7: Self Insurance
2-7-101. Election to Self Insure.
2-7-102. Liability Coverage under Self Insurance.
2-7-103. Uninsured / Underinsured Motorist Coverage.
2-7-101. Election to Self-Insure.
Bountiful City has for many years elected, and continues to choose, to manage its liability risks by a combination of self-insurance and excess commercial insurance, as permitted in §63-30d-801 of the Utah Code.
2-7-102. Liability Coverage under Self-Insurance.
With respect to motor vehicles owned or operated by Bountiful City, the liability coverage provided by this self-insurance is the minimum required by §31A-22-304 of the Utah Code or other applicable law.
2-7-103. Uninsured / Underinsured Motorist Coverage.
As permitted by §31A-22-305 of the Utah Code, Bountiful City elects not to provide uninsured / underinsured motorist coverage for Bountiful City-owned vehicles, as vehicles operated by City employees in the course of business are covered by the City’s workers compensation program. Because there is no uninsured or underinsured motorist coverage, there is no process for filing such claims.
Chapter 8: Appeals to Administrative Law Judge
2-8-101. Appeals
(a) Appeals provided for in this Bountiful City Code shall be heard by the Bountiful City Administrative Law Judge, unless otherwise expressly stated.
(b) All appeals must be filed with the Bountiful City Recorder within the applicable time period, and must be accompanied by a filing fee of $250.00. Appeals must be in writing, dated and signed, and at a minimum state the name, address and phone number of the person or entity making the appeal, the decision being appealed, and a summary of the basis of the appeal.
2-8-102. Administrative Law Judge
15
The Bountiful City Council shall appoint a qualified individual to serve as the Bountiful City Administrative Law Judge, who shall serve for a period of two years. The Judge may be removed from office by a vote of the City Council.
2-8-103. Hearings
(a) The Administrative Law Judge shall act in a quasi-judicial manner, holding an informal hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given by mailing it to the appellant at the address given in the written appeal at least eight days prior to the hearing.
(b) At the hearing formal rules of procedure, discovery and evidence shall not apply. The City shall have the burden of proof, which shall be established by a preponderance of the evidence. The appellant may present his/her case or may be represented by an attorney.
(b) The Judge may uphold the previous decision, overturn it, or make a new decision as appropriate under the circumstances. The Judge shall issue a written decision including findings, which is effective on the date of issuance and is a final decision of the City’s administrative process.
(c) A person who fails to appear at a hearing shall be deemed to have waived all rights in connection with the hearing, including the right to appeal. Providing that proper notice has been given, a decision may then be entered against the appellant based upon the failure to appear.
16
Title 3
City Commissions
Chapter 1: Bountiful Light and Power Commission
Chapter 2: Bountiful Historic Preservation Commission
Chapter 3: Planning Commission and Administrative Committee
Chapter 4: Bountiful Community Service Council
Chapter 1: Bountiful Light and Power Commission
3-1-101. Commission, Membership and Appointment.
3-1-102. Duty and Powers.
3-1-103. Term, Vacancies, Qualifications, Removal.
3-1-104. Rules.
3-1-105. Salary.
3-1-106. Rates.
3-1-101. Commission, Membership and Appointment.
There is hereby established the "Bountiful Light and Power Commission." It shall be composed of seven members, all of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council and one of whom shall be a member of the City Council.
3-1-102. Duty and Powers.
(a) The determining of the general policy and administration of the Electrical Light and Power Department is vested in the City Council.
(b) The extent of the authority and discretion to be vested in the Director of the Electrical Light and Power Department shall be determined by the City Council.
(c) It is hereby declared as policy that matters pertaining to the general policy of the Electrical Light and Power Department be referred to the Bountiful Light and Power Commission for its advice, counsel, and recommendations.
3-1-103. Term, Vacancies, Qualifications, Removal.
(a) Term. Each appointed member shall serve for a term of four (4) years, except that term of the member who is likewise a member of the City Council shall be as determined by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.
(b) Vacancies. Vacancies occurring due to death, disability, resignation or removal, shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. The term of such appointment shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term.
(c) Qualifications. The members of the Power Commission shall be residents of the city and shall be selected without regard to political considerations and solely on the basis of qualification for the position.
17
(d) Removals. Any member of the Power Commission may be removed, with or without cause, by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.
3-1-104. Rules.
The Commission shall formulate its own rules for selection of a chairman, the time, place and manner of calling the meetings and other procedural matters.
3-1-105. Salary.
Each member of the Power Commission shall receive compensation as fixed by resolution of the City Council.
3-1-106. Rates.
Electrical rates shall be set by the City Council of Bountiful, Utah by resolution.
Chapter 2: Bountiful Historic Preservation Commission
3-2-101. Historic Preservation Ordinance.
3-2-102. Purpose.
3-2-103. Historic Preservation Commission.
3-2-104. Powers and Duties of Commission.
3-2-105. Meetings and Notification.
3-2-106. Survey and Inventory.
3-2-107. Demolition - Notification
3-2-108. Enforcement and Penalties.
3-2-101. Historic Preservation Ordinance.
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Historic Preservation Ordinance".
3-2-102. Purpose.
Recognizing that the historical heritage of this City is among its most valued and important assets, it is the intent of this Ordinance to provide for the preservation, protection and enhancement of its history. This preservation, protection and enhancement shall include, but not be limited to, the written and visual history of Bountiful, its early settlers and its historic sites, the planning for and celebration of important historical events relating to Bountiful's history, the education of all segments of the community so that Bountiful's history can be fully and properly appreciated, and the establishment of a repository for items, artifacts, and other materials which have historical significance to the City of Bountiful. The purpose of the Ordinance shall also be to establish a Committee which shall recommend to the City Council necessary and desirable protection of historic areas and sites within the community.
3-2-103. Historic Preservation Commission.
(a) Commission, Members and Appointment. There is created a Historic Preservation Commission, which shall be an advisory body of and shall report to the City Council of Bountiful. The Commission
18
shall be composed of six (6) members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. One of the members shall always be the Mayor, who shall be an ex-officio member; one (1) of the members shall always be a member of the City Council; two (2) members shall be professional members from the disciplines of history, archaeology, planning, urban planning, American studies, American civilization, cultural geography, cultural anthropology, to the extent that such professionals are available in the City, and two (2) members shall be residents at large. With exception of the Mayor and City Council Member on the Commission, two or more members of the Commission shall not serve on the same board, commission or other leadership position within another organization while serving on the Commission.
(b) Terms. The term of each member of the Commission, with the exception of the Mayor and City Council member on the Commission, shall be for four (4) years. Initial members of the Commission shall be staggered as determined by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.
(c) Advisory Body. The Historic Preservation Commission shall be an advisory body of, and shall report to, the City Council.
3-2-104. Powers and Duties of the Commission.
The Commission shall have the following duties:
(a) Conduct research and collect information on the history of Bountiful, including the establishment of a repository for important documents, artifacts and other items of historical significance.
(b) Provide a written history of the City of Bountiful, as well as an historical program which outlines Bountiful's history for various age groups in the community. This may include, but not be limited to, the use of written summaries of history, visual exhibits, video tapes, displays, and other media.
(c) Increase the awareness of Bountiful's history through the commemoration of historical events.
(d) Designate entries on the Utah State Register of Historic and Cultural sites and recommend to the State Historic Preservation Officer nominations for the National Register of Historic places, utilizing the criteria for evaluation from the National Register.
(e) Attend at least one informational or educational meeting each year, sponsored by the State Historic Preservation Office, pertaining to the work and functions of the Commission or to historic preservation.
(f) Submit an annual report of the activities of the Commission to the State Historic Preservation Office and to the City Council.
(g) Review all proposed National Register nominations for properties within the boundaries of the City.
(h) Conduct or cause to be conducted a survey of cultural resources in the City which in form and content will be compatible to the Utah inventory of historic and archaeological sites.
(i) Act in an advisory role to other officials and departments of the City regarding the protection of local cultural resources and shall act as a liaison on behalf of the City to individuals and organizations within the City concerned with historic preservation.
19
3-2-105. Meetings and Notification.
(a) The Commission shall provide for adequate public participation in the historic preservation programs, including the process of recommending properties for nomination to the National Register.
(b) Commission meetings shall occur at regular intervals, and at least twice a year.
(c) Minutes of all decisions, actions of the Commission, including the reasons for making those decisions shall be kept on file and available for public inspection.
(d) Rules of procedure adopted by the Commission shall be available for public inspection.
3-2-106. Survey and Inventory.
(a) The Commission shall initiate or continue an approved process to identify historic properties within the City.
(b) A detailed inventory of the designated districts, sites, and/or structures within Bountiful City shall be maintained.
(c) The inventory material shall be compatible with the Utah state-wide inventory of historic and archaeological sites and shall be made accessible to the public except where restrictions have been made for archaeological sites.
(d) The inventory shall be updated periodically and made available through duplicates at the State Historic Preservation Office and shall be able to be readily integrated into State-wide comprehensive historic preservation planning and other appropriate planning process.
3-2-107. Demolition - Notification
If a historic site is to be demolished or extensively altered, efforts will be made to document its physical appearance before that action takes place.
(a) The City will delay issuing a demolition permit for a maximum of one week and will notify a member of the Historic Preservation Commission, which will take responsibility for the documentation.
(b) Documentation will include, at minimum, exterior photographs (both black-and-white and color) of all elevations of the historic building. When possible, both exterior and interior measurements of the building will be made in order to provide an accurate floor-plan drawing of the building.
(c) The demolition permit may be issued after one week of the initial application whether or not the Commission has documented the building. The permit may be issued earlier if the Commission completes its documentation before the one-week deadline.
(d) The documentation will be kept in the City’s files, which are open to the public.
3-2-109. Enforcement and Penalties.
It is unlawful to:
20
(a) Enter on City lands owned or controlled by the City or which have been designated as landmarks pursuant to this Ordinance for the purpose of appropriating, injuring or destroying a specimen without a permit from the Division of State history or the City.
(b) To appropriate, injure or destroy any site or specimen situated on lands or controlled by the City, or which have been designated as landmarks pursuant to this Ordinance.
(c) To reproduce, re-work or forge any specimen or make any object, whether copied or not, or falsely label, describe, identify or offer for sale or exchange any object with intent to represent the same as an original and genuine specimen, nor shall any person offer for sale or exchange any object with knowledge that it was collected or excavated in violation of this Ordinance.
Chapter 3: Planning Commission and Administrative Committee
3-3-101. Compensation.
Each member of the Bountiful Planning Commission paid $50.00 per meeting for meetings actually attended by that member. Each non-employee member of the Administrative Committee shall be paid $25.00 per meeting for meetings actually attended by that member.
Chapter 4: Bountiful Community Service Council
3-4-101. Community Council Creation and Membership.
There is hereby established the “Bountiful Community Service Council,”which shall be composed of no less than five (5) and no more than thirteen (13) members, all of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. One Community Council member shall be a member of the City Council.
3-4-102. Duty and Powers.
(a) The general policy and administration of the Community Council is vested in the City Council.
(b) The Community Council shall be an advisory body of, and report to, the City Council.
(c) It is the intent of the City Council that the Community Council shall render services to the community for the improvement of the citizens’ health, safety, education and welfare. These services may be assigned by the City Council or may be self-initiated by the Community Council itself, subject to such review as may be deemed appropriate by the City Council.
3-4-103. Qualifications, Term, Vacancies, and Removal.
(a) Qualifications. The members of the Bountiful Community Service Council shall be residents of the City who shall be selected without regard to political and/or religious considerations.
(b) Term. Each member shall serve a term of four years, except for the City Council member, who
21
shall serve so long as appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. Any member appointed to fill a vacancy which occurs for any reason shall serve the remainder of the unexpired term of the vacating member.
(c) Removal. Any member of the Community Council may be removed, with or without cause, by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council.
3-4-104. Rules of the Bountiful Community Service Council.
The Community Council shall formulate its own rules for the selection of a Director, the time, place and manner of calling meetings, and other procedural matters.
22
Title 4
Building Regulations
Chapter 1: General Provisions
Chapter 2: Uniform Codes
Chapter 3: Reserved
Chapter 4: Reserved
Chapter 3: Miscellaneous Provisions
Chapter 1: General Provisions
4-1-101. Enforcing Agency - Bountiful.
4-1-102. Penalty.
4-1-103. Inspections not an Assumption of Liability.
4-1-101. Enforcing Agency - Bountiful.
In the building and trade codes which are adopted in this Title, any reference to a governmental entity as the enacting and enforcing agency, is hereby amended to substitute Bountiful, Utah, as the enacting and enforcing agency.
4-1-102. Penalty.
(a) Any violation of the provisions of the trade codes adopted in this Title, or the provisions of this Title, is a class C misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided by State law for such an offense.
(b) Any building or structure not in compliance with any of the provisions of the trade codes adopted in this Title is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated by either criminal or civil action.
(c) Occupancy or use of any building or structure constituting a public nuisance under subsection (b) is a class C misdemeanor, and may be prevented or discontinued by civil injunction or writ, or by any other appropriate remedy available under the law, or by criminal prosecution.
(d) It is a class C misdemeanor to work on any building, structure, landscaping, excavation or other construction project after a Stop Work Order has been issued under the International Residential Code or any other Code adopted by the City or the State of Utah.
4-1-103. Inspections not an Assumption of Liability.
The adoption by the City of uniform codes shall not be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of any owner, contractor, sub-contractor, builder, or any other person to comply with such codes. Any inspection by, or any inspection certificate issued by, the City is not an assumption by the City or any employee of any liability by reason of the inspection or certificate.
23
Chapter 2: Uniform Codes.
4-2-101. Construction Codes.
4-2-102. Uniform Housing Code.
4-2-103. Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
4-2-104. International Existing Building Code.
4-2-105. Uniform Administrative Code.
4-2-106. Uniform Code for Building Conservation.
4-2-107. National Electrical Code.
4-2-108. International Fire Code.
4-2-101. Construction Codes
Bountiful City recognizes and adopts the "State Construction Code" as provided in Section 15A-2-101 et seq of the Utah Code, and the individual codes as provided therein, as may be adopted from time to time by the State of Utah.
4-2-102. Uniform Housing Code.
The 1997 edition of the Uniform Housing Code as published and copyrighted by the International Conference of Building Officials together with the revisions, additions and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Chapter as though fully set forth herein.
4-2-103. Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
The 1997 edition of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings as published and copyrighted by the International Conference of Building Officials, together with the revisions, additions and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Chapter as though fully set forth herein.
4-2-104. International Existing Building Code.
The 2012 edition of the International Existing Building Code as published and copyrighted by the International Conference of Building Officials, together with the revisions, additions and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Chapter as though fully set forth herein.
4-2-105. Uniform Administrative Code.
The 1997 edition of the Uniform Administrative Code as published and copyrighted by the International Conference of Building Officials, together with the revisions, additions and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Chapter as though fully set forth herein with the exception of Table No. 3-G "Grading Plan Review Fees" and Table No. 3-H "Grading Permit Fees" which are not adopted and shall not be used in administration of this Code.
4-2-106. Uniform Code for Building Conservation.
The1997 edition of the Uniform Code for Building Conservation, as published and copyrighted by the International Conference of Building Officials, together with the revisions, additions and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Chapter as though fully set forth herein.
24
4-2-107. National Electrical Code.
(a) Whenever a permit for electrical related construction is required by the codes, as adopted in this Title, the fees for such permits shall be as outlined in the Fee Schedule as set forth in the Uniform Administrative Code.
(b) The Building Official shall perform all functions of electrical inspection and shall, among other things, inspect and supervise the construction, installation and repairs of all electric light or power wiring, fixtures, appliances or apparatus installed within the limits of the City, and shall require that they conform to the provisions of the National Electrical Code. Wiring, fixtures and apparatus heretofore installed need not necessarily be made to conform strictly to all the provisions of said Code but said Building Official shall require the correction of such defects as he deems actually dangerous to life or property. The Building Official shall follow as to electrical work the procedures relating to enforcement and safety that are established by the uniform Building Code.
(c) No alterations or additions shall be made in existing wiring, nor shall any wiring be installed or any apparatus which generates, transmits, transform or utilizes any electricity, without first obtaining a permit therefor, except under minor repair work such as repairing flush and snap switches, replacing fuses, changing lamp sockets and receptacles, taping bar joints and repairing drop cords, Application for such permit, describing such work, shall be made in writing and shall conform as far as practicable to the requirements set forth in the Building Code as to extent of information disclosed. This Section shall not apply to installations in power houses and substations belonging to electric light companies. No permit shall be issued to any applicant for a permit during the time that he fails to correct any defective electrical installations after he has been duly notified to correct any defective electrical installations by the Chief of Division of Electrical Inspection.
(d) Electrical installation for signs, equipment or other facilities which create electrical disturbances that cause interference with normal radio or television receptions beyond the immediate vicinity of such electrical installations are hereby declared to be a nuisance. The owners or operators thereof shall so install and maintain such installations as to avoid or eliminate such interference, using all known means and devices for such purposes, such as proper grounding, connections, condensers, resistors and live chokes. The Building Official shall withdraw approval of any electrical installation causing the above disturbance and is hereby authorized to take all steps necessary for the abatement of such nuisances.
(e) In order to protect the electrical service supply conductors from damage or severance, all service supply conductors shall be installed in conduit from the meter pedestal to the main disconnect. For residential service the conductor wires shall be run in a 2 inch P.V.C. Schedule 40 or 80 conduit and shall be buried 18 inches below finish grade. The type of material and the size of conduit for other services shall be as required by the City Council.
25
4-2-108. International Fire Code.
(a) Adoption of International Fire Code. The International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, as adopted and amended by the State of Utah, is hereby adopted as the Bountiful City Fire Code, including Appendices A, B, C and D. Section 109.3 thereof is amended to read as follows: Any person convicted of violating any provisions of the IFC shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and such violations shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a term not longer than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(b) South Davis Metro Fire Agency. Bountiful City is a participant member of the South Davis Metro Fire Agency (“the Agency”), a separate legal entity duly organized and created under the laws of Utah by an Interlocal Cooperation Agreement (“the Interlocal Agreement”) entered into by the participating entities of the Agency. The Agency shall provide all fire, emergency medical, and other emergency first responder services for the City in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Interlocal Agreement entered into by the participating entities, as amended.
(c) Delegation of Authority. Bountiful City hereby delegates all power and responsibility for fire suppression, prevention, investigation, enforcement, emergency medical, and other emergency and fire responder services within the jurisdiction of the City to the Agency, and hereby recognizes the Agency as the governmental and political subdivision for such purposes consistent and in accordance with the Interlocal Agreement and Fire Code.
(d) Fire Code Official. The Agency shall service as the Fire Code Official for Bountiful City, as more particularly described in Section 104 of the Fire Code.
(e) Fire Board of Appeals. The Fire Board of Appeals as created and maintained by the Agency shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made the Agency’s Fire Code Official relative to the application and interpretation of the Fire Code within the jurisdiction of Bountiful City.
(f) Appeals. Any person adversely affected by an order, decision or determination made by the Fire Code Official in the application and interpretation of the Fire Code within the jurisdiction of Bountiful City may appeal such order, decision or determination to the Agency’s Fire Board of Appeals in accordance with the Agency’s rules and regulations regarding the same, and in accordance with applicable provisions of the Fire Code.
Chapter 3: Reserved
Chapter 4: Reserved
Chapter 5: Miscellaneous Provisions
4-5-101. Building Permit Fees.
4-5-102. Street Damage - Cash Deposit.
4-5-103. Demolition of Historic Sites – Notification.
4-5-104. Reserved.
4-5-105. Construction Site Cleanliness.
4-5-106. Construction without Required Permits Unlawful.
4-5-107. Protection of Public Water Supply.
26
4-5-108. Fire Hazardous Roof Coverings.
4-5-109. Retaining Walls.
4-5-101. Building Permit Fees
Whenever a building permit is required by the codes which are adopted in this Chapter, permit fees shall be as outlined in the fee schedules provided in the Uniform Administrative Code, with the exception that the plan review fees will be charged in accordance with State law. The valuation of the building construction shall be determined by the current cost per square foot of floor area of such construction as established by the International Conference of Building Officials and as set forth from time to time in their bi-monthly publication entitled "Building Standards".
4-5-102. Street Damage - Cash Deposit.
(a) Deposit Requirement.
In order to guarantee the replacement of street, sidewalk, driveway approach, curb and gutter improvements along the frontage of the property where a building permit is issued, and on adjacent properties, before construction begins the permittee shall deposit a cash sum with the City in the amount set by the Bountiful City Council. Other deposit amounts may be required in the reasonable discretion of the City Engineer upon a finding that an unusual situation exists and that a different amount is appropriate. This deposit requirement applies to residential, multifamily, institutional and commercial properties and uses, and to permits issued for new construction, remodeling of or additions to existing structures, and to new outbuildings (garages, sheds, etc.). To verify the condition of the street improvements prior to construction, the permittee shall submit to the City Engineer photographs or video showing the improvements and any condition issues in such detail as to verify any preexisting problems.
(b) Inspection and Deposits in New Construction.
(1) In building permits granted for new construction the deposit described in paragraph (a) shall be held by the City for a period of 12 months after the construction is granted final approval. At the end of the 12 months, the City will inspect these items for damage. Any improvements which are in a condition of damage, whether that damage occurred during construction or in the 12 months after construction, and regardless of the cause, shall be repaired or replaced as necessary by the property owner, in accordance with the city ordinances and specifications. If the 12 months have passed but the inspection or reinspection cannot be conducted because of weather conditions such as snow, the deposit shall continue to be held until the weather permits an inspection to take place. Upon passing inspection or reinspection, the cash deposit will be returned to the current owner of the property.
(2) If the improvement repairs required by the City Engineer are not completed within three months after notice to the property owner of the inspection described in paragraph (b) and a description of the repairs needed, the City may make, or have made, the repairs necessary, and may use part or all of the deposit necessary to pay the costs of those repairs. Any amount remaining shall be refunded to the property owner, plus accrued interest as provided by law. Any deficiency unpaid by the deposit is the responsibility of the property owner, which may, if necessary, be collected by the City from the property owner by civil action.
27
(c) Inspection and Deposits for Remodeling and Additions.
In building permits granted for remodeling of existing buildings, additions, outbuildings, etc., when all other site improvements, including landscaping, have been installed, the provisions of subsection (b) apply. However, the sidewalk deposit shall not be held for 12 months after completion.
4-5-103. Demolition of Historic Sites – Notification.
If a historic site is to be demolished or extensively altered, the City may delay issuing a demolition permit for a maximum of one week in order for the site to be appropriately documented. Documentation may include exterior photographs of all elevations of the historic building, the taking of exterior and interior measurements of the building, and the making of floor plan drawings. The demolition permit may be issued after one week of the initial application whether or not the building has been documented the building, and the permit may be issued earlier if the documentation is completed before the one-week deadline.
4-5-104. Reserved.
4-5-105. Construction Site Cleanliness.
(a) The general contractor, or owner-builder if there is no general contractor, of every residential or commercial building construction site, shall:
(1) maintain on the premises of each building lot, and not on a street, sidewalk or other public property, from the first day through the last day of construction:
(A) a portable toilet facility meeting the health requirements of the law; and
(B) a commercial trash bin, which shall be used for refuse on the site, and which shall be emptied when full.
(2) keep the construction site in a condition of cleanliness and healthfulness by:
(A) preventing the accumulation of garbage or refuse, including boards, bricks, stones, etc., into disorderly stacks or piles;
(B) maintaining the premises in such a manner that mice, rats, rodents, or other animals do not inhabit the premises;
(C) preventing garbage, refuse, dirt, rocks or building materials from encroaching onto sidewalks, streets, public property, or the private property of neighbors without the written consent of the owner; and
(D) preventing the blowing of paper or other items onto neighboring properties.
28
(b) Exceptions to the requirements of a portable toilet facility and a commercial trash bin may be granted in writing by the City Building Inspector upon a showing that such facilities are otherwise reasonably accessible.
(c) Violation of this ordinance is a class C misdemeanor.
4-5-106. Construction Without Required Permits Unlawful.
(a) It is unlawful to erect or construct a building or structure, to do any kind of excavation work, or to disturb any land with a slope of 30% or greater, without first obtaining any and all permit(s) and/or approvals required by City or State law.
(b) The doing of any act described in subsection (a) without required permits and/or approvals is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and also a public nuisance, which may be abated by civil or criminal action, and may be prevented or discontinued by civil injunction or writ, or by any other appropriate remedy available under the law.
4-5-107. Protection of Public Water Supply.
(a) It is the intent of this ordinance to protect the public potable water supply from contamination by isolating within a water customer’s distribution system any contaminants or pollution from their own system which could backflow or back siphon into the public water supply.
(b) It is the responsibility of the Water Department and the Engineering Department to monitor compliance with this ordnance, and to report violations to the police
(c) It is the responsibility of each water customer to purchase and maintain any backflow prevention device or assembly required by this ordinance or the Uniform Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State of Utah. The type of backflow prevention device or assembly shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists, as defined in the Uniform Plumbing Code.
(d) All backflow prevention devices and/or assemblies shall be tested within ten days of initial installation and yearly thereafter by a certified tester as required by the Uniform Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State of Utah, at the responsibility and expense of the owner.
(e) All connections of the Bountiful City water system shall in all respects conform to the Uniform Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State of Utah, the Utah State Public Drinking Water Regulations, and the ordinances of Bountiful City.
(f) All presently installed assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this ordinance but were approved at the time of installation and have been properly maintained may be left in service in accordance with provisions of this ordinance, so long as such action does not constitute a threat to the integrity or wholesomeness of the public water supply. Any determination of whether a threat exists shall be made solely by the City. In the event that it is determined that an existing system constitutes a threat to the integrity or wholesomeness of the public water supply, the water customer shall, at his expense, replace or repair the defective assembly in complication with the Uniform Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State of Utah.
29
(g) The water system of every customer of the City’s public water supply shall be open to inspection at treasonable times by authorized City personnel to determine compliance and whether any hazard exists.
(h) Any connection to the City water supply which actually allows or may allow backflow from any other source is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be summarily abated.
4-5-108. Fire Hazardous Roof Coverings.
(a) All building construction of structures containing roofs in areas of the City lying north of Mill Creek and east of 1500 East Street, and the north/south extension thereof, and also lying south of Mill Creek and East of Bountiful Boulevard, shall be constructed with either a Class A or a Class B roof as defined in Section 1505 of the International Building Code.
(b) All building construction containing roofs in all other areas of the City, except as provided in subsection (a) above, where the new construction contains a density of more than 4 dwelling units per acre and in all commercial zones of the City, the building structures shall be constructed with either a Class A, Class B, or Class C roof, as defined by the International Building Code.
4-5-109. Retaining Walls.
(a) No retaining wall which is four feet tall or taller shall be constructed without a permit issued by the City.
(1) This requirement includes all conventional cantilever concrete retaining walls as well as non- conventional wall systems such as reinforced earth structures, rock retained slopes, etc.
(2) Wall systems four feet tall or taller which are based on organic material such as treated lumber or railroad ties are not allowed.
(b) It is unlawful for any property owner to construct, or to have constructed by another, any retaining wall four feet tall or taller without first obtaining a permit from the City, or to construct or have constructed a wall in violation of subsection (1)(b).
(c) It is unlawful for any contractor or other person to construct any retaining wall four feet tall or taller for which a permit has not been issued by the City, or to construct a wall in violation of subsection (1)(b).
(d) To obtain a permit for a retaining wall, the following shall be submitted to the Bountiful City Engineering Department for review:
(1) An engineered wall design stamped by a civil, structural or geotechnical engineer registered to perform work in the State of Utah. The design shall be specific to the site and not a generic standard design.
(2) A site plan showing the extent of cuts or fills that will be included with the wall. The City may in its discretion require that the site plan be certified by a registered surveyor or engineer.
(e) All retaining walls four feet tall or taller must be inspected by the City. Prior to final inspection of the wall by the City, the contractor shall submit to the Bountiful City Building Official a complete set of
30
inspection reports by the engineer of record certifying that the engineer has personally inspected all aspects and phases of the wall’s construction.
(f) Retaining wall permits are subject to the same bonding requirement as any other building permit. Cash bonds will be returned when the work is satisfactorily completed and inspected, the engineer’s certifications have been submitted and reviewed, and any damaged public improvements (sidewalk, curb, gutter, etc.) have been repaired.
31
Title 5
Business Regulations
Chapter 1: General Licensing Provisions
Chapter 2: Pawn Brokers
Chapter 3: Public Dance Halls
Chapter 4: Amusement Devices
Chapter 5: Door to Door Soliciting Prohibited Where Notice Provided.
Chapter 6: Sound Amplification and Public Address Systems
Chapter 7: Businesses Selling Alcohol
Chapter 8: Massage Therapy
Chapter 9: Professional Dancers
Chapter 10: Fireworks
Chapter 11: Horse Drawn Carriages
Chapter 12: Temporary Licenses
Chapter 13: Going Out of Business Sales
Chapter 14: Businesses Leasing Premises to Other Businesses
Chapter 15: Sexually Oriented Businesses
Chapter 16: Ice Cream Vendors
Chapter 17 Sidewalk Cafes
Chapter 1: General Licensing Provisions
5-1-101. Definitions.
5-1-102. License Requirement.
5-1-103. License Supervisors.
5-1-104. Application for License.
5-1-105. License Term and Fees.
5-1-106. Display of License.
5-1-107. Appeal of License Denial
5-1-108. Grounds for Denial, Modification, Suspension or Revocation
5-1-109. Procedure for Appeal, Denial, Modification, Suspension or Revocation.
5-1-110. Records to be Maintained.
5-1-111. Exemption to License.
5-1-101. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
"Business" means and includes all activities engaged in within the corporate limits of Bountiful carried on for the business of gain or economic profit, except that the acts of employees rendering service to employers shall not be included in the term business unless otherwise specifically prescribed.
"Engaged in Business" includes but is not limited to the sale of tangible personal property and the rendering of personal services for others for a consideration by persons engaged in any craft, business, occupation, or other calling, except the rendering of personal services by an employee to his employer under any contract of personal employment. The foregoing shall also include the renting by a lessor of space, whether enclosed or otherwise, to be used as office space for any use or endeavor including but not
32
limited to commercial, medical, dental, or other professional endeavors or otherwise. The foregoing shall also include the renting by a lessor of four (4) rental units or more for the purpose of human habitation whether the said units are included or enclosed within one (1) structure or separate structures or a combination thereof.
"Employee" means the operator, owner or manager of said business and any persons employed by such person in the operation of said business in any capacity and also any salesman, agent or independent contractor engaged in the operation of said business in any capacity.
"Number of Employees" means the average number of employees engaged in business each regular working day during the preceding calendar year. In computing said number, each regular full-time employee shall be counted as one employee, and each part-time employee shall be counted as that fraction which is formed by using the total number of hours regularly worked by a full-time employee as the denominator.
"Person" means any individual, receiver, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, corporation, association, society or other group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, non-profit or otherwise.
"Gross Revenue" means the gross receipts of the business, but shall not include: The amount of any federal tax, except excise taxes imposed upon or with respect to retail or wholesale sales, whether imposed upon the retailer, wholesaler, jobber or upon the consumer and regardless of whether or not the amount of federal tax is stated to customers as a separate charge;' and the amount of net Utah State Sales Tax. The term "gross sales" includes the amount of any manufacturer's or importer's excise tax included in the price of the property sold, even though the manufacturer or importer is also the wholesaler or retailer thereof, and whether or not the amount of such tax is stated as a separate charge.
"Temporary Business" means engaging in a business on a lot without a permanent building or on a lot with a permanent building, but disassociated with any business located within said building.
"Permanent Building" means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy having footings and a foundation.
5-1-102. License Requirement.
(a) Except for door to door solicitation, every business and every person engaged in business in the City must annually procure a business license, plus any other license which may be required in this Code. A separate license is required for each separate business site or location.
(b) It is unlawful to engage in business without the current license or licenses required in this Code. Every day without a required license is a separate offense.
(c) All licenses are non-transferable as to both the license holder and the location.
33
5-1-103. License Supervisor.
The City Planning and Economic Development Director is hereby designated as the License Supervisor. The License Supervisor shall have the duty to receive applications for licenses, to review them for completeness, to collect license fees, and to issue or deny licenses as appropriate.
5-1-104. Application for License.
(a) Applications for a license shall be made in writing upon the forms provided by the City.
(b) An applicant must provide all information requested upon the application form. A license shall not be granted upon an incomplete form.
(c) It is unlawful to give to the City an application for a license which contains false or misleading information. Any such application shall be denied.
5-1-105. License Term and Fees.
(a) All licenses, unless otherwise provided in this Code, shall be valid for the calendar year in which issued, or part thereof remaining. New licenses must be obtained every calendar year.
(b) Prior to the granting of any license, the applicant must pay the license fee. All license fees shall be set by resolution of the City Council, unless otherwise specified in other chapters of this Title.
(c) Licenses fees for businesses licensed for the previous year shall be double the normal fee if renewed on or after July 1st of the current year.
5-1-106. Display of License.
(a) All licenses must be displayed on the business premises to which granted in a conspicuous place in view of the public.
(b) The license or licenses of any business shall be exhibited upon request to a City representative or any peace officer. It is unlawful to refuse to do so.
5-1-107. Appeal of License Denial.
Any person whose license application has been denied, modified, suspended or revoked by the License Supervisor has the right to appeal to the Bountiful City Administrative Law Judge. Any such appeal shall be requested in writing directed to the Bountiful City Recorder within 30 days of the denial.
5-1-108. Grounds for Denial, Modification, Suspension or Revocation.
The License Supervisor may deny, modify, suspend or revoke any license for any of the following reasons:
(a) fraud or misrepresentation in the application or procurement of the license;
(b) violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision of this Code or of the Utah State Code;
34
(c) failure to pay any required fee when due;
(d) failure to comply with current zoning ordinances or failure to perform any condition of a conditional use permit;
(e) failure to perform any requirement of the City made in the approval of a request to the City for any license, permit, etc., such as off-street parking, site plan provisions, architectural review, landscaping, or any other such requirement;
(f) failure to maintain qualifications for the license;
(g) maintenance of an illegal sign;
(h) conducting an illegal business upon the premises;
(i) violating any statute or ordinance involving moral turpitude;
(j) any conduct or act on the business premises, or any conduct, act or condition permitted, by the licensee or any employee which renders, or tends to render, such business or its premises a public nuisance or a menace to the health, peace, safety or general welfare of the City;
(k) failure to comply with any applicable provision of the Uniform Fire Code, Uniform Building Code, Uniform Electrical Code, or any other building code provision adopted in this Code;
(l) violation of any provision of the particular Chapter of this Code applicable to the license in question; or
(m) conducting business without any license required by State law; or
(n) conducting business in violation of any applicable State law; or
(o) for other good cause shown.
5-1-109. Procedure for Appeal, Denial, Modification, Suspension or Revocation.
An appeal shall be heard by the Bountiful City Administrative Law Judge in accordance with Section 2-8-101 et seq of this City Code.
5-1-110. Records to be Maintained.
It is the duty of every person liable for the payment of a business fee imposed by this chapter, to keep and preserve for a period of four (4) years such books and records as will accurately reflect the amount of his gross annual sales of goods and services for any year, and the number of employees from which can be determined the amount of any license fee for which he may be liable under the provisions of this chapter.
35
5-1-111. Exemption to License.
No license fee shall be imposed under this chapter upon any person engaged in business for solely religious, charitable eleemosynary or other type of strictly non-profit purpose who is tax exempt in such activities under the laws of the United States and the State of Utah, nor shall any license fee be imposed on any person engaged in a business specifically exempted from municipal taxation and fees by the laws of the United States or the State of Utah.
Chapter 2: Pawn Brokers
5-2-101. Pawn Broker Defined.
5-2-102. Pawn Broker License.
5-2-103. Records to be Kept.
5-2-104. Dealing with Minors Prohibited.
5-2-105. Unlawful to Pawn Items not Owned or to Give False Information.
5-2-101. Pawn Broker Defined.
Any person within the limits of this City who loans money on deposit of personal property or deals in the purchase or possession of personal property on condition of selling the same back again to the pledger or depositor or who loans or advances money on personal property by taking chattel mortgage security thereon and takes or receives such personal property in his possession is hereby declared to be a pawn broker.
5-2-102. Pawn Broker License.
It is unlawful for a person to engage in the business of a pawn broker without a current pawn broker license from the City.
5-2-103. Records to be Kept.
Every pawn broker shall comply with all applicable State law, and shall keep records containing a description of all articles received by them, the amounts paid therefor or advanced thereon, a general description of the person from whom received, together with his name and address and the date of the transaction. Such records shall at all reasonable times be accessible to any peace officer who demands an inspection thereof, and any further information regarding such transaction that he may require shall be given by pawn brokers and second-hand dealers to the best of the ability. At the close of each day's business pawn brokers shall mail a copy of such records to the Police Chief. It is unlawful to fail to keep this required information, or to provide false information.
5-2-104. Dealing with Minors Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any pawn broker business to permit persons under eighteen years of age to pawn, pledge or deposit items of any kind.
5-2-105. Unlawful to Pawn Items not Owned or to Give False Information.
(a) It is unlawful for anyone to pawn items with a pawn broker when that person does not own those items.
36
(b) It is unlawful for anyone to give false information concerning property to a pawn broker.
Chapter 3: Public Dances
5-3-101. Definitions.
5-3-102. Dance License.
5-3-103. Age Requirements.
5-3-104. Permitted Hours.
5-3-101. Definitions.
"Public Dance" means any dance to which the public generally may gain admission with or without the payment of a fee, but shall not include any dance conducted on or in any public park, street, or public grounds by permission of the City Council and under the supervision of the Bountiful City Recreation Department, a public or private school and churches.
"Public Dance Hall" means any rooms, place or space in which a public dance is held or in which classes in dancing are held and instruction in dancing is given for hire.
"Non-Public Dances" means dances conducted and sponsored by public or private schools and churches for the students or members thereof even though an admission fee is charged, and dances conducted in private homes. Such dances shall not be deemed to be public dances and shall be exempt from the licensing provisions of this Chapter.
5-3-102. Dance License.
(a) It is unlawful to hold or conduct any public dance without a current dance license from the City.
(b) The Police Department and Fire Department shall each examine each application to determine whether or not the dance halls sought to be licensed conform with the regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto. A written recommendation from each department shall be made as to whether a license shall be granted or refused.
5-3-103. Age Requirements.
(a) Except as provided in subparagraph (b) of this Section, it is unlawful to permit any person who has not reached the age of 18 years to attend or remain at any public dance unless such person is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian.
(b) It is lawful to permit persons who have attained the age of 14 years to attend a public dance without being accompanied by their parent or legal guardian only where such public dance is held under the following conditions:
(1) Said dance is under the supervision of a uniformed Category I Police Officer, who must be in his or her peace officer uniform and not in a private security or other uniform, which supervision shall be furnished at the expense of the management of the dance.
(2) No cigarettes, beer or liquor is sold, consumed or used upon the dance hall premises.
37
5-3-104. Permitted Hours.
It is unlawful for any person to conduct or maintain any public dance or public dance hall or having charge or control thereof to conduct carry on or permit any dance or dancing therein between the hours of 12:00 midnight of any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day.
Chapter 4: Amusement Devices
5-4-101. Purpose.
5-4-102. Definitions.
5-4-103. License.
5-4-104. Referral to Police Chief.
5-4-105. Gambling Devices Prohibited.
5-4-106. Amusement Device Regulations.
5-4-107. Exemption.
5-4-101. Purpose.
The City Council finds that in order to preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants, and particularly of the youth, of the City of Bountiful, the public patronage and use of amusement devices should be licensed and be subject to certain regulations as set forth in this Chapter.
5-4-102. Definitions.
"Amusement device" means any amusement machine, computer or other device made available to the public for the purpose of amusement or skill, and for the play of which a fee is charged. The term does not include coin operated music devices, ride machines designed primarily for the amusement of children, or vending machines not involving chance or skill.
"Accessory use" means a use incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the building or business, and operating fewer than eleven amusement devices.
"Arcade" means a business operating amusement devices as its primary business and/or having eleven or more machines.
"Person" means individual natural person, partnership, corporation, joint venture, society, association, club, trustee, or any other agency.
5-4-103. License.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to display or make available for public patronage or operation any amusement device without a current amusement device license from the City.
(b) No license shall be issued to individuals, or to business entities with principal individuals, with criminal convictions involving sexual or child abuse or other offenses involving moral turpitude.
38
5-4-104. Referral to Police Chief and Fire Chief.
The application for an amusement device license, together with such information as is required by the City to be attached thereto, shall be referred to the Chief of Police and to the Fire Chief for inspection, investigation and report. They shall, within fifteen days after receiving the application, make a report to the Licensing Supervisor.
5-4-105. Gambling Devices Prohibited.
Nothing in this ordinance shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling device whatsoever, or any device in any way contrary to law.
5-4-106. Amusement Device Regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to any business involving amusement devices:
(a) For businesses with amusement devices as an accessory use, no more than 25% of the floor area (not including restrooms and storage) may be used for amusement devices.
(b) For amusement device arcades, location, floor plans and other details shall be reviewed on an individual basis by the Planning Director, Fire Chief, and Police Chief.
(c) For all businesses with amusement devices, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) Space and Location Requirements.
(A) Adequate space shall be provided for each amusement device so as to allow its use without overcrowding.
(B) All entrances and interior areas shall be adequately lighted for adequate visibility and supervision.
(2) Supervision Required.
There shall be at least one supervisory employee on the premises during hours of operation of the amusement devices. The location of the amusement devices shall be such that there is a management attendant within the same room or such that the management attendant outside of the same room can easily see and supervise the interior of the room.
(3) Age Limits and Hours of Operation.
(A) It is unlawful for any licensee or any agent or employee of such licensee to permit, suffer or allow any person under the age of eighteen years to use or operate any amusement device located in or upon the licensed premises during such time as public elementary and secondary schools are in session.
39
(B) Persons under the age of eighteen may be allowed to operate amusement devices during their school hours if accompanied by an adult twenty-one years or older or by a parent.
(4) No Smoking or Alcohol.
No person shall be allowed to remain on the license premises for amusement devices while in the possession of, consuming, using or under the influence of, any alcoholic beverage or illegal drugs. No licensee, manager or supervisory employee shall permit any such person to enter or remain on the premises. Smoking and the sale of tobacco products on the premises is prohibited, except for general merchandise department and grocery stores.
(5) Signage.
Signs informing the public of the limitations on operation by school age children and the limitations on alcoholic beverages and smoking shall be posted in each area licensed for the operation of amusement devices. The text of such signs shall be in letters at least two inches high and on a contrasting background so as to be clearly readable.
(6) Other Requirements.
The Licensing Supervisor may make such specific require-ments as may be reasonably necessary to protect the interests, safety and welfare of the children and others who will be the clientele of the licensee, and to ensure sufficient access, parking, lighting, etc., for the specific site. This shall be a continuing right even after the license is issued.
5-4-107. Exemption.
These regulations do not apply to businesses not allowing minors upon the premises.
Chapter 5: Door to Door Soliciting Prohibited Where Notice Provided.
5-5-101. (a) “Soliciting” means the practice of engaging in, or attempting to engage in, conversation with any person at a residence for the purpose of making or seeking to make or facilitate a sale of goods or services by means of door to door solicitation.
(b) “Solicit a residence” means to knock on the door or ring a door bell at a residence, or speak with a person at the premises, for the purpose of selling, seeking to sell, or obtaining orders or prospective customers for goods or services.
(c) Any occupant of a residence may give notice of a desire to refuse solicitations by displaying a sign stating “No Soliciting” or similar wording, which shall be posted on or near the main entrance door. The display of such a sign constitutes notice to any solicitor that the inhabitants of the residence do not desire to receive and/or do not invite solicitors. It is the duty of the Solicitor to check each residence for the presence of any such sign or notice and to refrain from soliciting where present.
40
(d) It is a class C misdemeanor for any person to solicit a residence or a person at a residence where a “no soliciting” or similar notice has been given against soliciting as provided in this section.
Chapter 6: Sound Amplification and Public Address Equipment
5-6-101. Sound Amplifier Defined.
5-6-102. Sound Amplifier License.
5-6-103. Application.
5-6-104. Summary Revocation.
5-6-101. Sound Amplifier Defined.
For the purpose of this Chapter a "Sound Amplifier" is defined as any instrument or device which amplifies or increases the volume of sound. This includes, but is not limited to, public address systems, loud speakers, music players such as boom boxes, electronic instruments, and any other device which produces loud words, music or other sound.
5-6-102. Sound Amplifier License.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to use or operate, or permit to be used or operated out of doors, or indoors when used or operated to reach persons out of doors, any sound amplifier as defined in this chapter in any part of the City without a current amplified sound license from the City.
5-6-103. Application
The application shall set forth the name and address of the applicant, the location or locations or route or routes at which or over which applicant proposes to operate such sound amplifier or sound amplifiers, the purpose for which such sound amplifier or sound amplifiers will be used, the proposed hours of operation, and the number of days of proposed operation.
5-6-104. Denial of License and Summary Revocation.
A sound amplification license may be summarily revoked by any Bountiful police officer upon probable cause to believe that the noise ordinance is being violated, or if under the totality of circumstances the sound is unreasonably disturbing neighbors, the public, or others. The revocation may be appealed to the Bountiful Police Chief, and a denial or revocation of a license may be appealed to the Bountiful City Administrative Law Judge.
Chapter 7: Businesses Selling Alcohol
5-7-101. Definitions.
5-7-102. Alcohol License.
5-7-103. Qualifications for License.
5-7-104. Applications for License.
5-7-105. Referral to City Officials.
5-7-106. Issuance of License.
5-7-107. License Expiration and Renewal.
5-7-108. License Conditions.
41
5-7-109. Licenses.
5-7-110. Unlawful Acts.
5-7-101. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, as used in this Chapter, the terms shall have the definitions given in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the Utah State Code.
"Alcoholic beverage", "beer" and "liquor" shall have the definitions given in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the Utah State Code.
5-7-102. Beer License.
(a) It is unlawful for a person to sell beer or an alcoholic beverage at retail, and/or permit the consumption of beer or an alcoholic beverage on any business premises without a current beer license from the City, or without a current license required by State law.
(b) A separate license is required for each separate place of business.
5-7-103. Qualifications for License.
(a) Applicants for licenses and the premises proposed to be licensed under this Chapter must meet the following qualifications:
(1) Each licensee must be over 21 years of age, and a citizen of the United States, or a lawful resident alien, or is otherwise lawfully residing within the United States.
(2) Each licensee must possess the qualifications required under the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and other pertinent statues;
(3) Each licensee, or in the case of a partnership, each partner, or in the case of a corporation each director or officer, shall not have been convicted of or forfeited bail on a charge of having committed a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or a felony or any violation of any law or ordinance relating to intoxicating liquors or drunken driving or keeping a gambling or disorderly house;
(4) Each licensee shall not be delinquent in his financial obligations to the city;
(5) The licensed premises shall comply with the regulations issued by the Board of Health;
(6) No license shall be granted to allow on-premise consumption of alcoholic beverages:
(A) within 600 feet of any public or private school, church, public library, public playground, or park, as measured by the method established by State law, or
(B) for any location with a vehicle entrance or exit within 200 feet of any public or private school, church, playground, or park.
42
(C) With respect to the establishment of an on-premise beer retailer license that does not operate as a tavern (as defined by State law) the City Council may authorize a variance to the proximity requirements of this subsection if:
(i) the State also grants a variance;
(ii) a public hearing has been
held by the City Council after notice
published twice in a locally distributed
newspaper five to twenty-one days prior
to the hearing; and
(iii) the City Council determines that establishing a license would not be detrimental to the public health, peace, safety, and welfare of the community, after considering relevant facts, including the following: the location of the beer retailer relative to the location of the school, church, library or park, whether and what kind of street is between them, the pedestrian flow in the area, the location of sidewalks, other geographical considerations, the respective hours of operation, the nature of the neighborhood, and other factors that may exist.
(b) The governing body reserves, for implementation at a future time, the right to require of establishments licensed under this Chapter, a bond to guarantee compliance with all laws and ordinances and which may be forfeited to the city upon such conditions as the governing body may, at a future time, adopt and specify by ordinance.
(c) The governing body reserves, for implementation at a future time, the right to restrict the number of establishments licensed under this Chapter and to adopt a system providing for the allocation of such licenses in the future.
(d) The license required by this Chapter shall be in addition to any other business or regulatory license or licenses required by the city or other regulatory authority.
5-7-104. Applications for License.
(a) All applications for licenses required by this Chapter shall be filed with the License Supervisor and must state the applicant's name in full and contain all necessary information required to show that he has complied with the requirements and possesses the qualifications specified in the Alcohol Beverage Control Act and this Chapter. The License Supervisor or the Chief of Police may require the applicant to furnish other information to insure compliance with this Chapter. If the applicant is a partnership, association, or corporation, the same information must be obtained with respect to each partner, association member, corporate director or officer. All applications by individuals must be subscribed by such persons and state under oath that the facts set forth therein are true. Each applicant shall provide with his initial application a site plan and layout review, indicating all security measures and plans for ingress and egress to a public street. Each applicant shall, at the time of filing his license application, present himself to the chief of police or his designee, to be fingerprinted and photographed. Such fingerprints and photographs shall be clearly marked and designated as having been taken in connection with an application for a beer license.
43
5-7-105. Referral to City Officials.
(a) The License Supervisor shall refer all applications for a license under this Chapter to the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief.
(b) The Chief of Police shall, within 10 days after receiving such application, report in writing to the governing body the general reputation and character of the persons who habitually frequent such place, the nature and kind of business conducted at such place by the applicant or by any other person or by the applicant at any other place, whether said place is or has been conducted in a lawful, quiet and orderly manner, the nature and kind of entertainment, if any at such place, whether gambling is or has been permitted on the premises or by the applicant at any other place, the proximity of such premises to any school or church, and his recommendation as to whether or not the application should be granted.
5-7-106. Issuance of License.
(a) Upon receipt of the reports from the Chief of Police and other officials, the governing body may consider the application for license.
(b) The governing body has the sole discretion to grant or to refuse to grant a license under this chapter.
(c) If the applicant has complied with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations, the governing body may direct the City Recorder to issue a license to the applicant for the licensed premises.
(d) The issuance of a license pursuant to this Chapter shall grant only a revocable privilege as provided hereunder and under the laws of the State of Utah and shall not confer any vested rights of any kind or nature upon a licensee.
(e) If the license application is denied by the governing body, no new application shall be made for the premises until after the expiration of one year following the denial of the initial application.
5-7-107. License Expiration and Renewal.
(a) All licenses issued under this Chapter shall expire on the 31st day of December of each year unless sooner canceled or revoked, except seasonal licenses which may be issued for a period of less than one year as may be determined by the governing body. No license shall be issued for a period longer than one year.
(b) Licenses may be renewed by making application therefor and paying the appropriate fee. All applications to renew licenses shall be filed by the licensee with the city recorder at least 30 days, but no earlier than 90 days, prior to the expiration date of the license. The renewal application shall state whether or not the business is presently operating and if not, the date when it ceased daily operation, together with such other information as the City Recorder may reasonably require to verify or determine the status of the business. Any person who fails to file such application within the time limit shall, upon expiration of the license, cease the operations licensed under this Chapter on the premises and shall not resume such operations until a new license is issued upon order of the governing body. A licensee may apply for renewal of his license annually until suspended or revoked for cause or until said license is no longer currently and actively used to operate a business authorized by the license; provided, however, the license may be renewed after termination of the authorized business activity during a licensing period for one additional year, if the licensee makes application within 45 days after the expiration of said license and if the licensee certifies under oath that he is not holding the license for speculative reasons and he is
44
actively seeking a purchaser for his business premises and assets as provided above, or is actively seeking a new business location for which he will seek a transfer of said license as provided herein. No license renewal may be granted beyond one year of inactive status as provided above.
5-7-108. License Conditions.
(a) Licensed premises shall be illuminated at a minimum of 2 candlepower light measured at a level 5 feet above the floor at all times that it is occupied or open for business and no booth, blind or stall shall be maintained unless all tables, chairs and occupants, if any, therein are kept open to full view from the main floor of such licensed premises.
(b) Licensed premises selling beer on draft shall be so situated that the beer-dispensing device is not visible from the area normally occupied by customers or patrons.
(c) All licensed premises shall be subject to inspection by any police officer.
(d) All employees handling and selling liquor must be at least twenty-one years of age.
5-7-109. Licenses.
(a) A Class "A" retail beer license entitles the licensee to sell beer on the licensed premises only in original containers for consumption off the premises in accordance with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and Ordinances of the City.
(b) A class "B" retail beer license entitles the licensee to sell beer on the licensed premises only in original containers for consumption on or off the premises in accordance with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and ordinances of the city.
(c) A class "C" retail beer license entitles the licensee to sell beer on the licensed premises on draft and in original containers for consumption on or off the premises in accordance with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and ordinances of the City.
(d) A class "D" retail beer license entitles the licensee to sell beer only on the licensed premises in open containers not exceeding two liters and on draft for consumption on the premises in accordance with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and ordinances of the city.
(e) A class “E” retail beer license entitles the licensee to sell beer at a single event permit, subject to the conditions set forth in the approval of the permit. Any person or entity actually granted a single event permit by the State may be granted a class “E” beer license to run concurrently with the State permit. The license fee shall be $50.00.
(f) A Liquor License, in conjunction with a valid license issued by the State of Utah according to State law, entitles the licensee to sell liquor as permitted in the State license. Issuance of this license by the City for liquor package agencies, restaurants, special uses, public service, and single events is intended to constitute the written consent of the local authority that is required by State law. Club liquor licenses will not be issued by the City, and the City will not give local consent for State club liquor licenses.
45
5-7-110. Unlawful Acts.
(a) It is unlawful for any licensee, by himself or through his agent or employee, to violate or to fail to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter or of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
(b) It is unlawful for any person, by himself or through his agent or employee, to expose, keep for sale, or directly or indirectly or upon any pretense or upon any device, to sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages, except as provided in this Chapter and the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
(c) It is unlawful for any licensee to purchase or acquire or to have or possess for the purpose of sale or distribution any beer except that which he shall have lawfully purchased from a brewer or wholesaler licensed under the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
(d) It is unlawful for any person in charge of any place of business knowingly to permit or allow customers, guests or any other person to possess liquor upon which the seal has been broken at the place of business unless the premises have been licensed therefor under the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
(e) It is unlawful for any person to store any liquor in or on premises licensed under this Chapter unless appropriately licensed by the State of Utah to do so.
(f) It is unlawful for any licensee or any operator or employee of a licensee to hold, store or possess liquor on the premises licensed under this Chapter unless appropriately licensed by the State of Utah.
(g) It is unlawful for any person in charge of any place of business knowingly to permit or allow customers, guests, or any other person to consume alcoholic beverages at the place of business unless the premises have been licensed therefor under this Chapter or the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
(h) It is unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages in any place of business whose premises are not licensed under this Chapter or the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
(i) It is unlawful for any person to sell, possess or consume alcoholic beverages on premises licensed hereunder between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m..
(j) It is unlawful for any licensee by himself or his agent or employee to permit any customer, guest, or any other person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m..
(k) It is unlawful for any person to sell or supply any alcoholic beverages or permit alcoholic beverages to be sold or supplied to any person under or apparently under the influence of liquor.
(l) It is unlawful for any person to sell any alcoholic beverages at any public dance.
(m) It is unlawful for any person to advertise the sale of alcoholic beverages except under such regulation as is made by the Utah Liquor Control Commission, except that a simple designation of the fact that beer is sold may be placed in or upon the window or front of the licensed premises.
(n) It is unlawful for any employee at licensed premises, while on duty, to consume an alcoholic beverage or be under the influence of alcohol.
46
Chapter 8: Massage Therapy.
5-8-101. Definitions.
5-8-102. Massage Therapy License.
5-8-103. License Application.
5-8-104. Referral to Police Chief.
5-8-101. Definitions.
The terms "massage," "massage technician" and "massage apprentice" shall have the meanings set forth in the Massage Practice Act of the Utah Code.
5-8-102. Massage Therapy License.
It is unlawful for any person to practice or engage in, or attempt to practice or engage in, massage for compensation without first (a) being licensed as a massage technician or as a massage apprentice by the State of Utah and (b) obtaining a current massage therapy license from the City. It is unlawful for any person licensed by the City to exceed the scope of the license granted by the State.
5-8-103. License Application.
Every person applying for a massage therapy license shall state in the application that the applicant is a massage technician or massage apprentice licensed by the State of Utah, giving the license number thereof, stating the address where the applicant proposes to conduct the business of massage, and such other information as the Licensing Information may require.
5-8-104. Investigation of Applicant and Premises.
The application for such license, together with such other information as is required by the city to be attached thereto, shall be referred to the Chief of Police for investigation and recommendation.
Chapter 9: Professional Dancers.
5-9-101. License Required.
5-9-102. License - Application and Issuance Conditions.
5-9-103. Referral to Police Chief.
5-9-104. Performer Location Restrictions.
5-9-105. Dancers - Restricted Activities.
5-9-106. Dancers - Age Restrictions.
5-9-107. Dancers - Costume Restrictions.
5-9-108. Patrons - Prohibited Activities.
5-9-101. License Required.
It is unlawful:
(a) For any person to perform as a professional dancer on the premises of an establishment as defined in this chapter, either gratuitously or for compensation; without first obtaining a license therefor from the City;
47
(b) For any person, agency, firm or corporation to furnish, book or otherwise engage or permit any person to dance as a professional dancer, either gratuitously or for compensation, in or for any establishment, which dancer, at the time of such booking, employment or performance, was not licensed in accordance with subsection (1) of this section;
(c) For any person, firm, corporation, business or agent, or employee thereof, to furnish, book or otherwise engage or permit any person to dance as a professional dancer, either gratuitously or for compensation, in any establishment unless such establishment is licensed by the City to allow professional dancing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
5-9-102. License - Application and Issuance Conditions.
The applicant shall appear in person before the City Recorder and shall complete the application form in writing. The application shall include the name and address of the applicant, any stage name or names used, the name of the agent or agency if the performer uses an agent, the criminal record, if any, and such other information as may be reasonably required by the license supervisor pertaining to verifying personal identification and criminal history of the applicant, including its officers and employees.
5-9-103. Referral to Police Chief.
Upon receipt of the fee and application, the City Recorder shall transmit the application to the police department, which shall make inquiry concerning the applicant's character and background and report whether or not in its opinion a license should be granted. If the police recommend denial of the application, the license supervisor shall not issue the license. If the applicant desires a hearing, the applicant shall apply to the mayor for a public hearing within ten days after denial of a license.
5-9-104. Performer Location Restrictions.
It is unlawful for a professional dancer to dance with or among the patrons of an establishment, or upon the tables or chairs, or in any part of an establishment other than on a stage, platform or dance floor which is separated on all sides from the aisles, tables, chairs, booths and the patrons of said establishment by at least three feet.
5-9-105. Dancers - Restricted Activities.
It is unlawful for any dancer, while performing in any establishment pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, to touch in any manner any other person, to throw any object or clothing, to accept any money, drink or any other object from any person, or to allow another person to touch such dancer or to place any money or object on such dancer or within the costume or person of such dancer.
5-9-106. Dancers - Age Restrictions.
It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one to perform, dance or entertain either gratuitously or for compensation in any premise licensed under this chapter.
48
5-9-107. Dancers - Costume Restrictions.
(a) Professional dancers shall at all times be costumed during performances in a manner not to violate any city ordinance or State law concerning obscene conduct, or conduct themselves in such a manner which violates the provisions of any city ordinance or State law.
(b) Each agency, person, firm or corporation employing, booking or using the services of a dancer required to be licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall require that such dancers comply with the provisions of this chapter, and any person, firm, corporation, business or establishment that permits a violation of this chapter, either personally or through its agents, employees, officers or assigns, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
5-9-108. Patrons - Prohibited Activities.
It is unlawful for any person, or any patron of any establishment, to touch in any manner any professional dancer, to place any money or object on or within the costume or person of any professional dancer, or to give or offer to give to any such dancer any drink, money or object while the dancer is performing any dance.
Chapter 10: Fireworks
5-10-101. Definition.
5-10-102. Fireworks License.
5-10-103. Referral to Fire Chief and Police Chief.
5-10-104. Fireworks Display Permit.
5-10-105. Application for Permit.
5-10-106. Bond or Liability Insurance.
5-10-107. Fireworks Display Vendor's License.
5-10-108. Fireworks Restrictions
5-10-101. Definition.
"Class C common state approved explosive" is defined in Section 11-3-2(5) of the Utah State Code.
5-10-102. Fireworks License.
It is a class B misdemeanor for a person to:
(a) sell, or to offer to sell, class C common state approved explosives, without a current fireworks license from the City;
(b) discharge display fireworks, or exhibit a pyrotechnic display inside a public building, without current fireworks license from the City.
5-10-103. Referral to Fire Chief and Police Chief.
Any application for a fireworks license for the purpose of discharging display fireworks or an exhibit of a pyrotechnic display inside a public building shall be referred to the Fire Chief and Police Chief for their recommendation as to public safety.
49
5-10-104. Fireworks Display Permit.
The City Manager or designee may, upon application writing and the posting of a bond acceptable to the City, grant a permit for the public display of fireworks. The display must be performed by a competent operator, who shall be approved by the Police Chief and the Chief of the Fire Department. Such display shall be of such a nature and so located and discharged as, in the opinion of the Police Chief and the Chief of the Fire Department, shall not be hazardous to person or property. After such permit shall have been granted, the sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only. Any permit granted hereunder is non-transferable.
5-10-105. Application for Permit.
All applications for permits shall set forth the date, hour and location proposed for the display, the place of storing fireworks prior to the display, the names or names of individuals or entities making the display, and the name of the person or persons in charge of the actual igniting of the fireworks, and such other information as the Licensing Supervisor may reasonably require. The location of the storage place shall be subject to the approval of the Chief of the Fire Department.
5-10-106. Bond or Liability Insurance.
Any application for a permit shall be accompanied by a certificate of insurance of a policy insuring the licensee and naming Bountiful City as an additional insured, providing for the payment of all damages which may be caused to any person or property by reason of the display. Such insurance shall be in a sum not less than $2,000,000/$2,000,000 for bodily injury and/or property damage. No City officer shall issue any permit until the certificate of insurance has been furnished by the applicant and approved by the City Manager and the City Attorney.
5-10-107. Fireworks Display Vendor's License.
If the holder of a fireworks display license states in writing to the City that it does not wish vendors to be in attendance at its function, the City will not issue vendors licenses for that event. It shall be unlawful to sell merchandise of any kind and by any means at a fireworks display without first obtaining a current and valid vendors license, or to do so at a fireworks display where the holder of the license has stated in writing to the City that it does not wish vendors to be in attendance at its function.
5-10-108. Fireworks Restrictions.
(1) Within the limits of the City of Bountiful east of Bountiful Boulevard, and, north of 400 North, east of 900 east:
(a) The discharge of class C common fireworks is prohibited at all times; and
(b) Campfires and other fires are allowed only in an approved fire pit designed and installed by the Forest Service or the City. No homemade or makeshift fire pits are allowed. The restrictions of this section 1(b) do not apply to residential structures or improved fire pits adjacent to a residential structure.
(2) (a) The discharge of fireworks is prohibited at all times as follows:
50
(i) north of 1400 North Street, fireworks are prohibited east of 650 East Street;
(ii) north of 400 North Street, fireworks are prohibited east of 900 East Street;
(iii) south of 400 North Street, fireworks are prohibited east of Davis Boulevard; and
(iv) fireworks are prohibited in any other areas designated by South Davis Metro Fire Agency officials.
(b) Within the area described in Subsection (2)(a), campfires and other fires are allowed only in an approved fire pit designed and installed by the Forest Service or the City. No homemade or makeshift fire pits are allowed. The restrictions of this section 1(b) do not apply to residential structures or improved fire pits adjacent to a residential structure.
(c) This subsection (2) does not apply to Bountiful City’s Handcart Days public fireworks display because of adequate fire prevention preparations.
(d) This subsection (2) shall expire unless extended by vote of the City Council at 11:59 p.m. on November 30, 2017.
(3) In other parts of the City where not prohibited by Sections 1 and 2, the possession, display or discharge of Class C common state approved fireworks is permitted only as provided by State law. Any other possession, display or discharge is prohibited.
(4) It is unlawful to negligently discharge class C common state approved explosives, in such a manner as to cause, or to recklessly risk causing, a fire or injury to people or property.
(5) This ordinance shall not limit the authority of the Fire Chief or Fire Marshal to at any time issue emergency decrees or order fireworks and/or other fire restrictions depending upon conditions or needs.
(6) Fireworks possessed, sold or offered for sale in violation of this Ordinance may be seized and destroyed and the license of the person selling or offering fireworks for sale may be revoked.
(7) All terms relating to fireworks used in this Ordinance shall have the same meaning as defined in Utah Code § 53-7-202 of the Utah Fire Prevention Act.
Chapter 11: Horse Drawn Carriages
5-11-101. Definitions.
5-11-102. License and Permit Required.
5-11-103. Driver Licensing
5-11-104. Carriage Equipment and Maintenance
5-11-105. Traffic Laws.
5-11-106. Hours.
5-11-107. Routes.
5-11-108. Carriage Stand.
5-11-109. Drinking Alcoholic Beverage and Open Containers in Horse-Drawn
Carriage is Prohibited.
5-11-110. Care of Horses.
51
5-11-101. Definitions.
The words and phrases when used in this Chapter shall have the meaning defined and set forth herein.
"Carriage" or "horse-drawn carriage" means any device in, upon or by which any person is or may be transported or drawn upon a public way and which is designed to be drawn by horses.
"Carriage Business" means any person offering to transport another person for any valuable consideration and by means of a horse-drawn carriage.
"Carriage Stand" means that portion of a curb line designated for loading or unloading of passengers for horse-drawn carriages.
"Driver" means any person operating or in actual physical control of a horse-drawn carriage, or any person sitting in the driver's seat of such carriage with the intention of causing it to be moved by a horse.
"Holder" means any person to whom a horse-drawn carriage permit has been issued and which permit is unexpired.
"Horse" means any animal purely of the genus equus caballus, specifically excluding crosses with other genera.
"Person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity.
"Stable" means any place or facility where one or more horses are housed or maintained.
5-11-102. License and Permit Required.
No person shall operate or permit a horse-drawn carriage owned or controlled by him or her to be operated as a carriage fore hire upon the streets of the City without first having obtained:
(a) An annual City business license, and
(b) An annual horse-drawn carriage license. This license shall not be construed as either a franchise or irrevocable.
5-11-103. Driver Licensing.
It is unlawful for any person to operate or for a holder to permit any person to operate a carriage for hire or a training cart upon the streets of the city without such operator having first obtained and having in force a current chauffeur's license valid in the State of Utah.
Every driver operating a carriage under this Chapter shall keep his or her chauffeur's license on his or her person while such driver is operating the carriage, shall exhibit the license upon demand of any Police Officer, Animal Control Officer, License Inspector or any authorized agent of the licensing office of the City.
5-11-104. Carriage Equipment and Maintenance.
52
(a) The carriages used shall be of types customarily known in the carriage industry as "vis-a-vis", "landau", "brougham", "victoria" and/or "rock-a-way" and shall meet all of the equipment registration and other requirements of this Chapter before being used to transport customers.
(b) Each carriage shall be equipped with rear view mirrors, 2 electrified white lights visible for 1,000 ft. to the front of the carriage and 2 electrified lights visible for 1,000 ft. to the rear of the carriage. All lights shall be operational for one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise and during times of lessened visibility. Electrified directional signals are required at all times.
(c) Each carriage shall be equipped with hydraulic or factory equipped mechanical brakes appropriate for the design of the particular carriage.
(d) Each carriage shall be equipped with a slow moving vehicle emblem (red triangle) attached to the rear of the carriage.
(e) Each carriage shall permanently and prominently display the name and telephone number of the carriage business operating it on the rear portion of such carriage.
(f) Each carriage shall be equipped with a device to catch horse manure falling to the pavement.
(g) Each carriage shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
5-11-105. Traffic Laws.
(a) A driver operating a horse-drawn carriage shall be subject to all laws of the City pertaining to the driver of any vehicle.
(b) Speed. The driver shall not permit the speed at which any horse-drawn carriage is driven to exceed a slow trot.
(c) Control. No driver shall leave the carriage unattended in any public place.
(d) Number of Passengers. No driver shall permit more than six (6) adult passengers to ride in the carriage at one time, plus no more than two (2) children under 3 years of age if seated on the laps of adult passengers unless the carriage is designed to carry fewer in which event the carriage shall not carry more passengers than it was designed to carry.
(e) No driver shall permit a passenger to ride on any part of the carriage while in motion unless the passenger is seated inside the carriage.
(f) No driver shall create a traffic hazard or obstruct other traffic.
5-11-106. Hours.
Carriages shall only be operated on the streets of the City during the hours from 6:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight on evenings when public schools will be in session the next day, and to 1:00 a.m. on evenings when public schools will not be in session the next day, provided however that the Chief of Police may grant permission to the holder to operate the carriage business for special occasions during other hours of the day, but only upon application made at least 48 hours beforehand.
53
5-11-107. Routes.
Carriages shall only be operated from and including 100 West to 300 East and from 400 South to 300 North in the City.
5-11-108. Carriage Stand.
The carriage stand shall be on either Center Street or 100 South between Main Street and 100 East Street in Bountiful, Utah.
5-11-109. Drinking Alcoholic Beverage and Open Containers in Horse-Drawn
Carriage is Prohibited.
(a) A person may not drink any alcoholic beverage while operating a horse-drawn carriage or while a passenger in a horse-drawn carriage whether the carriage is moving, stopped or parked on a street.
(b) A person may not keep, carry, possess, transport or allow another to keep, carry, possess or transport in or upon a horse-drawn carriage while the horse-drawn carriage is in use, whether moving, stopped or parked on the street, an open container which contains any alcoholic beverage if the container has been opened, its seal broken, or the contents of the container partially consumed.
(c) In this Section the term "alcoholic beverage" has the meaning given in Section 32 A-1-5 of the Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended.
5-11-110. Care of Horses.
No person shall cause a horse to draw or to be harnessed to a carriage if:
(a) Acute Ailment. The horse has an open sore or wound or is lame or appears to have any other injury, sickness or ailment unless the person attending to the horse has in his possession a written statement signed by a veterinarian and stating that the horse is fit for pulling a carriage notwithstanding the injury, sickness or ailment.
(b) Hoofs. The hoofs of the horse are not properly shod and trimmed, utilizing rubber coated heel pads or open steel barium type shoes to aid in the prevention of slipping. Horses shall be shod and trimmed by an experienced, competent farrier at least every 4 to 6 weeks or more frequently if necessary.
(c) Coat. The horse is not well-groomed and/or has fungus, dandruff, or a poor or dirty coat.
No horse owned by or within the control of a carriage business shall be treated cruelly, harassed or neglected. A carriage business and its owner and managers are all individually responsible to take any action reasonably necessary to assure the humane care and treatment of the horses under their control.
Chapter 12: Temporary Licenses
5-12-101. License and Permit Required.
5-12-102. License Fee.
5-12-103. Site Plan Required.
54
5-12-104. Time Limit.
5-12-105. Number of Temporary Businesses Per Site.
5-12-106. Signs.
5-12-101. License Required.
(a) It is unlawful to conduct a temporary business without first having first obtained a Temporary Business License.
(b) A temporary business license may be issued to a temporary business meeting all of the following requirements:
(1) The conduct of the requested use will not have any detrimental effects on adjacent properties and will be in general harmony with surrounding uses.
(2) The requested use will not create excessive traffic hazards on adjacent streets. Sufficient off-street parking shall be provided which shall be designed to meet all City parking regulations. A site plan showing where the sale of goods will take place, points of ingress and egress to the site, and parking available for the temporary business shall be provided.
(3) The applicant has obtained, or shall obtain, all necessary City permits associated with the placement and operation of the use, i.e., Health Department approvals for sales of food items, electrical permit for electrical hookups, fire department clearance for fireworks stands, etc.
(4) The applicant shall provide, at its own expense, for the restoration of the site of said use to its original condition, including such clean up, washing and replacement of facilities as may be necessary.
(c) Prior to the granting of any license, the applicant must pay the license fee.
(d) Any person or business which engages in business prior to obtaining a business license from the City shall pay an administrative fee of $50.00 prior to the issuance of a license, which shall be in addition to the regular fee for the license.
5-12-102. License Fee.
A fee as adopted by resolution of the City Council will be required for any temporary license.
5-12-103. Site Requirements.
Any site proposed for use for a temporary business must be on property with curb and gutter with adequate traffic ingress and egress. A site plan shall be submitted showing where the sales shall be conducted on the site along with the location of at least four off-street parking spaces specifically designated for use by the temporary business. Such spaces may not be designated for or required by ordinance for any permanent, on-site business and the temporary business may not occupy such parking. In no event shall the temporary business be located within the clear vision area as defined by Section 6-2-118 of this Code, nor shall it be located in any way as to obstruct the clear vision of traffic ingress or
55
egress from the site.
5-12-104. Time Limit.
A temporary license shall be issued for a maximum of 120 days.
5-12-105. Number of Businesses on Site.
Only one temporary business at a time shall be allowed on any given site, unless it can be shown that adequate ingress, egress, and parking would be available for additional temporary businesses.
5-12-106. Signs.
One sign shall be allowed on the sales booth, table, stand or other sales structure for any licensed temporary business. No movable signs, banners, or off-premise signs shall be allowed.
Chapter 13: Going-Out-of-Business Sales.
5-13-101. License Required.
5-13-102. Unlawful Acts.
5-13-103. Records.
5-13-101. License Required.
It is unlawful to conduct a “going out of business sale,” “quitting business” or other type of sale the connotation of which is total liquidation followed by a closure of the business, without first obtaining a license for such sale from the City.
5-13-102. Unlawful Acts.
It is unlawful:
(a) to advertise by any means that a sale is a "going-out-of-business sale," "quitting-business sale," "liquidation sale," or other similar descriptive wording, unless that business does in fact intend to permanently close its doors within 90 days of the beginning of the sale;
(b) for a going-out-of-business sale to be conducted for more than 90 days;
(c) during a going-out-of-business sale, to bring in additional merchandise for sale which was not on the premises on the day before the sale began, or which was not contracted for prior to the first day of the sale; or
(d) to bring in merchandise from other business liquidation sites to a going-out-of-business sale in the city.
5-13-103. Records.
The business owner shall keep suitable books and records showing the extent of inventory and contract orders as of the date the sale commenced, and shall make such records available to the City Attorney, upon reasonable notice, for the purpose of enforcing this ordinance.
56
Chapter 14: Businesses Leasing Premises to Other Businesses
5-14-101. Unlawful to lease to unlicensed business.
It is an infraction for any individual, business or other entity to lease, rent or otherwise provide premises to another individual, business or entity for the conducting of business when the lessee or renter does not possess a current Bountiful City business license.
Chapter 15: Sexually Oriented Businesses
5-15-101. Purpose.
5-15-102. Findings.
5-15-103. Definitions.
5-15-104. Classification of licenses.
5-15-201. Sexually Oriented Business License Required.
5-15-202. Sexually Oriented Business Employee License Required.
5-15-203. Fees.
5-15-204. Inspection.
5-15-205. Expiration of License.
5-15-206. Unlawful Acts.
5-15-207. Suspension or Revocation of License.
5-15-208. No Transfer of License.
5-15-209. Hours of Operation.
5-15-301. Additional Regulations for Adult Motels.
5-15-302. Additional Regulations For Escort Agencies.
5-15-303. Additional Regulations For Nude Model Studios.
5-15-304. Additional Regulations Concerning Public Nudity.
5-15-305. Regulations Pertaining to Exhibition of Sexually Explicit Films and Videos.
5-15-306. Exterior Portions of Sexually Oriented Businesses.
5-15-307. Signage.
5-15-308. Sale, Use, or Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited.
5-15-309. Persons Under Eighteen Prohibited; Attendant Required.
5-15-310. Massages Prohibited.
5-15-311. Hours of Operation.
5-15-312. Public Nuisance.
5-15-313. Violation a Misdemeanor.
5-15-101. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to regulate sexually oriented businesses and related activities to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of Bountiful City (“the City”), and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the City. The provisions of this ordinance have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market, or to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials.
57
5-15-102. Findings.
Based on the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); and Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); Arcara v. Cloud Books, Inc., 478 U.S. 697, (1986); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); Iacobucei v. City of Newport, Ky, 479 U.S. 92 (1986); United States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367 (1968); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); Kev, Inc. v. Kitsap County, 793 F.2d 1053 (9th Cir. 1 986); Hang On, Inc. v. City of Arlington,, 65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir. 1995); and South Florida Free Beaches, Inc. v. City of Miami, 734 F.2d 608 (I I th Cir. 1984), as well as studies conducted in other cities including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and Beaumont, Texas; and findings reported in the Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (I 986), the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), and statistics obtained from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Council finds that:
(a) sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments, and there is presently no mechanism to hold owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises.
(b) crime statistics show that all types of crimes, especially sex-related crimes, occur with more frequency in neighborhoods where sexually oriented businesses are located. See, e.g., studies of the cities of Phoenix, Arizona; Indianapolis, Indiana; and Austin, Texas.
(c) sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows. See, e.g., California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109, 111 (1972). The offering and providing of such booths and/or cubicles encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. See, e.g., Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 376-77.
(d) persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses, for the purpose of engaging in sex within those premises. See, e.g., Arcara v. Cloud Books, Inc., 478 U.S. 697, 698 (1986); see also Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 376-77.
(e) at least fifty communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections, and shigella infections. See, e.g., Study of Fort Meyers, Florida.
(f) for the period 1985 through 1995, the total number of reported cases of AIDS in the United States caused by the immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was 523,056. See, e.g., Statistics of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
(g) the total number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the United States reported during the ten year period 1985-1995 was 367,796. See, e.g., Statistics of the U.S. Department of Health and Human
58
Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
(h) the number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at a high level, with a total of 1,250,581 cases reported during the period 1993-1995. See, e.g. Statistics of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
(i) the surgeon general of the United States in his report of October 22, 1986, advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug use, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn.
(j) according to the best scientific evidence available, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. See, e.g. Findings of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
(k) sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. See, e.g., Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 377.
(l) numerous studies and reports have determined that bodily fluids, including semen and urine, are found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult" oriented films. See, e.g., Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 377.
(m) nude dancing in adult establishments encourages prostitution, increases sexual assaults, and attracts other criminal activity (see, e.g., Barnes v. Glen Theatre, 501 U.S. 560, 583 (1991)), and increases the likelihood of drug-dealing and drug use. See, e.g., Kev, Inc. v. Kitsap County, 793 F.2d 1053, 1056 (9th Cir. 1 986).
(n) these findings raise substantial governmental concerns.
(o) sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns.
(p) a reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore non-existent incentive on the operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety, and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the City. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein.
(q) the disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and criminal activity.
(r) it is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct this ordinance is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity.
59
(s) the fact that an applicant for a sexually oriented business or employee license has been convicted of a sex-related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention to this ordinance, and the barring of such individuals from operation or employment in sexually oriented businesses for a period of ten years for a previous felony conviction serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.
(t) this ordinance is necessary and proper to provide for safety, to preserve health, and to promote the prosperity, improve the morals, peace and good order, comfort and convenience of the city and its inhabitants, and is authorized on that basis by Section 10-8-84 of the Utah State Code.
5-15-103. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter the following words shall have the meanings given. However, acts prohibited elsewhere in this chapter are not permitted merely by being included within these definitions.
(a) “Adult Arcade” means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or token-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas. "
(b) “Adult Bookstore” or “Adult Video Store” means a commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any of the following:
(1) books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or
(2) instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities."
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and still be categorized as “adult bookstore” or “adult video store.” Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an “adult bookstore” or “adult video store”so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials that depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." A principal business purpose need not be a primary use of an establishment so long as it is a significant use based upon the visible inventory or commercial activity of the establishment.
(c) “Adult cabaret” means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features:
(1) persons who appear in a state of semi-nudity; or
(2) films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or
60
(3) persons who engage in erotic dancing or performances that are intended for the sexual interests or titillation of an audience or customers.
(d) “Adult motel” means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that:
(1) offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right of way that advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or
(2) offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than twenty-four hours; or
(3) allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than twenty-four hours.
(e) “Adult motion picture theater” means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(f) “Adult Theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features persons who appear, in person, in a state of semi-nudity.
(g) “Director” means the Bountiful City Director of Planning and Redevelopment.
(h) “Employee” means a person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full time, part time, contract basis, or independent basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise, and whether or not the said person is paid a salary, wage, or other compensation by the operator of said business. "Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises, nor does "employee" include a person exclusively on the premises as a patron or customer.
(i) “Escort” means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
(j) “Escort agency” means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
(k) “Establishment” means and includes any of the following:
(1) the opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
(2) the conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
61
(3) the additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
(4) the relocation of any sexually oriented business; or
(5) a sexually oriented business or premises on which the sexually oriented business is located.
(l) “Licensed day-care center” means a facility licensed by the State of Utah whether situated within the City or not, that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than twelve children under fourteen years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for less than twenty-four hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the services it offers.
(m) “Licensee” means a person in whose name a license has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license.
(n) “Nude model studio” means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons for consideration.
(o) “Nudity” or “a state of nudity”means the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, male genitals, female genitals, or vulva, with less than a fully opaque covering; or a female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.
(p) “Person” means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
(q) “Premises” means the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a business license.
(r) “Semi-nude” or “semi-nudity” means:
(1) for a female, a state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more, or little more, than the nipple and areola of the female breast, the genitals, pubic region and anus; or
(2) for a male, a state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more, or little more, than the genitals, pubic region and anus.
(s) “Sexual encounter center” means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
(1) physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
(2) activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.
62
(t) “Sexually oriented business” means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
(u) “Specified anatomical areas”means:
(1) the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if fully and opaquely covered;
(2) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
(v) “Specified criminal activity” means any of the following offenses:
(1) prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; sexual assault; molestation of a child; or any similar sex-related offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of this state, other states, or other countries.
(2) for which:
(A) less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
(B) less than ten years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense;
(C) less than ten years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four month period;
(3) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
(w) “Specified sexual activities”means and includes any of the following:
(1) the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts, whether covered or uncovered;
(2) sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
(3) masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(4) excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1) through (3) above.
63
(x) “Transfer of ownership or control” of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following:
(1) the sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
(2) the transfer of securities that form a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
(3) the establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device that transfers the
ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control.
5-15-104. Classification of licenses.
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: (a) adult arcades; (b) adult bookstores or adult video stores; (c) adult cabarets; (d) adult motels; (e) adult motion picture theaters; (f) adult theaters; (g) escort agencies; (h) nude model studios; and (i) sexual encounter centers.
5-15-201. Sexually Oriented Business License Required.
(a) It is a unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license.
(b) It is unlawful for any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work and/or perform services on the premises of the sexually oriented business, if such employee is not in possession of a valid sexually oriented business employee license, except if the employment is of limited duration and for the sole purpose of repair and/or maintenance of machinery, equipment, or the premises.
(c) An application for a sexually oriented business license must be made on a form provided by the City.
(d) The application must be accompanied by a sketch or a diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. It need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Prior to issuance of a license, the premises must be inspected by the health department, fire department, building department, zoning department and police department.
(e) The applicant shall provide such information (including fingerprints) as necessary to enable the City to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established under this ordinance. The applicant has an affirmative duty to supplement an application with new information received subsequent to the date the application was deemed completed.
(f) If a person who wishes to own or operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a business license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than a single individual, each individual who has a ten percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a business license as applicant.
(g) Applications for a business license, whether original or renewal, must be made by the intended
64
operator of the enterprise. The following information shall be provided on the application form:
(1) The name, street address (and mailing address if different) of the applicant(s);
(2) A recent photograph of the applicant(s);
(3) The applicant's driver's license number, Social Security number, and/or his/her state or federally issued tax identification number;
(4) The name under which the establishment is to be operated and a general description of the services to be provided. If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, the fictitious name must be stated together with documents proving legal entitlement to the name;
(5) Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been convicted, or is awaiting trial on pending charges, of a "specified criminal activity" and, if so, the "specified criminal activity" involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each;
(6) Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a previous license under this ordinance or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the business license was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant is or has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is or was licensed under a sexually oriented business ordinance whose business license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the business license was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation;
(7) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds any other licenses under this ordinance or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses;
(8) The classification of license for which the applicant is filing;
(9) The telephone number of the establishment;
(10) The address and legal description of the tract of land on which the establishment is to be located;
(11) If the establishment is in operation, the date on which the owner(s) acquired the establishment for which the business license is sought, and the date on which the establishment began operations as a sexually oriented business at the location for which the business license is sought;
(12) If the establishment is not in operation, the expected startup date (which shall be expressed in number of days from the date of issuance of the business license). If the expected startup date is to be more than ten days following the date of issuance of the business license, then a detailed explanation of the construction, repair or remodeling work or other cause of the expected delay and a statement of the owner's time schedule and plan for accomplishing the same;
65
(h) Each application for a business license shall be accompanied by the following:
(1) Payment of the application fee;
(2) If the establishment is a Utah corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto, or if a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in this state, together with all amendments thereto;
(3) If the establishment is a limited partnership formed under the laws of Utah, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto, or if a foreign limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto;
(4) Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the establishment is to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed;
(5) If the persons identified as the fee owner(s) of the tract of land are not also the owners of the establishment, then the lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or other document(s) evidencing the legally enforceable right of the owners or proposed owners of the establishment to have or obtain the use and possession of the tract or portion thereof that is to be used for the establishment for the purpose of the operation of the establishment;
(6) A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any existing sexually oriented businesses, established religious institution/synagogue, school, public park or recreation area, or family-oriented entertainment business within one thousand feet of the property. For purposes of this Section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted; and
(7) Any of items (2) through (6), above shall not be required for a renewal application if the applicant states that the documents previously furnished the Director with the original application or previous renewals thereof remain correct and current.
(i) Every application for a license shall contain a statement certifying that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application, that the information contained therein and furnished therewith is true and correct; and the applicant has read the provisions of this ordinance.
(j) A separate application and business license shall be required for each sexually oriented business classification.
(k) The Director shall approve or deny issuance of the license within forty-five days of receipt of the completed application. The Director shall issue a license to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
(1) An applicant has failed to provide the information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form;
(2) An applicant is under the age of eighteen years;
66
(3) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been denied a license by the City to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding twelve months, or whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve months;
(4) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing is overdue in payment to the City in taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation to any business;
(5) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity;”
(6) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the health department, fire department, the police department, or the building department as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances;
(7) The license fee required under this ordinance has not been paid;
(8) An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of, or is not in compliance with, one or more of the provisions of this ordinance.
(l) The license issued shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business, and the classification for which the license is issued. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.
(m) The health department, fire department, building department, police department and zoning department shall complete their certification that the premises are in compliance or not in compliance within twenty days of receipt of the completed application by the Director. The certification shall be promptly presented to the Director.
(n) In the event that the Director determines that an applicant is not eligible for a sexually oriented business license, the applicant shall be given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial within forty five days of the receipt of the completed application by the Director, provided that the applicant may request, in writing at any time before the notice is issued, that such period be extended for an additional period of not more than ten days in order to make modifications necessary to comply with this ordinance.
(o) An applicant may appeal the decision of the Director regarding a denial to the Bountiful City Administrative Law Judge by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Recorder within fifteen days after service of notice upon the applicant of the Director's decision. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The Director may, within fifteen days of service upon him of the applicant's memorandum, submit a memorandum in response to the memorandum filed by the applicant on appeal to the Bountiful City Administrative Law Judge. After reviewing such memoranda, as well as the Director's written decision, if any, and exhibits submitted to the Director, the Bountiful City Administrative Law Judge shall either uphold or overrule the Director's decision. However, all parties shall be required to comply with the Director's decision during the pendency of the appeal.
67
(p) A license may annually renewed upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the Director that the applicant has not been convicted of any "specified criminal activity" or committed any act during the existence of the previous license which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The decision whether to renew a license shall be made within thirty days of the completed application. The renewal of a license shall be subject to the fee as set forth in Section 5-15-203.
5-15-202. Sexually Oriented Business Employee License Required.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business if such person is not in possession of a valid sexually oriented business employee license issued to such person by the Director pursuant to this ordinance, except if the employment is of limited duration and for the sole purpose of repair and/or maintenance of machinery, equipment, or the premises.
(b) The applicant shall provide such information (including fingerprints) as necessary to enable the City to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established under this ordinance. The applicant has an affirmative duty to supplement an application with new information received subsequent to the date the application was deemed completed.
(c) Each application for an employee license shall be accompanied by payment of the application fee. Application forms shall be supplied by the Director, and shall include the following information:
(1) The applicant's given name, and any other names by which the applicant is or has been known, including "stage" names and/or aliases;
(2) Age, and date and place of birth;
(3) Height, weight, hair color, and eye color;
(4) Present residence address and telephone number;
(5) Present business address and telephone number;
(6) Date, issuing state, and number of photo driver's license, or other state issued
identification card information;
(7) Social Security Number; and
(8) Proof that the individual is at least eighteen years old.
(d) Attached to the application form for a license shall be the following:
(1) A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the police department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant.
(2) A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant, in this or any other city, county, state, or country, has ever had any license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit
68
denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name(s) under which the license was sought and/or issued, the name(s) of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason(s) for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the application.
(3) A statement whether the applicant has been convicted, or is awaiting trial on pending charges, of a "specified criminal activity" and, if so, the "specified criminal activity" involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each.
(e) Every application for a license shall contain a statement certifying that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application, that the information contained therein and furnished therewith is true and correct; and the applicant has read the provisions of this ordinance.
(f) The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits and/or licenses does not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business or employee license.
(g) The application shall then be referred to the appropriate city departments for investigation to be made on the information contained in the application. The application process shall be completed within thirty days from the date of the completed application. After the investigation, the Director shall issue an employee license unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
(1) The applicant has failed to provide the information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form;
(2) The applicant is under the age of eighteen years;
(3) The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity;”
(4) The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule, or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this ordinance; or
(5) The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the City within two years of the date of the current application.
(h) The license issued shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The employee shall keep the license on his or her person at all times while engaged in employment or performing services on the sexually oriented business premises so that said license may be available for inspection upon lawful request.
(i) The license shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the Director that the applicant has not been convicted of any "specified criminal activity" or committed any act during the existence of the previous license which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The decision whether to renew a license shall be made within thirty days of the completed application. The renewal of a license shall be subject to the fee as set forth in Section 5-15-203.
5-15-203. Fees.
69
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license, whether new or renewal, is Five Hundred Dollars. The annual fee for a sexually oriented business employee license, whether new or renewal, is Fifty Dollars. These fees are to be used to pay for the cost of the administration and enforcement of this ordinance.
5-15-204. Inspection.
An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Police Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Building Department, or other city or state departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time it is open for business. It is unlawful to refuse such an inspection.
5-15-205. Expiration of License.
(a) Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance.
(b) An application for renewal of an existing license should be made at least thirty days before the expiration date. If an application for renewal is made less than thirty days before the expiration date, the license will expire as scheduled and remain invalid until a new license is issued.
(b) When the Director denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial.
5-15-206. Unlawful Acts.
The following acts are unlawful:
(a) any violation of, or non-compliance with the requirements of, this ordinance;
(b) intoxication on the premises of a sexually oriented business;
(c) refusal to promptly allow inspection of the premises as authorized by this ordinance;
(d) permitting gambling by any person on the premises;
(e) permitting the possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
(f) permitting the sale, use, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises;
(g) permitting prostitution on the premises;
(h) permitting any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other any other specified sexual activity or conduct to occur in or on the premises;
5-15-207. Suspension or Revocation of License.
(a) The City Council may suspend or revoke a license upon any basis set out in section 5-1-108 of the Bountiful City Code, or if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
70
(1) committed any unlawful act set out in this ordinance;
(2) is delinquent in payment to the City or State for any taxes or fees; or
(3) has attempted to sell his business or employee license, or has sold, assigned, or transferred ownership or control of the sexually oriented business to a non-licensee;
(b) When the City Council revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented license for one year from the date revocation became effective.
5-15-208. No Transfer of License.
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application.
5-15-209. Hours of Operation.
Sexually oriented businesses may be open only between the hours of 10 a.m. to 10 p.m. It is unlawful to be open to the public during any other hours.
5-15-301. Additional Regulations for Adult Motels.
(a) Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial enterprise has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the enterprise is an adult motel.
(b) It is unlawful if a person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial enterprise that does not have a sexually oriented business license, rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. The terms "rent" and "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
5-15-302. Additional Regulations For Escort Agencies.
It is unlawful for an escort agency to employ a person under the age of 18 years, or for a person under the age of 18 to act, agree to act, or attempt to act as an escort.
5-15-303. Additional Regulations For Nude Model Studios.
(a) Nudity is prohibited in a nude model studio. However, an exception may be granted in the reasonable discretion of the Licensing Supervisor upon a finding that the operation is in fact a bona fide art instruction business.
(b) A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
(c) It is unlawful for a person under the age of 18 years to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio.
(d) It is unlawful to appear in a state of nudity, or with knowledge, allow another to appear in a state of
71
nudity or semi-nudity, in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right of way.
(e) A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public.
(f) It is a defense to prosecution under this ordinance that a person appearing in a state of nudity or semi-nudity did so in a modeling class operated by either a proprietary school licensed by the State of Utah, a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation, or by a private college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation.
5-15-304. Additional Regulations Concerning Public Nudity.
(a) It is unlawful for a person to appear live in a state of nudity in a sexually oriented business.
(b) It is unlawful for a person to appear live in a state of semi-nudity unless the person is an employee who is at least ten feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet above the floor.
(c) It is unlawful for an employee, while in a state of semi-nudity in a sexually oriented business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer, or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity to any such employee.
(d) It is unlawful for an employee, while in a state of semi-nudity in a sexually oriented business, to touch a patron or the clothing of a patron, or for a patron to touch any such employee.
5-15-305. Regulations Pertaining to Exhibition of Sexually Explicit Films and Videos.
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction, that depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
(a) Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the business license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The Director may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
(b) Every application for a license shall contain a statement certifying that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application, that the information contained therein and furnished therewith is true and correct; and the applicant has read the provisions of this ordinance.
72
(c) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the Director or his designee.
(d) It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
(e) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of the entire area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of the entire area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.
(f) It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (e) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted, as designated in the license application.
(g) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
(h) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five foot-candle as measured at the floor level.
(i) It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
(j) No licensee shall allow an opening of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths.
(k) No person shall make any attempt to make an opening of any kind between the viewing booths or rooms.
(l) The operator of the sexually oriented business shall, during each business day, inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist.
(m) The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
(n) The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within forty-eight inches of the floor.
5-15-306. Exterior Portions of Sexually Oriented Businesses.
(a) It is unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from any point outside the establishment.
73
(b) It is unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the exterior portion of the sexually oriented business to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by the provisions of this ordinance.
(c) It is unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any color other than a single achromatic color. This provision shall not apply to a sexually oriented business if the establishment is a part of a commercial multi-unit center and the exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted the same color as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial multi-unit center.
5-15-307. Signage.
Notwithstanding any other city ordinance, code, or regulation to the contrary, it is unlawful for the operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person to erect, construct, or maintain any sign for the sexually oriented business other than the one outside sign. It shall have no more than two display surfaces. Each such display surface shall be a flat plane and shall not contain any flashing lights, shall not exceed seventy-five square feet in area, and shall not exceed ten feet in height or ten feet in length.
5-15-308. Sale, Use, or Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited.
The sale, use, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually oriented business is prohibited.
5-15-309. Persons Under Eighteen Prohibited; Attendant Required.
(a) It is unlawful to allow a person who is younger than eighteen years of age to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time the sexually oriented business.
(b) An attendant must be stationed at each public entrance to the sexually oriented business at all times during such sexually oriented businesses' regular business hours.
5-15-310. Massages Prohibited.
No massage therapy license shall be issued to, or upon the same premises as, or to an employee or business partner of, a sexually oriented business.
5-15-311. Hours of Operation.
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
5-15-312. Public Nuisance.
Any sexually oriented business operating without a valid business license is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and may be summarily abated by closing the business or may be abated by either criminal or civil action.
74
5-15-313. Violation a Misdemeanor.
Any violation of this chapter is a Class B misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 16: ICE CREAM VENDORS
5-16-101. License Required.
5-16-102. License Fee.
5-16-103. Time Limit.
5-16-104. Driver Certification
5-16-105 Equipment Required for Street Vending Vehicles.
5-16-106. Vending Restrictions.
5-16-107. Prohibited Conduct.
5-16-101. License Required.
(a) “Ice cream vendor” as used in this chapter includes any person traveling by wagon,
motor vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, or from street to street carrying, conveying, or transporting ice cream, frozen confectionaries, or similar goods and wares, offering or exposing the same for sale from a wagon, motor vehicle, or other vehicle of conveyance.
(b) No person shall vend or sell ice cream or other similar frozen confectionaries from a vehicle on public streets without first having first obtained an Ice Cream Vendors License, which shall be in addition to a regular business license.
5-16-102. License Fee.
A $100 annual fee will be required for any ice cream vendor license.
5-16-103. Time Limit.
An ice cream vendor license shall be valid for the calendar year in which it is issued, or part thereof remaining. No ice cream vendor license shall be renewable year to year. A new license, meeting all of the criteria as required by this Chapter, must be obtained each year.
5-16-104. Driver Certification.
Each ice cream vendor business applying for a license under this Chapter shall submit a list of drivers who will operate ice cream vending vehicles in Bountiful City. All drivers on that list shall:
(a) at their own expense, annually obtain and submit to the City a certified copy of their criminal
record report from the Bureau of Criminal Identification (BCI) in Salt Lake City, Utah;
(b) possess a valid Utah Drivers License; and
(c) be 18 year of age or older.
5-16-105 Equipment Required for Street Vending Vehicles
75
The following equipment shall be required on any street vending vehicle or means of conveyance used by an ice cream vendor in Bountiful City:
(a) A vehicle with no trailers.
(b) A swing arm caution sign reading “SLOW Children Crossing” that can be extended horizontally
from the left side of the vehicle by a motor.
(c) A convex mirror mounted on the front of the vehicle so that the driver, in his/her normal seated
position, can see the area in front of the truck obscured by the hood.
(d) A beacon light placed on the top of the truck which will be visible to oncoming traffic.
5-16-106. Vending Restrictions
The following restrictions shall apply to any ice cream vendor within the city limits of Bountiful City:
(a) It is unlawful to stop for the purposes of selling without the swing arm stop sign in its
extended position.
(b) A driver shall not vend on streets where the speed limit exceeds twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
(c) A driver shall vend only when the vending vehicle is lawfully parked.
(d) A driver shall vend only from the curb side or rear of the vending vehicle, away from moving
traffic and as near as possible to the curb or edge of the roadway.
(e) A driver shall not vend to any person standing in the roadway.
(f) A driver shall not back the vending vehicle to make or attempt a sale.
(g) A driver shall not permit any unauthorized person to ride on or in the vending vehicle.
5-16-107. Prohibited Conduct.
The following restrictions apply to any ice cream vending vehicle within the city limits of Bountiful City:
(a) No ice cream vending vehicle may be stopped or parked:
(1) on a sidewalk.
(2) within twenty (20) feet of an intersection.
(3) on or in a crosswalk.
(4) between a safety zone and the adjacent curb.
(5) alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping or parking
76
would obstruct traffic.
(6) in front of a public or private driveway.
(7) within thirty (30) feet of any flashing signal, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal.
(8) alongside or opposite a curb area which has been constructed to provide accessibility to
the sidewalk.
(b) No person authorized to engage in business of vending under this Chapter shall do any of the
following:
(1) Unduly obstruct pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic flow.
(2) Obstruct traffic signals or regulatory signs.
(3) Stop, stand, or park any vehicle, pushcart, or any other conveyance upon any street for
the purpose of selling during the hours when stopping, standing, and parking have been prohibited by signs or curb markings.
(4) Leave any conveyance unattended at any time, or store, park, or leave such conveyance
in a public space overnight.
(5) Sell any goods, wares, or merchandise within the right-of-way of public street in a
commercial, hospital or professional zone; or within 200 feet of the boundary of a commercial, hospital, or professional zone.
(6) Operate any sound amplifier system contrary to the provisions of Chapter 6 of this Title.
(7) Conduct business on private residential property.
(8) Conduct business on private commercial property without first having obtained a
temporary business license under Chapter 12 of this Title for the specific business location.
Chapter 17 Sidewalk Cafes
5-17-101. Sidewalk Café.
Subject to the regulations stated herein, outdoor dining on a public sidewalk or land as part of a restaurant business (a “Sidewalk Café”) is allowed only by permit and only in the Downtown Zone on Main Street between 400 North and 500 South. It is unlawful to have outdoor dining on public property without a Sidewalk Café License.
5-17-102. Licensing.
A Sidewalk Café License may be issued by the Bountiful City Planning & Economic Development Director if all conditions are met and continuously maintained:
(a) A signed and completed Sidewalk Café License application must be submitted with an application fee of $50, which shall be applied to the calendar year license fee of $50. The applicant must be a fully
77
lawful and licensed restaurant. An annual Sidewalk Café License must be obtained, and an annual license fee of $50 must be paid, in addition to the other required licensing of the restaurant.
(b) The application must include a scaled drawing of the proposed sidewalk café use, including dimensions, seating, capacity, etc. The plan must comply with the requirements of this ordinance and must demonstrate that the Sidewalk Café will not interfere with adequate pedestrian flow, access to building entrances, pedestrian and traffic safety, and the aesthetic quality of the surrounding area, and that the proposal meets the Sidewalk Café regulations contained herein. The Planning Director may require modifications to the plan prior to approval. The operation of the Sidewalk Café must be in compliance with the approved plan.
(c) The applicant must sign and comply with the terms of a Sidewalk Café License Agreement. The Licensee must agree to indemnify and defend the City in all respects relating to the use of public property for the Licensee’s business.
(d) A Sidewalk Café License is non-transferrable.
(e) Any license issued hereunder vests no right, title or interest whatsoever by the Licensee in, or in the use of, the public right of way or public property. The Sidewalk Café program and any license issued under it is revocable at will by the City.
(f) The City reserves the right to deny a license if in the City Planning Director’s opinion the proposed location is not suitable for a sidewalk café, such as a narrow sidewalk, a busy traffic street, a narrow business frontage, etc. Such a denial may be appealed to the Bountiful City Administrative Law Judge.
(g) The City reserves the right and power to terminate the license agreement for any reason, including, but not limited to, a violation of any provision of this ordinance and/or the terms of the license agreement. This termination may be appealed within fifteen days to the Bountiful City Administrative Law Judge. The licensing program can be discontinued by the City at any time, and the prorated balance of the annual licensing fee refunded.
(h) The License may be summarily suspended for up to five days by the Planning Director for violation of the License Agreement. This suspension may be appealed to the Bountiful City Manager.
(i) The License may be permanently revoked by the Planning Director for violation of the License Agreement. This revocation may be appealed within fifteen days to the Bountiful City Administrative Law Judge.
5-17-103. Insurance Requirements.
The Sidewalk Cafe licensee must have and continuously maintain in effect, and provide proof to the City, liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and $1,000,000 aggregate combined single limit, and must name the City as an additional insured in that policy.
5-17-104. Sidewalk Café Regulations.
All Sidewalk Cafes must continuously comply with the following requirements:
(a) The conducting of a sidewalk cafe business is at the sole risk of the licensee. The City assumes no liability with respect to any such business.
78
(b) Outdoor dining may be conducted at any time of the year. If it snows during that time, outdoor dining must be suspended and outdoor furnishings removed immediately by the licensee for snow removal.
(c) The City reserves the right and power to temporarily order the discontinuation of the operation of public outdoor dining at any time because of anticipated or actual problems or conflicts in the use of the sidewalk area. These situations include, but are not limited to, festivals, parades, marches, road races, repairs to the street or sidewalk, or any emergencies occurring in the area. To the extent possible, the Licensee shall be given prior written notice of the time period during which the operation of outdoor dining will not be permitted by the City, but failure to give notice shall not affect the right and power of the City to prohibit outdoor dining operation at any particular time.
(d) Outdoor dining may be located only on public sidewalks adjacent to or abutting the indoor restaurant which operates the outdoor dining. Outdoor dining shall extend no further than the actual street frontage of the operating restaurant, unless approved in writing by the adjacent property owner (which approval may be revoked by the adjacent owner at any time).
(e) The outdoor dining operation shall provide not less than six contiguous feet of sidewalk clear of obstructions to allow unimpeded pedestrian traffic next to the front of the building. The term “obstructions” includes, but is not be limited to, railings, tables, chairs, planters, umbrellas, and signs.
(f) The location of outdoor dining cannot obstruct the clear sight distance for vehicles or access or crossings for the disabled. The Bountiful City Engineer has the authority to determine whether the outdoor dining constitutes an obstruction. Any obstruction may be summarily moved or removed by the City.
(g) Outdoor dining operation shall meet all Building Code requirements and Zoning Code Regulations.
(h) No modifications shall be made to City property without written approval of the City Planning Director.
(i) Furnishings for outdoor dining shall consist solely of movable tables, chairs and decorative accessories. Furnishings must be suitable for the purpose, kept in a state of good repair and in a clean and safe condition at all times.
(j) Awnings shall be adequately secured and retractable. Umbrellas over tables must be adequately weighted and safe.
(k) Tables, chairs, and all other furnishings or accessories may, at the risk of the licensee, be left in place overnight during seasonal operation but shall be removed from the sidewalk and stored indoors whenever outdoor dining is not in seasonal operation. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to secure furnishings and accessories that are left in place overnight.
(l) Outdoor heaters with power cords, busing stations, and food preparation are not permitted in the outdoor dining facility.
(m) Outdoor dining shall be at the same elevation as the public sidewalk. Paint, carpeting, artificial turf, platforms or other surfaces of any kind are not permitted at any time in the outdoor dining facility.
79
(n) No sign shall be allowed at any outdoor dining facility except for the name of the establishment on an awning or umbrella fringe. One menu board sign may be displayed within the area of the outdoor dining, mounted on an easel or other easily removable fixture. The sign shall not exceed six square feet.
(o) Alcohol, beer and wine may not be served on a public sidewalk.
(p) Outdoor dining may operate during regular business hours of the restaurant operating the outdoor dining but no later than 11:00 p.m.
(q) The licensee of outdoor dining is responsible for keeping the premises clean and clear of trash at all times, including the public sidewalk and other furnishings of the outdoor dining. At no time should trash or debris of any kind be blown, swept or otherwise deposited into the street. The presetting of tables with utensils, glasses, napkins, condiments and the like is prohibited.
(r) The premises must be maintained in an orderly manner. The Licensee is responsible for the good conduct of its customers in the public right of way or property.
(s) No food preparation shall be done by the Licensee in the public right of way or land.
(t) There shall be public address system broadcast within or to the outdoor dining area. A restaurant owner wishing to have music must apply to the City for a sound amplifier license under Section 5-6-102 of the Bountiful City Code.
(u) If the restaurant owner desires to have a sidewalk café area that includes grass, such as in a parkstrip, the owner must either undertake all maintenance, mowing, etc, or remove all furniture every night to allow City maintenance. The City reserves the right to monitor such a situation and to make further requirements concerning lawn maintenance.
(v) Such other rules or restrictions as are deemed necessary by the City Planning Director under the circumstances of the location and business may be required.
(w) Regulations applicable to a sidewalk café business may be added, modified or repealed by the City at any time without notice.
80
Title 6
Public Works and Property
Chapter 1: Cemetery
Chapter 2: Streets and Sidewalks
Chapter 3: Water Courses
Chapter 4: Water Pollution
Chapter 5: Water and Sewer Service
Chapter 6: Non-Payment of Utility Accounts and
Service to Newly Annexed Areas or Areas not Previously Served by the City
Chapter 7: Wastewater System Regulations
Chapter 8: Pressure Irrigation
Chapter 9: Excavation in Streets and Public Properties
Chapter 10: Existing Utilities
Chapter 11: Reserved.
Chapter 12: Parks and Recreation
Chapter 13: Municipal Improvement District Act
Chapter 14: Impact Fees
Chapter 15: Storm Drainage Utility
Chapter 16: Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
Chapter 17: Public Utility Easements
Chapter 1: Cemetery
6-1-101. All Dead Interred in Cemeteries
6-1-102. Superintendent
6-1-103. Designation of Cemetery Areas
6-1-104. Sale of Burial Rights
6-1-105. Burial of Indigents
6-1-106. Placement of Markers and Monuments
6-1-107. Artificial Flowers
6-1-108. Regulations
6-1-109. Prohibited Acts
6-1-101. All Dead Interred in Cemeteries
No body of any deceased person shall be interred within the city except in the city cemetery or in such other cemetery as may be established with the consent of the governing body.
6-1-102. Superintendent
The City Manager shall appoint a qualified person to be the cemetery superintendent, who shall be responsible for the maintenance and operation of the cemetery. All markers, planting, improvements or other work of any nature or description must be done under the direction and control of the cemetery superintendent. No person owning a right in a lot in the cemetery shall plant, grade or do any work in said cemetery except by written permission obtained from the cemetery superintendent. The cemetery
81
superintendent shall keep a public record of the place of burial of every person so reported to him.
6-1-103. Designation of Cemetery Areas
(a) Raised marker area. The cemetery superintendent shall designate and plot areas of the cemetery where "above grass-level" monuments and markers are permitted and areas of the cemetery where only "grass-level" monuments and markers are permitted. The two areas shall be so arranged and of sufficient size so as to be easily differentiated upon visual inspection.
(b) Child burial spaces. The cemetery superintendent may designate a separate area of the cemetery for the burial of children and may sell burial rights therein as provided in Section 6-1-109. The size of such child burial space shall be one-half the size of the adult burial space.
(c) Double-depth burial areas. The cemetery superintendent may designate a separate area of the cemetery share 2 caskets may be buried, one atop the other, in the same burial space and may sell burial rights therein as provided in Section 6-1-109.
(d) Other areas. The cemetery superintendent may designate a portion of the cemetery for the location of urns containing the ashes of cremated persons and may sell burial rights therein as provided in Section 6-1-109.
(e) The cemetery superintendent shall file in the office of the City Recorder an accurate plat thereof, which shall clearly show the sections of burial lots which have been disposed of and the names of the persons owning or holding the same, and the sections of burial lots held for disposal; and thereafter he shall file additional plats of any additions to the cemetery before offering for sale any burial lots therein.
6-1-104. Sale of Burial Rights
(a) The cemetery superintendent may sell burial rights in the city cemetery.
(b) To each purchaser of a burial right in the city cemetery, the cemetery superintendent shall issue a certificate showing a description of the burial space to which the burial right pertains. The certificate shall indicate that future perpetual care and maintenance for such burial space has been paid for. The certificate of burial right in a burial space within the "raised marker" area of the cemetery shall indicate whether a "raised marker" is permitted or whether the burial space is for "grass-level marker only."
6-1-105. Burial of Indigents
The city manager and the cemetery superintendent may authorize the burial of indigents without the payment of the fees required by this Chapter.
6-1-106. Placement of Markers and Monuments
(a) All monuments and markers must have a finished grass-level stone or cement base extending outward for a minimum of eight inches from the outer perimeter of the base of the marker or from the receptacle for a flower vase or pot.
(b) All markers and monuments placed in the cemetery shall be grass-level, except that placement of above-grass-level markers or monuments shall be permitted only upon all the following conditions:
82
(1) Payment of the fee as provided in Section 6-1-109.
(2) In an area designated as a "raised marker" section of the cemetery;
(3) Only one above-grass-level marker or monument will be permitted for any burial plot of four or more contiguous grave spaces under the same ownership; and
(4) Upon a burial space, for which the burial rights certificate indicates a "raised marker" is permitted.
6-1-107. Artificial Flowers
Artificial flowers, potted plants and grave decorations are not permitted from April 1 to November 1 during the mowing season with these exceptions:
(a) If they are in a raised vase or marker, or in the opinion of the staff they do not interfere with mowing the grass or upkeep of the grounds.
(b) They will be allowed beginning the Saturday before Memorial Day, but must be removed before the following Saturday.
Flat marker or headstone vases that are attached by chain or other methods and can be removed or put in the base receptacle so as to be flush with the grass level are not considered a raised vase.
6-1-108. Regulations
The Cemetery Superintendent may adopt rules and regulations necessary for the operation of the cemetery .
6-1-109. Prohibited Acts
(a) It is unlawful for the owner, agent, caretaker, or other person in charge of livestock to allow or negligently permit animals to run at large or trespass on cemetery grounds. This does not apply to seeing-eye dogs or police dogs used by law enforcement agencies.
(b) It is unlawful to injure, deface, take or carry away from any grave or lot any monument, marker, tree, shrub, flower, ground or any other property or ornament in the city cemetery, except by written permission of the cemetery superintendent. For the purposes of this section, the person who removes such property shall be deemed not to be the owner thereof, unless he has previously obtained permission for such removal.
(c) It is unlawful to drive any vehicle over any grave or upon any non-paved area of the cemetery or to drive any motor vehicle within the cemetery at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour.
(d) It is unlawful to allow any dog, under his control or ownership, to be within the cemetery, even if under leash.
83
Chapter 2: Streets, Sidewalks, and Public Improvement Bonds
6-2-101. Names of Streets
6-2-102. Numbers for Houses
6-2-103. Superintendent of Streets
6-2-104. Liability for Repair of Sidewalk
6-2-105. Defects to be Reported and Repaired
6-2-106. Building Material in Street
6-2-107. Obstructions
6-2-108. Obstructions to Traffic
6-2-109. Animal on Sidewalk
6-2-110. Coasting on Street
6-2-111. Gates to Swing Inward
6-2-112. Billboards
6-2-113. Sand, Gravel, Lime and Cement
6-2-114. Irrigation Water
6-2-115. Vegetation Damaging Public Improvements
6-2-116. Removal of Snow from Sidewalks
6-2-117. Encroachments
6-2-118. Sight Clearances on Corner Lots
6-2-119 Streets
6-2-120 Alleys
6-2-121 Dead-End Streets
6-2-122 Maximum Grade of Streets
6-2-123 Length and Width of Blocks
6-2-124 Bonds Required
6-2-125 Release of Bonds
6-2-101. Names of Streets
All streets of the City shall be known by the names by which they are so designated on the official map of the city, filed in the office of the City Engineer on the 1st day of January, 1990 and such additions, changes and corrections of the names of streets as shall from time to time be placed on the official map by the City Engineer acting at the direction of the City Council.
6-2-102. Numbers for Houses
(a) The City Engineer shall number all houses or buildings upon the streets of the City.
(b) It is unlawful for any person to erect a house or building without numbering such house or building with the number designated by the City Engineer, or for the occupant of any house or building, or for the owner or agent of any unoccupied habitable house or building to fail for a longer period than ten days after notice from the City Engineer so to do, to number such house or building with the number designated by him. When such number has been designated by the City Engineer the owner or occupant of such house or building shall cause a painted, carved, or cast duplicate of such number at least three inches in height and of a shade in contrast to the background upon which the number is mounted to be
84
placed in a conspicuous position in the front of such house or building, in a permanent, stationary and durable manner unobstructed at all times by vines, screens or anything that would tend to hid or obscure the number.
6-2-103. Superintendent of Streets
The City Manager shall appoint a Superintendent of Streets who shall see that the provisions of this Chapter are faithfully carried out and who shall perform such other and further duties as may be prescribed by the City Council.
6-2-104. Liability for Repair of Sidewalk
Whenever a sidewalk is out of repair by reason of the act or omission of any person, it shall be repaired at such person's expense, under the direction of the Streets Director.
6-2-105. Defects to be Reported and Repaired
All defects in public streets coming to the knowledge of any officer or person in the employ of the city shall be communicated to the Superintendent who shall repair or cause such defect to be promptly repaired. Until such repair is completed he shall do whatever shall be necessary to protect the public from injury by reason of the defect.
6-2-106. Building Material in Street
It is unlawful to occupy or use any portion of the public streets for the erection or repair of any building upon land abutting thereon, without first making application to and receiving from the City Council permission for the occupation or use, for building purposes, of such portions of streets and for such periods of time and under such limitations and restrictions as may be required by the governing body. Any such permission may be revoked by the City Council at any time when the holder thereof fails to comply with any rule or regulation under which it is granted or when, in the opinion of the City Council, the public good requires such revocation.
6-2-107. Obstructions
(a) It is unlawful to put or place, or cause to be put or placed, anywhere upon a public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way, and it is unlawful for any such person, after reasonable notice by an official charged with enforcing the law, to suffer to be or remain within a public street, sidewalk, or right of way:
(1) Any broken ware, glass, filth, rubbish or refuse matter;
(2) Any vehicle, lumber, wood, boxes, fencing, building material, merchandise, or any other thing which obstructs any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way, or any part thereof, or the free use and enjoyment thereof, or the free passage over and upon the same, or any part thereof, without the permission of the governing body.
(b) No person receiving or delivering goods, wares or merchandise in the City shall place or keep upon, or cause to be placed or kept upon, any sidewalk in the city any goods, wares or merchandise which he may be receiving or delivering, for a longer period than two hours. It is unlawful for any merchant, auctioneer or other individual to sell or exhibit for sale any kind of property on or near to any street so as
85
to cause people to gather in crowds on the sidewalk or to obstruct free passage thereon, provided that the governing body may authorize, after proper application, a merchant or group of merchants to conduct a "sidewalk sale".
6-2-108. Obstructions to Traffic
(a) It is unlawful to obstruct the free travel of any pedestrian or vehicle lawfully upon a public street or sidewalk, except as provided in subsection (b).
(b) A person may obstruct the flow of vehicular traffic upon the public street, other than a state highway within the city, if permission is obtained from the Chief of Police. Application for permission shall be made in writing at least five (5) days in advance, and shall give the following:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the person requesting permission; if the street is to be blocked in connection with or on behalf of any organization, the name address, and telephone number of the authorized head of the organization;
(2) The purpose for which permission is requested, and the date, time, and location of the intended obstruction;
(3) The means to be used to block traffic;
(4) The written consent of each property owner, or resident if the owner does not reside on the property, of each parcel of property with frontage on the property being obstructed, or within 200 feet of the blockade or obstruction;
(5) The approximate number of persons who will participate in the activity or function for which permission is sought.
(c) The means used to block traffic shall be arranged and maintained so as to allow emergency access by vehicles or pedestrians to residences within the obstructed area. For good cause, the permission granted may be revoked without prior notice by the Police Chief or any sworn officer in the Bountiful Police Department.
(d) The provisions of this section shall not apply to obstructions necessitated by excavations and other work, for which a permit has been issued under Section 11-9-3.
6-2-109. Animal on Sidewalk
It is unlawful to lead, ride or drive any animal upon any sidewalk. However, this does not prohibit a person from walking a household pet on a leash on the sidewalk.
6-2-110. Coasting on Street
It is unlawful to coast or slide with any sled, sleigh, toboggan or vehicle upon any public street or sidewalk, except upon such streets as may be designated by proclamation or notice of the City Council.
6-2-111. Gates to Swing Inward
86
It is unlawful to allow or cause any gate to open outward and upon the sidewalk.
6-2-112. Billboards
It is unlawful to erect and maintain any billboard for advertising purposes on, in or along any street.
6-2-113. Sand, Gravel, Lime and Cement
(a) It is unlawful to place or pile or cause or permit to be placed or piled any sand, gravel, lime, cement, mortar, plaster, concrete or any like substance or mixture or allow the same to remain on any portion of any paved street or sidewalk or to make or mix or cause or permit to be made or mixed any mortar, plaster, concrete or any like substance or mixture on any portion of any paved street or sidewalk without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City Engineer.
(b) It is unlawful to drive a vehicle or move the same upon any street unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom. There shall at all times be a minimum of three inches between the top of the contents and the top of the sideboards and endgate of the vehicle.
6-2-114. Irrigation Water
All owners or occupants of lots requiring water from a main ditch for irrigation shall dig suitable ditches, erect flumes or lay pipes and maintain the same to convey the water across the sidewalk to or from their respective lots. It is unlawful for any person to allow or cause any irrigation water to overflow or be directed upon the street.
6-2-115. Vegetation Damaging Public Improvements.
(a) It is the duty of any property owner or occupant in charge of property to notify the City in writing promptly upon discovering that the sidewalk and curbs in front of the premises is being raised by roots growing from trees immediately adjacent to the property.
(b) If any property owner shall fail to notify the City and allow the sidewalk or curbs to be raised by roots immediately adjacent to his property so as to become dangerous to users thereof, the City may cause the sidewalk or curb to be restored and the roots trimmed and all costs thereof shall be charged to the property owner.
(c) Without notice, the City or its agent may remove any tree, shrub, or plant, or any portion thereof, which is located within a public right-of-way and damaging public improvements, regardless of whether the offending plant is also located partially on private property.
(d) Upon written notice, the City may require that the adjacent property owner or occupant remove any tree, shrub, or plant, or any portion thereof, which is located within a public right-of-way and damaging public improvements, regardless of whether the offending plant is also located partially on private property.
87
6-2-116. Removal of Snow from Sidewalks
(a) Any person owning, having charge or control of or occupying any property, building, lot, part of lot, land or real estate abutting on any street shall remove snow and ice promptly and effectually from all sidewalks abutting such property, including sidewalks to the front, side and rear of all residences, businesses and other premises. All such snow shall be removed within 24 hours of its falling. Failure to do so is a class C misdemeanor.
(b) In case of failure, refusal or neglect, the Streets Director may cause the removal of the snow and charge the cost thereof to the property owner.
(c) It is unlawful to place snow removed from private property in a public street or right of way. It is unlawful to place snow removed from a sidewalk or other public place in a manner so as to cause a hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
6-2-117. Encroachments
(a) If any street is encroached upon by a fence or building or otherwise, the Superintendent shall, in writing, require the encroachments to be removed. Notice must be given to the occupant or owner of the land or person causing or owning the encroachments or be left at his place of residence, if he resides in the City; if not, it must be posted on the encroachment, specifying the breadth of the streets, the place and extent of the encroachment and requiring the removal thereof within ten days thereafter.
(b) It is unlawful to leave, or cause to be left, any encroachment upon the streets of the City after the expiration of ten days from the service or posting of a notice to remove such encroachment. If the encroachment obstructs or prevents the use of the highway for vehicles, the Superintendent shall forthwith remove the same. If any other encroachment is not removed within five days after the notice is complete, the Superintendent shall forthwith remove the same. If the encroachment is not denied but is not removed for five days after the notice is complete, the Superintendent shall cause such encroachment to be removed at the expense of the owner, occupant or person controlling the same and recover his costs and expenses in an action for that purpose. If the encroachment is denied and the owner, occupant or person controlling the matter or thing charged with being an encroachment refuses either to remove or permit the removal thereof, the City Attorney shall commence in the proper court an action to abate same as a nuisance.
(c) It is unlawful to adversely possess a public street or right-of-way, regardless of the passage of time.
6-2-118. Sight Clearances on Corner Lots
As set forth in Title 14, The Bountiful City Land Use Ordinance.
6-2-119 Streets
(a) Any street and/or street right-of-way shown on the Master Street Plan shall conform to the width designated in the Plan. Major and collector streets not shown on the Master Street Plan but proposed within the City shall also be constructed and/or dedicated to a width conforming to the Street Master Plan based on the maximum projected volume of the street and the AASHTO street classification system.
88
(b) Minor streets shall have a minimum dedicated right-of-way width of fifty-four (54)feet.
(c) If deemed necessary by the City Council, streets may be required to extend to the boundary of the proposed subdivision where it abuts adjoining land which is undeveloped. Half streets along the subdivision are not permitted.
(d) No street shall intersect another street at an angle of less than eighty (80) degrees.
(e) Unless otherwise approve by the City Engineer for good cause shown, street intersections shall be
offset by a minimum of 175 feet measured to the centerline of the intersections.
6-2-120 Alleys
Public alleys are not permitted in any zone.
6-2-121 Dead-End Streets
Any cul-de-sac or other dead-end street, whether public or private, shall conform to the following conditions:
(a) Maximum Grade. The maximum downhill grade of any dead-end street shall be four percent (4%), as measured at any point.
(b) Maximum Length. The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be six hundred (600) feet, measured from the radius point of the turnaround to the centerline of the intersecting street.
(c) Minimum Width of Street. The minimum width of the street right-of-way of a dead end street at any point is fifty-four (54) feet.
(d) Radius of Turnaround. The radius of a turnaround required at any point along a dead-end street shall be fifty-four (54) feet.
(e) Surface Water Drainage. In the event that surface water drains into a turnaround due to the grade of the street, catch basins and drainage easements may be required. Any such easement shall be at least fourteen (14) feet in width.
6-2-122 Maximum Grade of Streets
The maximum grade of any street shall be twelve percent (12%), except that the City Council may grant approval of a grade up to fifteen percent (15%) along a straight section of street for a distance not exceeding two hundred (200) linear feet. No street shall exceed a grade of fifteen (15%).
6-2-123 Length and Width of Blocks
The recommended length of any block is five hundred (500) feet, and the maximum length of any block shall be nine-hundred (900) feet. The width of any block shall be sufficient to allow two tier lots.
89
6-2-124 Bonds Required
Before the City will record any subdivision plat, the subdivider shall comply with one of the following requirements:
1 Complete all public improvements within the subdivision as required in this ordinance, as shown on the approved engineering drawings and in accordance with the City's specifications, and supply to the City proof of payment of labor and materials, and deposit with the City a cash bond or letter of credit and a bond agreement in the amount of 10% of the construction cost of all such improvements; or
2 Deposit with the City a cash bond and bond agreement in the amount of 100% of the total cost of public improvements as required in this ordinance, as shown on the approved engineering drawings and in accordance with the City's specifications;
3 Deliver to the City a letter of credit from a financial institution authorized to do business in the State of Utah and reasonably acceptable to the City, in the amount of 100% of the total cost of public improvements as required in this ordinance, as shown on the approved engineering drawings and in accordance with the City's specifications.
6-2-125 Release of Bonds
I.When a cash bond or letter of credit, as described in Section 6-2-124 (b), (c), has been deposited with the City as required in Section 6-2-124, up to 90% of the cash bond or letter of credit may be partially released by the City when any individual item is completed, subject to the limitation set forth in subsection (b) of this section.
II.Before any improvements are accepted by the City, and before the cash bond is reduced pursuant to subsection (a), the subdivider must (in addition to full performance of other requirements) present to the City a list, under oath, of all laborers and materialmen who supplied labor materials in connection with the improvements to be accepted by the City, and deliver to the City a proof of said payment and a release from each laborer or materialman, in a form approved by the City.
III.The required public improvements may be installed by the subdivider prior to recording of the final plat, however, this does not relieve the subdivider of the responsibility of calling for the required inspections and for strict compliance with City requirements. The improvements will not be accepted by the City until they meet City standards and specifications, and all risks that the improvements may not be accepted by the City shall be assumed by the subdivider.
IV.The 10% cash bond described in Section 6-2-124(a), and the 10% retention of cash bonds or letters of credit described in Section 6-2-125(a), shall be held by the City to guarantee the prompt replacement and/or repair of defects discovered in the improvements within a one year period following the completion of all improvements. The cash bond or letter of credit shall not be finally and fully released until all required improvements have been accepted by the City. Unless otherwise provided, all improvements shall be completed within two years from the date of the approval of the plat by the City Council. If the subdivider fails to complete improvements within two years, the City may apply all or part of any cash bond or letter of credit to complete all or part of the improvements. The bond, whether cash or a letter of credit, shall be liable for the immediate completion of all improvements.
90
Chapter 3: Water Courses
6-3-101. Definitions.
6-3-102. Acts Requiring Permit.
6-3-103. Owner's and Tenant's Responsibility.
6-3-104. Application for Permit.
6-3-105. Issuance of Permit.
6-3-106. Performance of Work by City.
6-3-107. Appeal.
6-3-101. Definitions.
"Canal" means an artificial channel designed for irrigation of water.
"Channel" means elongated open depression in the contour of land in which storm water, or water, may or does flow.
"Conduit" means a general term for any artificial or natural channel intended for the conveyance of storm water, or water, whether open or closed, or any structure through which water flows.
"Culvert" means a closed conduit for the free passage of surface drainage water under a highway, railroad, canal or other embankment.
"Ditch" means a trench for drainage or irrigation of water artificially made by digging.
"Drainage" means: (1) the process of removing surplus ground or surface waste by artificial means; (2) the manner in which the waters of an area are removed; (3) the area from which waters are drained to a drainage basin.
"Stream" means any course of running water flowing on the earth.
6-3-102. Acts Requiring Permit.
(a) It is unlawful to do any of the following acts without having received a written permit therefor from the City Engineer:
(1) To interfere with, destroy, or use in any manner whatsoever any levee, embankment, channel, dam, reservoir, rain or stream gauges, telephone line, piling, or other stream protection work constructed by or on behalf of the City;
(2) To place in or cause to be placed in any stream, drainage ditch, water course, channel, culvert or conduit, or upon any property over which the City has an easement for flood control purposes, any wires, fence, building or other structure, or any refuse, rubbish, tin cans or other matter that may impede, obstruct, retard or change the direction or flow of water in such stream, drainage ditch, water course, channel, culvert or conduit or that will catch or collect debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the natural flow of the storm and flood waters would carry the same downstream to the damage and detriment of either private or public property adjacent to said drainage ditch;
91
(3) To change the drainage on his property so as to divert the drainage to any public road;
(4) To fill or obstruct or maintain any fill or obstruction in any stream, drainage ditch, water course, channel, culvert or conduit carrying storm water, or water;
(5) To construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, install or maintain any drainage structure in any stream drainage ditch, water course, channel, culvert, or conduit carrying storm water or water;
(6) To do anything to any stream, drainage ditch, water course, channel, culvert or conduit carrying storm water or water that will in any manner obstruct or interfere with the flow of water through such ditches, water courses, channels, culverts or conduits.
(b) The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any drainage ditch, water course, channel, culvert or conduit carrying water that originates entirely on the property of any person and does not discharge onto any other property and will not have adverse effect on such other property.
6-3-103. Owner's and Tenant's Responsibility.
(a) Facilities not Maintained by the City. Every property owner, whether it be a person, firm, corporation, or district, or his lessee or tenant, through whose property a drainage ditch, stream, water course, channel, culvert or conduit carrying storm water or water passes, shall keep and maintain the same free from obstacles that will prevent or retard the flow of water through such ditch, stream, water course, channel, culvert or conduit, except that same may be filled or altered if a permit to do so has been first obtained pursuant to this Chapter.
(b) Facilities Maintained by the City. Every property owner, whether it be a person, firm, corporation or district, or his lessee or tenant, through whose property a drainage ditch, water course, channel, culvert or conduit carrying storm water passes, shall refrain from depositing or allowing to be deposited material foreign to that normally discharged into such ditch, stream, water course, channel, culvert or conduit, which will prevent or retard the flow of water, except that same may be filled or altered if a permit to do so has been first obtained pursuant to this Chapter.
6-3-104. Application for Permit.
Any person desiring to obtain a permit as herein provided shall file an application in writing therefor with the City Engineer which shall state:
(a) The name and address of the applicant, and if the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the principal officers thereof;
(b) The place where such work is to be done;
(c) Description of the work to be done, together with the materials to be used therefor, accompanied by a diagram of the proposed work and such other information as the City Engineer may require to carry out the purposes of this Chapter;
(d) Total estimated cost of the proposed work;
92
(e) A statement that if the permit is granted, the applicant agrees that all works specified in the application will be commenced within thirty days after the permit is granted and will be pursued to its completion with responsible diligence.
6-3-105. Issuance of Permit.
(a) The City Engineer may issue a permit to do the proposed work in the manner specified in the application, or in such manner as the City Engineer may determine is required to carry out the purposes of this Chapter, upon payment of the fees required by this Section and upon determining that the work:
(1) Does not interfere with any flood control and water conservation district or any storm drain maintenance district or any other district or entity authorized by law for flood control, conservation or drainage purposes; and
(2) Will not injure adjoining property; and
(3) Will not interfere with the flow of natural storm waters.
(b) The applicant at the time of obtaining any such permit shall pay to the City an amount equal to four per cent of the estimated cost of the work to be done as indicated by the permit if the estimated cost is one thousand dollars or less and in addition an amount equal to three and on-half per cent of the estimated cost of the work in excess of one thousand dollars, as a permit fee to cover the ordinary inspection cost of the work to be performed, provided, however, that in no event shall the permit fee herein required to be paid be less than two dollars. In addition, if it is determined by the agency charged with inspection that any special tests such as, but no limited to, soil tests, compaction tests, material tests, or other special tests, are required, then said permittee shall pay to the City the actual costs of such tests.
(c) Upon issuing a permit pursuant to this Section, the City Engineer may impose any conditions which he may deem necessary to insure the proper maintenance and drainage of the property and surrounding areas.
(d) Subject to the right of appeal to the Bountiful City Administrative Law Judge, the City Engineer may deny, suspend or revoke any permit.
6-3-106. Performance of Work by City.
In the event the permittee does not complete the work in accordance with the terms of the permit within a reasonable time from the date of issuance of the permit, and if the completion of the work is essential to the health, welfare and safety of the public, then the City Engineer may cause the work to be completed and the permittee shall pay for the cost of the work. In the event that the permittee fails to pay the cost of said work within thirty days after receiving written notice therefore, the City Engineer shall enter the amount due for the work upon the assessment rolls of the City and shall collect said amount in the same manner as real property taxes are collected.
In the event that any person shall impede, divert or obstruct any channel, conduit, culvert, ditch, canal or stream in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, the City Engineer may take any necessary action to correct the condition, and shall bill the person who has created the condition. In the event the said bill is not paid within thirty days after receiving written notice therefor, the City Engineer shall enter the amount
93
due of the said work upon the assessment rolls of the City and shall collect said amount in the same manner as real property taxes are collected.
In addition to the foregoing, the City may use any other lawful means to collect the cost of the work performed by the City or on its behalf pursuant to the provisions of this Section.
6-3-107. Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the City Engineer in the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit pursuant to this Chapter shall have the right to appeal to the Bountiful City Administrative Law Judge. A statement setting forth fully the grounds of such appeal shall be filed with the City Recorder within fourteen days after notice of the denial, suspension or revocation has been delivered to such person or mailed to his last known address.
Chapter 4: Water Pollution
6-4-101. Watershed Area Defined.
6-4-102. Unlawful to Maintain Privy in Watershed.
6-4-103. Unlawful Acts Defined.
6-4-104. Chemical Privies and Disposal Effluent.
6-4-105. Existing Unsanitary Systems Must be Made to Comply.
6-4-106. Loose Cattle Within Watershed.
6-4-101. Watershed Area Defined.
The "watershed area" of the City is hereby defined to be the entire area in any canyon above the City within which water drains into any stream or tributary thereof, where such stream of water, or any part thereof, is taken by the City into its waterworks system for the culinary and domestic use of the inhabitants thereof.
6-4-102. Unlawful to Maintain Privy in Watershed.
It is unlawful to construct, use or maintain any closet, privy, outhouse, cesspool, urinal, or sewage disposal system, or any public bath house, swimming tank or swimming pool, at any place within the watershed area of the City without first having obtained from the City Council a permit for the construction, use and maintenance of same.
6-4-103. Unlawful Acts Defined.
It is unlawful to cause, do, or permit to be done, any of the offenses hereinafter described in any canyon supplying water to the City, or along any stream of water used by the inhabitants of the City for their water supply and located within the watershed area of the City as herein defined:
(a) To construct or maintain any corral, sheep pen, pig pen, chicken coop, stable, or any offensive or contaminating yard or outhouse; provided, however, that livestock may be permitted to graze beyond 300 feet from any stream or source of water supply; but not within 300 feet of any stream or source of water supply except where written permission has been first obtained from the City Council and compliance with all the sanitary requirements prescribed by said officials has been complied with.
94
(b) To deposit, pile, unload or leave any manure or offensive rubbish, or carcass of any dead animal any place within said watershed area.
(c) To permit any loose cattle, horses, sheep, hogs, or any other animals to run at large except where such livestock are more than 300 feet from any stream or source of water supply within said watershed area.
(d) To stake or graze horses, cattle, sheep, hogs or other animals within 300 feet of the bank of such stream, except that horses or cattle may be staked or corralled within 300 feet at such place and under such conditions as may be designated by the City Council. The person obtaining such permit must keep the premises whereon said animals are kept in such conditions as may be required by the City Council and said permit may be revoked at any time by said officers upon failure of the permittee to comply with such reasonable sanitary regulations as are prescribed by said officers.
(e) To permit any horses, cattle, sheep, hogs, or other animals to take or use water directly from the stream.
(f) To permit any horses, cattle, sheep, hogs, or other animals to remain in or near, or to pollute any such stream of water or source of water supply.
(g) To throw or deposit any garbage or other deleterious matter of any kind anywhere within said limits.
(h) To permit any dog to run at large.
(i) To throw or break bottles or glass.
(j) To wade or bathe in the stream or source of water supply.
(k) To wash dishes or other articles in the stream or source of water supply.
(l) To commit any nuisance whatsoever.
6-4-104. Chemical Privies and Disposal Effluent.
It is unlawful to construct, use or maintain any cesspool or septic tank for the disposal of human waste except when used in connection with chemical privies, anywhere within the watershed area of the City. The effluent from any such tank or privy must be hauled at the cost of the owner or occupant to a sewage disposal plant maintained by the City, or its designated agent.
6-4-105. Existing Unsanitary Systems must be made to Comply.
All existing sewage disposal systems, cesspools, or privies within the water-shed area of the City as herein defined, which shall be found to be unsanitary or which does not comply with the requirements of the City Ordinances or regulations of the City Council must be remodeled and converted into a sanitary type of system within thirty days after notice to the owner thereof of such unsanitary or inadequate condition from the City Engineer.
It is unlawful to use or maintain any unsanitary sewage disposal system, cesspool, or privy after thirty days notice shall have been given of such unsanitary or inadequate condition by the City Engineer.
95
6-4-106. Loose Cattle within Water-Shed.
Whenever any loose cattle, horses, sheep, hogs, or other animals are found within the watershed area of the City as herein defined and within 300 feet of the stream or source of water supply it is hereby made the duty of the City Engineer to cause any such animals to be driven to the nearest estray pound and there to be dealt with according to law.
Chapter 5: Water and Sewer Service
6-5-101. Water Department.
6-5-102. Superintendent.
6-5-103. Permits and Reports.
6-5-104. Fixtures and Fittings Used in Water or Sewer Connections.
6-5-105. Use Without Payment Prohibited.
6-5-106. Payment. Discontinuance of Service.
6-5-107. Turning on Water After Services Terminated Prohibited.
6-5-108. Reserved.
6-5-109. Scarcity of Water.
6-5-110. Superintendent to Have Free Access.
6-5-111. Water Meters.
6-5-112. Two Users on One Connection.
6-5-113. Taker Only to Use Water.
6-5-114. Waste Prohibited.
6-5-115. Use of City Sewer System Mandatory.
6-5-116. Licensed Plumbing Necessary.
6-5-117. Inspection of Installations.
6-5-118. Sewer Permit.
6-5-119. Sewer Service Lateral.
6-5-120. Storm Water.
6-5-121. Destroy Sewer System.
6-5-122. Use After Disconnected.
6-5-123. Reserved.
6-5-124. Outside Watering Restrictions.
6-5-101. Water Department.
The City Water Department is hereby created. It shall comprise all of the property and equipment and personnel necessary to the maintenance and operation of the City's water supply and distribution.
6-5-102. Employment of Superintendent.
The City Manager shall appoint a competent person to the position of Water Superintendent, who shall have charge of all waters and water sources, water tanks, water mains, fire hydrants, and all the equipment and appurtenances pertaining to the water-works systems. He shall have the direction of the laying of the water mains, and putting in of all service pipes, and the regulation of the supply of water, and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by law or Ordinance.
96
6-5-103. Permits and Reports.
It is unlawful to make any extension of any pipe or connect any fixture to the water or sewer system for any purpose whatever without first obtaining a permit.
6-5-104. Fixtures and fittings used in Water or Sewer Connections.
It is unlawful to use any kind of fitting, stopcock, drawcock, or other equipment in connection with the water or sewer system, except the kind prescribed by the Water Department.
6-5-105. Use Without Payment Prohibited.
It is unlawful to utilize the City water or sewer system without first paying therefor as herein provided, or without authority to open any stopcock, valve or other fixture attached to the system of water supply, or to in any wise injure, deface, or impair any part or appurtenance of the water or sewer system or to cast anything into any reservoir or tank belonging to said system.
6-5-106. Payment, Discontinuance of Service.
The City Treasurer shall mail a written statement to each user of the water service at such intervals as the City Council shall direct. Said statement shall separately specify the amount of the bill for the water and sewer service used and the place of payment and date due. If any person fails to pay his water charges within thirty days of the date due, the City Treasurer may so notify the Water and Sewer Department and shall have authority to direct said Department to shut off all water service to the premises involved. Before said water service to said premises shall again be provided, all delinquent water and charges must have been paid to the City Treasurer, together with a special expense charge. The City Treasurer is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce the payment of all delinquent water service charges by an action at law in the corporate name of the City.
6-5-107. Turning on Water After Services Terminated Prohibited.
It is unlawful, after the water has been turned off from his premises on account of non-payment of rates or other violation of the rules, regulations or Ordinances pertaining to the water supply, to turn on or allow the water to be turned on or used, or allow the water to be used without authority.
6-5-108. Reserved.
6-5-109. Scarcity of Water.
In time of scarcity of water, whenever it shall in the judgment of the Mayor and the City Council be necessary, the Mayor shall by proclamation limit the use of water for other than domestic purposes to such extent as may be necessary for the public good. It is unlawful for any person to violate any proclamation made by the Mayor in pursuance of this Section.
6-5-110. Superintendent to have Free Access.
Free access shall, at all ordinary hours, be allowed to the Superintendent or other authorized persons to all places supplied with service from the water system to examine the apparatus, the amount of water used
97
and the manner of use of either service. Any water service users violating any of the rules, regulations or Ordinances controlling the water systems shall forfeit all payment made and the right to the use of said service.
6-5-111. Water Meters.
All structures, dwelling units and establishments using water from the City system must have such number of water meters connected to their water systems as are necessary in the judgment of the Superintendent to adequately measure use and determine water charges by the respective water users. Meters will be furnished by the City at the expense of the property holder, at rates established from time to time by resolution. The Superintendent shall cause meter readings to be taken regularly and shall advise the City Treasurer thereof for the purpose of recording the necessary billings for water service.
6-5-112. Two Users on One Connection.
Where two or more families or premises are supplied from the same service pipe, the failure on the part of either of said parties to comply with these Ordinances shall warrant the City in withholding a supply of water through said service pipe until a separate service pipe is put in for each user of water under a separate application.
6-5-113. Taker Only to Use Water.
It is unlawful for any water user to permit any person from other premises, or any unauthorized persons, to use or obtain water regularly from his premises or water fixtures, either outside or inside his building.
6-5-114. Waste Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any water user to waste water, or to allow it to be wasted, by imperfect stops, taps, valves, leaky joints or pipes or to wastefully run water from hydrants, faucets, or stops or through basins, water closets, urinals, sinks, or other apparatus, or to use water in violation of the rules, regulations or Ordinances for controlling the water supply.
6-5-115. Use of City Sewer Mandatory.
It is unlawful for the owner or any other person occupying or having charge of any premises within the City limits to dispose of sewage therefrom by any means other than by use of the City-approved sewer system. It is be unlawful to construct or to continue to use any other sewage disposal system, such as a privy, vault, cesspool or septic tank.
6-5-116. Licensed Plumber Necessary.
It is unlawful to connect any drain or sewer pipe with the public sewer, unless such person is a duly licensed plumber.
6-5-117. Inspection of Installations.
The inspection of sewer connections between the main sewer and three feet outside of the property line shall be made by or under the direction of the City Engineer. He shall be notified at least four hours in advance by the plumber that the connection is complete and ready for inspection. The entire length of the
98
sewer connection, including a Y at the main sewer shall be fully exposed. No backfilling shall be done until the inspection is made and the work accepted. If any portion of the work is not done in accordance with the Ordinance and the instruction of the Superintendent or his Inspectors, it shall be rectified promptly. No permit shall be issued to any licensed plumber during the time that he shall fail to remedy any defective work, after he has been notified that he has been held responsible therefor under these regulations.
6-5-118. Sewer Permit.
It is unlawful for an unauthorized person to uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof for any reason without first obtaining a written permit from the City Engineer.
6-5-119. Sewer Service Lateral.
(a) A separate and independent sewer service lateral shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another or on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway; the service lateral from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one service lateral.
(b) All expenses associated with the ordinary installation, operation, maintenance, repair or replacement of a sewer service lateral, including any portions underlying the public right-of-way and the portion comprising the lateral's connection with the public sewer main, are the responsibility of the property owner.
(c) Extraordinary expense, such as that resulting from damage to a lateral by the City or a contractor under permit from the City, while working in the public right-of-way, will be paid or reimbursed by the City.
6-5-120. Storm Water.
It is unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, or subsurface drainage into any sanitary sewer. Such storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet consisting of water courses, ponds, ditches, lakes, or other bodies of surface or ground water provided for receiving the same.
6-5-121. Destroy Sewer System
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of a sanitary sewer facility or sewage works, or remove any manhole cover therefrom.
6-5-122. Use After Disconnected.
It is unlawful, after sewer service to any premises has been discontinued for any reason whatsoever, to reconnect or resume such service or for the owner or occupant of such premises to allow the same to be reconnected or resumed without being authorized by the Superintendent or other owner of such sanitary
99
sewer.
6-5-123. Reserved.
6-5-124. Outside Watering Restrictions.
(a) Watering outside the home with Bountiful City culinary water is prohibited between the hours of 10 a.m. and 6 p.m. from April 15th through October 15th of each year.
(b) The City Engineer, in his reasonable discretion, is authorized to permit water use in contravention of these provisions. A written application stating the reasons for the requested exception shall be submitted. A record shall be kept of any such exceptions granted, and a written permission issued.
(c) Anyone using water in violation of these provisions shall, upon a first violation, be warned against further illegal use, and upon a second or further violation, be assessed a water user fee of $100 per violation. Such fee shall become part of the water bill of that person or of the property whereon such use occurred. There shall be a right of appeal of any such assessment to the Bountiful City Administrative Law Judge, which appeal must be made in writing within thirty days of the assessment.
(d) Anyone using water in violation of these provisions shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor.
Chapter 6: Non-Payment of Utility Deposits and Utility Accounts
6-6-101. Service Policies.
6-6-101. Service Policies.
The rendering of electrical and other utility services by the City is subject to the service policies that are adopted by the City Council, which policies are hereby incorporated in the City Code by this reference.
Chapter 7: Wastewater System Regulations
[Please see the City Attorney for this lengthy ordinance.]
Chapter 8: Pressure Irrigation
6-8-101. Use and Installations.
6-8-102. Control Valves.
6-8-101. Use and Installations.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to:
(a) Use of cause to be used any untreated or nonpotable water from a pressure irrigation system for other than irrigation purposes.
(b) Interconnect or cause to be interconnected the potable and non-potable portions, distribution systems or service lines of dual water supplies or extensions thereof.
100
(c) Install or cause to be installed in the same trench or trenches the distribution or service lines of potable and non-potable water. Install a pipe joint (union nipple or any other connection) of either type of water system, across, above or under a pipe in any existing trench of the other system.
(d) Connect or cause to be connected a service line to any distribution system or main line carrying non-potable water without authority of the district, municipality, company or person having jurisdiction of the non-potable water supply.
(e) Extend or cause to be extended into any building a non-potable water supply system or service line except for fowl or stock watering purposes.
(f) Expose or cause to be exposed any portions of a non-potable water supply system or extensions or service lines thereof without identifying the same by distinctive coloring or other suitable means sufficient to distinguish the same from potable water supply systems, extensions or service lines.
(g) Contaminate or cause to be contaminated any source of supply, distribution system, or service line furnishing or carrying non-potable water.
6-8-102. Control Valves.
All hydrants and sprinkling system control valves for the distribution of non-potable water shall be operated by a removable key, unless such valves are of the quick-coupling type, and all such keys and coupling valves shall be removed when said hydrant or sprinkling system is not in use.
Chapter 9: Excavation in Streets and Public Properties.
6-9-101. Purpose.
6-9-102. Permit Needed.
6-9-103. Permit Fee.
6-9-104. Emergency Excavations.
6-9-105. Applications for Permit.
6-9-106. Rules and Regulations.
6-9-107. Denial of Applications.
6-9-108. Civil Liability.
6-9-109. Enforcement.
6-9-110. Penalty for Failure to Obtain Permit.
6-9-111. Penalty for Improper Restoration and Maintenance.
6-9-201. Definitions.
6-9-202. Permit Required; Basis for Issuance
6-9-203. Permit Application Requirements.
6-9-204. Emergency Work.
6-9-205. Permit Fees.
6-9-207. Permit - No Transfer or Assignment.
6-9-208. Compliance with Specifications, Standards, Traffic-Control Regulations;
Site Permittee Identification.
6-9-209. Other Highway Permits.
6-9-210. Relocation of Structures in Public Ways.
101
6-9-211. Impact of Excavation on Existing Improvements.
6-9-212. Restoration of Public Property.
6-9-213. Insurance Requirements.
6-9-214. Bond - When Required, Conditions, Warranty.
6-9-215. Hold Harmless Agreement; Limitations on City Liability.
6-9-216. Work without Permit - Penalty.
6-9-217. Failure to Comply; Default in Performance.
6-9-218. Failure to Conform to Design Standards - Penalty.
6-9-219. Appeal of Suspension, Revocation, or Stop Order.
6-9-220. Tampering with Traffic Barricades.
6-9-221. Conflict with Governing Provisions.
6-9-222. Violation - Penalty.
6-9-101. Purpose.
This Chapter is designed and enacted for the purpose of promoting the safety and health of those persons using and traveling the roads, streets, highways and rights of way of and within the City; for the purpose of protecting the highways and rights of ways themselves within the City; for the purpose of preventing unauthorized and unnecessary crossing sand excavations; for the supervising of necessary crossing and excavations on said roads, streets, highways and rights of way; and providing for the proper repair of the same where necessary crossings must be made.
6-9-102. Permit Needed.
It is unlawful to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine, or in any manner break up any street, or to make or cause to be made, excavations in or under the surface of any street for any purpose or place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth or any other excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street, unless such persons shall first have obtained an excavation permit therefore from the City Engineer. Any public utility regulated by the State, or holding a franchise from the City which, in the pursuit of this calling, has frequent occasion to open or make excavations in streets, may upon application, receive a general permit from the City Engineer to cover all excavations such utilities make within the streets of the City. Permit fees shall accompany the application, except for fees under general permits, which shall be paid monthly as herein provided. All permits shall be subject to revocation and the City Engineer may refuse to issue a permit for failure of the permittee, or applicant, to abide by the terms and conditions of this Chapter. Excavation permits will not be request prior to excavation in case of emergency, endangering life or property, providing the City Engineer is notified as soon as practicable and a permit is applied for upon the next regular working day following the emergency.
6-9-103. Permit Fee.
The fee for any permit provided for herein shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
6-9-104. Emergency Excavations.
Nothing in the Chapter shall be construed to prevent the making of such excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property or for the location of trouble in conduit or pipe or for making repairs, provided that the person making such excavation shall apply to the City Engineer for such a permit on the first working day after such work is commenced.
102
6-9-105. Applications for Permit.
Each application for a permit shall show the following:
(a) The name and address of the person desiring a permit. If the applicant is a co-partnership, the names and addresses of all the partners; and if a corporation, the names and addresses of the manager or person authorized to act for and in behalf of the corporation and to obligate it to the responsibilities set forth in this Chapter.
(b) The name and address of the person who will do the actual digging, tunneling, trenching and backfilling or construction work.
(c) Mechanical means or method by which the street, highway or roadway is to be trenched and backfilled.
(d) The exact location, with a complete description, of the place where the cut is to be made in or along or across the roadway or highway, with a brief sketch showing the designated work.
(e) A signed agreement whereby the petitioner contracts with the City, and whereby his contractor, if he has one, also contracts, that:
(1) Notify the City Engineer's Office four (4) hours in advance when the work is to begin, who in turn will notify the City Road Inspector, so that an inspection may be made of the excavation site.
(2) All backfill materials shall be fine material, free from lumps and stone, selected from the soil and shall be thoroughly compacted around and under the substructure to the upper level of the substructure. Backfill material shall be placed to the subgrade of the pavement in lifts consistent with the type of soil involved and the method of consolidation being used. Broken pavement, large stone, roots and other debris shall not be used in the backfill. Each lift shall be flooded, jetted, rolled or tamped, or a combination of these methods shall be used, depending upon the type of soil involved, to compact the backfill material. Such backfill shall be done in a manner that will permit the restoration of the surface to condition equivalent to that in which it was prior to excavation. The City Engineer may require soil tests to be furnished by a recognized soil testing laboratory or registered professional engineer specializing in soil mechanics when, in his opinion, backfill for any excavation is not being adequately compacted. In order for the resurfacing to be permitted, such test must show that the backfill material meets the minimum requirements as prescribed by the City Engineer. All expense of such test shall be born by the permittee.
(3) Before beginning the excavation, proper safeguards by barricade and warning lights, where necessary shall be placed by the applicant and/or his contractor, and these shall be maintained by the applicant and/or his contractor at all times while there is any possible danger or inconvenience to persons traveling the highway so as to prevent accidents during construction.
(4) Guarantee that the City and its employees and the City Council shall be free and
103
harmless from any and all damages that may occur during the operations under the permit, and agree that the applicant and/or his contractors will assume full responsibility therefore before a permit is granted. The applicant and his contractor, if any, will present a bond to the City Engineer's Office guaranteeing that the work will be done in accordance with this Ordinance. The City Engineer, in his discretion, shall determine the amount and type of the bond that the particular applicant and his contractor shall furnish to guarantee the protection of the City and its agents; the safety of the traveling public, and the satisfactory completion of the work under this permit. No permit shall be issued, and no work shall begin until such bond is properly made out and presented to the City Engineer and accepted by him.
(5) The applicant and his contractor shall agree that all digging and excavation will be made in strict accordance with the specifications of the City Engineer's Office, and that all excavations will be immediately backfilled and properly tamped to prevent settling. Should the City Engineer determine at any time that the work is not progressing as rapidly as it should progress for the protection of the City and the people of the City; then, after notice to the applicant or his contractor or agent, the City Engineer shall be authorized to employ another contractor to finish the job in a good, workmanlike manner, and any and all costs and expenses of this work shall be immediately paid by the applicant and his contractor to the City, or it may be taken from the bond, at the City's option. Should the City Engineer at any time feel that the backfilling and hard-surfacing work is not being properly done, then after notice to the applicant and his contractor, he may contract with another contractor to properly do this work, and the applicant and his contractor will immediately pay to the City the amount which it has necessarily incurred as an expense.
(6) All asphalt paving up to 500 square feet will be done by the City Street Department under the direction of the City Engineer. A charge at the per square foot price set annually to the price of asphalt will be made for the replacement of the asphalt paving in excavated areas.
(i) In areas larger than 500 square feet the permittee may apply to the Engineer's Office for permission to do their own asphalt paving, and they may be granted permission to do so, under direction of the City Engineer.
(ii) In all excavated areas a 12 inch minimum compacted thickness of crushed gravel or base will be provided by the contractor for a 3 inch thick asphalt surfacing. Before asphalt surfacing is placed in the excavated area the edges of existing asphalt area will be cut clean and any loose edges or pieces removed.
(7) All work provided under this Chapter and under the permit must be completed within the time specified in the permit by the City Engineer, and in all events within thirty (30) days from the issuance of the permit, unless an extension in writing is placed on the permit by the City Engineer's Office. In no case will work other than that described in and shown on the application for permit and on the permit be attempted or done by the applicant or his contractor.
(8) The applicant, his contractor or agent will maintain and be responsible for the place
104
of excavation for a period of one (1) year from the date of completion and will assume full responsibility for any injury caused to the City or to third persons as a result of a rise or settling in a portion of the roadway which they have worked on. Should the applicant, within said one year, receive notice from the City Road Department, the City Council, or from the City Engineer's office that the road portion that they have reconstructed has settled or raised, they will immediately place necessary barricades to protect the traveling public, and will within seven (7) days' time repair the road at the point of construction, placing it back in a condition equal to its original condition, weather permitting or availability of asphalt. Should the applicant or the contractor or agency fail to do this within seven (7) days, the City Engineer shall have the authority, without further notice, to employ a third-party contractor to repair the work or the City may do so with its own work crews, and the applicant and his contractor will immediately pay to the City the amount necessarily expended by it in the reconstruction of this portion of the road. The bond of the applicant will be retained during this one (1) year period to guarantee the proper backfilling and proper maintenance and/or reconstruction of the road.
6-9-106. Rules and Regulations.
(a) Bountiful City asserts the right to regulate and control the placement of utilities in public streets, in public properties, and in public utility easements throughout the city limits.
(b) The City Engineer is authorized and directed to regulate and control the placement of utilities in public streets, in public properties, and in public utility easements throughout the city limits, by the development of reasonable rules and practices. The City Engineer is specifically authorized to reasonably direct the location of particular utilities within these streets, properties and easements.
(c) It is unlawful to place utilities in public streets, in public properties and in public utility easements in locations other than those specifically authorized by the City Engineer.
(d) The minimum buried depth of phone lines, cable television lines, and all other utility lines placed within the public rights of way, including public utility easements, is twenty-four inches.
6-9-107. Denial of Applications.
The City Engineer is hereby given the authority to deny the application of any person or contractor for the permission to excavate along or across or to tunnel under the roads, rights of way or highways in the City in all instances where it would not be in the best interest of the City and the streets, roads, rights of way and highways thereof if such excavation is made, and in all instances where the applicant or the contractor has at any prior time failed and refused to comply with this Chapter or with the rules and regulations placed into effect by the City Engineer. In this case, the City Engineer shall write his reasons for refusal on the application. The applicant may appeal to the Bountiful City Administrative Law Judge.
6-9-108. Civil Liability.
The applicant, his contractor, or agent, by signing the application, agree to assume any and all civil liability which may arise as a result of their barricades, their work in construction, digging or tunneling, and their work in backfilling, and in maintaining the work-on portion of the street, road, highway or right of way for the period of one year after the date of completion. No permit shall be issued to a person or contractor who is not financially responsible in the opinion of the City Engineer, or who is unable to
105
furnish the proper and necessary bond to cover the cost of construction, replacement and maintenance, and also the cost of any liability which might occur as a result of these works. If the applicant or his contractor are not individually financially responsible, then necessary corporate bonds must be furnished to protect the City and the citizens thereof from any damage that may occur to them.
6-9-109. Enforcement.
The City Recorder, the City Police Department, the City Street Department and the City Attorney's office are each authorized collectively or individually to take any and all action such as is necessary to insure and to enforce compliance with the terms of this Chapter.
6-9-110. Penalty for Failure to Obtain Permit.
If any person, either by himself, his agents, his employees or his contractor shall barricade a City road or roadway or highway, or shall begin to construct or do any digging, ditching, excavation, trenching or tunneling in, along or across a City street, roadway or highway without having in his possession a valid permit from the City Engineer's office, as in this Chapter provided, he shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Each day that an excavation, or ditch, trench digging or tunnel along, in or across a City road or highway shall continue without the necessary permit having been issued, either by the City Engineer or by the City Council, shall be considered as a separate offense and may be punished as such.
6-9-111. Penalty for Improper Restoration and Maintenance.
Should any person fail, neglect or refuse to properly backfill and maintain a City roadway or highway which he has caused to be disturbed for a period longer than that provided for in his permit, it shall be a misdemeanor, and each day that this condition continues shall be a separate misdemeanor and the punishment thereof for each of the individual misdemeanors shall be of a fine of not more than $299.00 and/or up to thirty (30) days in the City or County jail.
6-9-201. Definitions.
(a) “Applicant” means any Person who makes application for a permit.
(b) “Business” means any place in the City in which there is conducted or carried on principally or exclusively any pursuit or occupation for the purpose of gaining a livelihood.
(c) “City” means the city of Bountiful, Utah.
(d) “City Engineer” means the City Engineer, or his /her authorized representative.
(e) “Emergency” means any unforseen circumstances or occurrence, the existence of which constitutes an immediate danger to persons or property, or which causes interruption of utility or public services.
(f) “Engineering Regulations,” “Regulations,” “Specifications,” and/or “Design Standards” mean the latest version of the Engineering Regulations, specifications, design standards or criteria published or adopted by the City Engineer.
(g) “Failure” means a Work Site Restoration which fails to meet City Engineer Specifications, or
106
which results in a deteriorated or substandard condition within the duration of the warranty period. Failure may be settlement of surfaces, deterioration of materials, or other surface irregularities. Measurement of Failure shall be further defined in the Engineering Regulations.
(h) “Infrastructure Provider” means a Person doing any type of construction work in the Public Way.
(i) “Operator” means any Person who provides a service through use of a Public Way..
(j) “Permittee” means any Person which has been issued a permit and thereby has agreed to fulfill the requirements of this Chapter.
(k) “Person” means and includes any natural Person, partnership, firm, association, Provider, corporation, company, organization, or entity of any kind.
(l) “Property Owner” means Person or Persons who have legal title to property and/or equitable interest in the property, or the ranking official or agent of a company having legal title to property and/or equitable interest in the property.
(m) “Provider” means an Operator, Infrastructure Provider, Reseller, System Lessee, or public or private utility Company.
(n) “Public Utility Company” means any company subject to the jurisdiction of the Utah State Public Service Commission, or any mutual corporation providing gas, electricity, water, telephone, or other utility product or services for use by the general public.
(o) “Public Way” means and includes all City public rights-of-way and easements, public footpaths, walkways and sidewalks, public streets, public roads, public highways, public alleys, and public drainage ways. It does not, however, include utility easements not within Public Ways of the City.
(p) “Private Drain Line” means a pipe installed solely for the transmission of water collected or generated on private property such as drainage, spring, or storm water, or condensate into the public drainage system.
(q) “Reseller” refers to any Person that provides service over a System for which a separate
charge is made, where that Person does not own or lease the underlying System used for the transmission and does not install any System in the rights-of-way.
(r) “Resident” means the Person or Persons currently making their home at a particular dwelling.
(s) “Storm Drain” means a dedicated pipe, conduit, water way, or ditch installed in a right-of-way or easement for the transmission of storm and drainage water. This term does not include Private Drain Lines.
(t) “System Lessee” refers to any Person that leases a System or a specific portion of a System to provide services.
(u) “System” means all pipes, lines, drains, conduits, manholes, poles, antennas, transceivers, amplifiers and all other devices, equipment, wire and Appurtenances owned, leased, or used by a public
107
or private utility, including telecommunications providers.
(v) “Work Site Restoration” means and includes the restoring of the original ground or paved hard surface area to comply with Engineering Regulations, and includes but is not limited to repair, cleanup, backfilling, compaction, stabilization, paving and other work necessary to place the site in acceptable condition following the conclusion of the work or the expiration or revocation of the permit.
6-9-202. Permit Required; Basis for Issuance
Any Person desiring to perform work of any kind in a Public Way within the City, shall make application for a permit. The decision by the City to issue a permit shall include, among other factors determined by the City, consideration of the following:
(a) The capacity of the Public Way to accommodate the facilities or structures proposed to be
installed in the Public Way;
(b) The capacity of the Public Way to accommodate multiple wire in addition to cables, conduits,
pipes, drains, or other facilities or structures of other users of the Public Way, such as electrical power, telephone, gas, sewer, water, irrigation systems, drainage facilities, and telecommunications systems;
(c) The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, or landscaping
previously existing in the Public Way;
(d) The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction from numerous
excavations of the Public Way.
6-9-203. Permit Application Requirements.
(a) Application for a permit shall be filed with the City Engineer on a form or forms to be furnished by the City. Contractors are required to obtain the necessary permits prior to the commencement of work. It is unlawful for work to commence prior to the obtaining of required permits.
(b) Only the following shall be eligible to apply for or receive permits to do work within the Public Way:
(1) Contractors appropriately bonded, insured, and licensed by the State;
(2) Providers appropriately bonded, insured, and licensed by the State;
(3) Persons offering a service which requires occupation of the Public Way, such as scaffold
or staging, staging of a crane, installation or maintenance of electric signs, glass, awnings, and painting or cleaning of buildings or sign boards or other structures.
(c) The City Engineer may deny the issuance of permits to contractors, utility companies, or other permit Applicants who have shown by past performance that in the opinion of the City Engineer they will not consistently conform to the Engineering Regulations, Specifications, Design Standards, or the requirements of this Chapter.
(d) When necessary, in the judgment of the City Engineer, to fully determine the relationship of the work proposed to existing or proposed facilities within the Public Ways, or to determine whether the
108
work proposed complies with the Engineering Regulations, construction Specifications and Design Standards, the City Engineer may require the filing of engineering plans, Specifications and sketches showing the proposed work in sufficient detail to permit determination of such relationship or compliance, or both, and the application shall be deemed suspended until such plans and sketches are filed and approved.
(e) It is unlawful for any Person to commence work upon any Public Way until the City Engineer has approved the application and until a permit has been issued for such work, except as specifically approved to the contrary in this Chapter.
(f) The disapproval or denial of an application by the City Engineer may be appealed by the Applicant to the City Manager by filing of a written notice of appeal within ten days of the action of the City Engineer. The City Manager shall hear such appeal, if written request therefor be timely filed as soon as practicable, and render his/her decision within two weeks following notice of such appeal.
(g) In approving or disapproving work within any Public Way, or permits therefor, in the inspection of such work; in reviewing plans, sketches or Specifications; and generally in the exercise of the authority conferred upon him/her by this Chapter, the City Engineer shall act in such manner as to preserve and protect the Public Way and the use thereof, but shall have no authority to govern the actions or inaction of Permittees and Applicants or other Persons which have no relationship to the use, preservation or protection of the Public Way.
(h) A permit is not required from the City Engineer for hand digging excavations for installation or repair of sprinkler systems and landscaping within the non-paved areas of the Public Way. However, conformance to all City Specifications is required.
6-9-204. Emergency Work.
(a) Any Person maintaining pipes, lines, or facilities in the Public Way may proceed with work upon existing facilities without a permit when Emergency circumstances demand the work to be done immediately; provided a permit could not reasonably and practicably have been obtained beforehand.
(b) In the event that Emergency work is commenced on or within any Public Way of the City during regular business hours, the City Engineer shall be notified within one-half hour from the time the work is commenced. The Person commencing and conducting such work shall take all necessary safety precautions for the protection of the public and the direction and control of traffic, and shall insure that work is accomplished according to City Engineering Regulations, the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and other applicable laws, regulations, or generally recognized practices in the industry.
(c) Any Person commencing Emergency work in the Public Way during other than business hours without a permit shall immediately thereafter apply for a permit or give notice during the first hour of the first regular business day on which City offices are open for business after such work is commenced. A permit for such Emergency work may be issued which shall be retroactive to the date when the work was begun, at the discretion of the City Engineer.
6-9-205. Permit Fees.
(a) The City shall charge and the Permittee shall pay upon issuance of the permit, fees for costs associated with the work performed under the permit. Such costs could include costs for reviewing the
109
project and issuing the permit, inspections of the project, deterioration of the Public Way or diminution of the useful life of the Public Way, and other costs to the City associated with the work to be done under the permit. All costs shall be assessed in a non-discriminatory manner.
(b) The City Engineer may reduce or waive permit fees or penalties or portion thereof provided for in this Chapter, when he/she determines that such permit fee or penalty:
(1) pertains to construction or rehabilitation of housing for Persons whose income is below
the median income level for the City; or
(2) pertains to work by a contractor on City owned systems at the request of the City.
(c) Additional charges to cover the reasonable cost and expenses of any required engineering review, inspection, and Work Site Restoration associated with each undertaking may be charged by the City to each Permittee, in addition to the permit fee.
6-9-206. Permit - Contents - Duration and Extensions.
(a) Each permit application shall state the starting date and estimated completion date. Work shall be completed within five days from the starting date or as determined by the City Engineer. Such determination shall be based upon factors reasonable related to the work to be performed under the permit. Such factors may include, in addition to other factors related to the work to be performed, the following:
(1) The scope of work to be performed under the permit;
(2) Maintaining the safe and effective flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the Public
Way affected by the work;
(3) Protecting the existing improvements to the Public Way impacted by the work;
(4) The season of the year during which the work is to be performed as well as the current
weather and its impact on public safety and the use of the Public Way by the public;
(5) Use of the Public Way for extraordinary events anticipated by the City.
The City Engineer shall be notified by the Permittee of commencement of the work within twenty-four hours prior to commencing work. The permit shall be valid for the time period specified in the permit.
(b) If the work is not completed during such period, prior to the expiration of the permit, the Permittee may apply to the City Engineer for an additional permit or an extension, which may be granted by the City Engineer for good cause shown.
(c) The length of the extension requested by the Permittee shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer. No extension shall be made that allows work to be completed in the winter period without payment of winter fees.
6-9-207. Permit - No Transfer or Assignment.
110
Permits shall not be transferable or assignable, and work shall not be performed under a permit in any place other than that specified in the permit. Nothing herein contained shall prevent a Permittee from subcontracting the work to be performed under a permit; provided, however, that the holder of the permit shall be and remain responsible for the performance of the work under the permit, and for all bonding, insurance and other requirements of this Chapter and under said permit. Subcontractors shall also be appropriately licensed, insured and bonded.
6-9-208. Compliance with Specifications, Standards, Traffic-Control Regulations; Site Permittee Identification.
(a) The work performed in the Public Way shall conform to the requirements of the Engineering Regulations, Design Standards, construction Specifications and traffic control regulations of the City, copies of which shall be available from the City Engineer.
(b) All job sites shall be operated in conformity with the latest edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Failure to do so is unlawful.
(c) All excavations shall be conducted in a manner resulting in a minimum amount of interference or interruption of street or pedestrian traffic. Inconvenience to Residents and Businesses fronting on the Public Way shall be minimized. Suitable, adequate and sufficient barricades and/or other structures will be used where necessary to prevent accidents involving property or Persons. Barricades must be in place until all of the Permittee’s equipment is removed from the site and the excavation has been backfilled and proper temporary gravel surface is in place, except where backfilling and resurfacing is to be done by the City; in which case the barricades, together with any necessary lights, flares or torches, must remain in place until the backfill work is actually commenced by the City. From sunset to sunrise, all barricades and excavations must be clearly outlined by adequate signal lights, torches, etc. The Police Department and Fire Department shall be notified in writing by the Permitee at least 24 hours in advance of any planned excavation requiring street closure or traffic detour.
(d) The contractor shall give full access at all times to the City Engineer or his designee for the purpose of inspection.
6-9-209. Other Highway Permits.
(a) Holders of permits for work on highways owned or under the jurisdiction of other government entities, but located within the City limits, shall be required to obtain permits from the City. Any City permit shall not be construed to permit or allow work on a County road or a State highway within the City without an applicable County or State permit.
(b) The City Engineer, in his or her discretion, shall have the right and authority to regulate work under permits issued by other governmental entities with respect to hours and days of work, and measures required to be taken by the Permittee of said governmental entity for the protection of traffic and safety of Persons and property. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose any duty, implied or express, on the City or its employees, officers, agents or assigns, relative to the protection of traffic and safety of Persons or property, arising out of the issuance of any permit issued by government entities other than the City, or arising out of any work performed on any Public Way owned or within the jurisdiction of the City.
6-9-210. Relocation of Structures in Public Ways.
111
(a) The City Engineer may direct any Person owning or maintaining facilities or structures in the Public Way to alter, modify or relocate such facilities or structures as the City Engineer may require as set forth herein. Sewers, water and other pipes, drains, tunnels, conduits, gas lines, vaults, trash receptacles and overhead and underground electric, telephone, telecommunication and communication facilities shall specifically be subject to such directives. The Person owning or maintaining the facilities or structures shall, at their own cost and expense and upon reasonable written notice by the City, promptly protect, or promptly alter or relocate such facilities or structures, or part thereof, as directed by the City. In the event that such Person refuses or neglects to conform to the directive of the City, the City shall have the right to break through, remove, alter or relocate such part of the facilities or structures without liability to such Person. Such Person shall pay to the City all costs incurred by the City in connection with such work performed by the City, including also design, engineering, construction, materials, insurance, court costs and attorneys fees.
(b) Any directive by the City Engineer shall be based upon of the following:
(1) The facility or structure was installed, erected or is being maintained contrary to law, or
determined by the City Engineer to be structurally unsound or defective;
(2) The facility or structure constitutes a
as defined under State statute;
(3) The permit under which the facility or structure was installed has expired or has been
revoked;
(4) The Public Way is about to be repaired or improved and such facilities or structures may
pose a hindrance to construction; or
(5) The grades or lines of the Public Way are to be altered or changed.
(c) Any directive of the City Engineer under this Section shall be under and consistent with the City’s police power. Unless an emergency condition exists, the City Engineer shall make a good faith effort to consult with the Person regarding any condition that may result in a removal or relocation of facilities in the Public Way to consider possible avoidance or minimization of removal or relocation requirements and provide the directive far enough in advance of the required removal or relocation to allow the Person a reasonable opportunity to plan and minimize cost associated with the required removal or relocation.
(d) This obligation does not apply to facilities or structures originally located on private property pursuant to a private easement, which property was later incorporated into the Public Way, if that prior private easement grants a superior vested right.
(e) Any Person owning or maintaining facilities or structures in the Public Way who fails to alter, modify or relocate such facilities or structures upon notice to do so by the City Engineer shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. All costs of alteration, modification or relocation shall be borne by the Person owning or maintaining the facilities or structures involved.
(f) The City may, at any time, in case of fire, disaster or other emergency, as determined by the City
112
in its reasonable discretion, cut or move any parts of any System and appurtenances on, over or under the Public Way, in which event the City shall not be liable therefor to a Person. The City shall notify a Person in writing prior to, if practicable, but in any event as soon as possible and in no case later than the next business day following any action taken under this subsection.
6-9-211. Impact of Excavation on Existing Improvements.
(a) If any sidewalk or curb ramp is blocked by excavation work, a temporary sidewalk or curb ramp shall be constructed or provided. Said temporary improvement shall be safe for travel and convenient for users, and consistent with City standards for such.
(b) Where excavations are made in paved areas, the surface shall be replaced with a temporary gravel surface until such time as the permanent repairs are completed.
(c) (1) At any time a Permittee disturbs the yard, residence or the real or Personal property of a
private Property Owner or the City, such Permittee shall insure that such property is returned, replaced and/or restored to a condition that is comparable to the condition that existed prior to the commencement of the work.
(2) The costs associated with the disturbance and the return, replacement and/or restoration
shall be borne by the Permittee. Further, a Permittee shall reimburse a Property Owner or the City, for any actual damage caused by the Permittee, its subcontractor, or its independent contractor, in connection with the disturbance of such property. However, nothing in this Subsection shall require the Permittee to pay a subscriber or private Property Owner when that subscriber or private Property Owner requests that the Permittee remove, replace or relocate improvements associated with the service provided by the Permittee to the Property Owner and when the Permittee exercises due care in the performance of that service, or when the subscriber or private Property Owner provided false information to the Permittee on which the Permittee relied to its detriment.
(d) Examples of types of acts specifically included in this Section are the following:
(1) Removal of sod, lawn, shrubbery, flowers, trees, driveways, or fence, to install, trench,
repair, replace, remove or locate, equipment, cable, water lines, sewer lines, storm drains, gas lines, telephone lines or other Appurtenances of the Permittee;
(2) Installation or removal of equipment or other Appurtenances of the Permittee’s System
within a private Property Owner’s property or residence which requires drilling, excavating, plastering, or the like on the part of the Permittee;
(3) Temporarily relocating or moving a piece of personal property or a fixture of a private
Property Owner (such as a motor vehicle, fence, air conditioning, heating unit, or the like) in order to perform some sort of construction, maintenance or repair by the Permittee; or
(4) Permanently removing a Permittee’s equipment or other Appurtenances due to the
revocation, termination or non-renewal of the franchise (if applicable).
(e) Existing drainage channels, such as gutters or ditches, shall be kept free of dirt or other debris so that natural flow will not be interrupted. When it is necessary to block or otherwise interrupt flow of the
113
drainage channel, a method of rerouting the flow must be submitted for approval by the City Engineer prior to the blockage of the channel.
(f) The requirements imposed upon the Permittee extend to any subcontractor or independent contractor that the Permittee might employee to perform the tasks pursuant to the permit.
(g) The requirements of this Section shall not apply to the removal by a Permittee, of a permanent structure placed by a Property Owner in a Public Way, unless such Property Owner has received prior written permission from the City granting the Property Owner the right to install a permanent structure on a Public Way, and such written permission has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
6-9-212. Restoration of Public Property.
The City shall, at Permitee’s expense, restore the surface of any Public Way to City standards.
6-9-213. Insurance Requirements.
(a) Before a permit is issued, the Applicant shall furnish to the City evidence that such Applicant has a comprehensive general liability and property damage policy that includes contractual liability coverage endorsed with the following limits and provisions or with such alternative limits and provisions as may be approved by the City:
(1) A minimum of Two Million Dollars ($2,000,000) combined single limit per occurrence
for bodily injury, personal injury, and property damage and not less than Two Million Dollars ($2,000,000) in the aggregate. The general aggregate limit shall apply separately to the permit, or the general aggregate limit shall be two times the required occurrence limit. The coverage shall be in the nature of Broad Form Commercial General Liability coverage. The City Attorney may increase or decrease minimum insurance limits, depending on the potential liability of any project.
(2) All policies shall include the City, its employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers
and assigns, as insureds. Any reference to the “City” shall include the City, its employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers and assigns.
(3) The coverage shall be primary insurance as respects the City, its employees, officers,
officials, agents, volunteers, and assigns. Any insurance or self-insurance maintained by the City, its employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers, and assigns shall be in excess of the Permittee’s insurance and shall not contribute to or with it.
(4) Any Failure to comply with reporting provisions of the policy shall not affect coverage
provided to the City, its employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers, and assigns.
(5) Coverage shall state that the Permittee’s insurance shall apply separately to each insured
against whom claim is made or suit is brought, except with respect to the limits of the insurer’s liability.
(6) Underwriters shall have no right of recovery or subrogation against the City, it being the
intent of the parties that the insurance policy so affected shall protect both parties and be primary coverage for any and all losses covered by the described insurance.
114
(7) The insurance companies issuing the policy or policies shall have no recourse against the
City for payment of any premiums due or for any assessments under any form of any policy.
(8) Each insurance policy shall be endorsed to state that the coverage shall not be suspended,
voided, canceled, or reduced in coverage or in limits, except after thirty (30) days’ prior written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested sent to the City.
(9) Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify, save harmless and defend the City and its
officers and employees against any claim or loss, damage or expense sustained on account of damages to Persons or property occurring by reason of permit work done by the Permittee, his/her subcontractor or agent, whether or not the work has been completed and whether or not the right-of-way has been opened to public travel.
(10) Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify, hold harmless and defend the City, and its
officers and employees against any claim or loss, damage or expense sustained by any Person occurring by reason of doing any work pursuant to the permit including, but not limited to falling objects or failure to maintain proper barricades and/or lights as required from the time work begins until the work is completed and right-of-way is opened for public use.
(b) Insurance is to be placed with insurers with an AM Best rating of no less than an A carrier, with a rating of “7" or higher.
(c) The Permittee shall furnish the City with certificates of insurance and original endorsements affecting coverage required by the permit. The certificates and endorsements for each insurance policy are to be signed by a Person authorized by that insurer to bind coverage on its behalf. The City expressly reserves the right to require complete, certified copies of all required insurance policies at any time. Consequently, the Permittee shall be prepared to provide such copies prior to the issuance of the permit.
(d) If any of the required policies are, or at any time become, unsatisfactory to the City as to form or substance, or if a company issuing any such policy is, or at any time becomes, unsatisfactory to the City, the Permittee shall promptly obtain a new policy, submit the same to the City for approval, and thereafter submit verification of coverage as required by the City. Upon failure to furnish, deliver and maintain such insurance as provided herein, the City may declare the permit to be in default and pursue any and all remedies the City may have at law or in equity, including those actions outlined in this Chapter.
(e) The Permittee shall include all subcontractors as insureds under its policies or shall furnish separate certificates and endorsements for each subcontractor. All coverages for subcontractors shall be subject to all of the requirements stated herein.
(f) Any deductibles or self-insured retentions shall be declared to and approved by the City. At the option of the City, either the insurer shall reduce or eliminate such deductibles or self-insured retentions as respects the City, its employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers or assigns, or the Permittee shall procure a bond, in a form acceptable to the City, guaranteeing payment of losses and related investigations, claim administration, and defense expenses.
(g) A Property Owner performing work adjacent to his/her residence may submit proof of a homeowner’s insurance policy in lieu of the insurance requirements of this Section.
115
(h) A Provider may be relieved of the obligation of submitting certificates of insurance under the following circumstances:
(1) if such company shall submit satisfactory evidence in advance that:
(A) It is insured in the amounts set forth in this Chapter, or has complied with State
requirements to become self insured. Public utilities may submit annually evidence of insurance coverage in lieu of individual submissions for each permit; and
(B) Said coverage provides to the City the same scope of coverage that would
otherwise be provided by a separate policy as required by this Chapter; or
(2) The work to be performed under the permit issued to the Applicant is to be performed by
the City, in which case insurance or other risk transfer issues shall be negotiated between the City and the Applicant by separate agreement.
6-9-214. Bond - When Required, Conditions, Warranty.
(a) Except as noted in this Chapter, each Applicant, before being issued a permit, shall provide the City with an acceptable security (this may include a corporate surety bond, cash bond or letter of credit, as determined by the City) in an amount determined by the City Engineer to guarantee faithful performance of the work authorized by a permit granted pursuant to this Chapter. The amount of the security required may be increased or decreased at the discretion of the City Engineer whenever it appears that the amount and cost of the work to be performed, and not satisfactorily completed, may vary from the amount of security otherwise required under this Chapter. The form of the security and the entity issuing the security shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney.
(b) Public utilities franchised by the City shall not be required to file any security if such requirement is expressly waived in the franchise documents.
(c) The security required by this Section shall be conditioned as follows:
(1) That the Permittee shall fully comply with the requirements of the City ordinances and
Regulations, Specifications and standards promulgated by the City relative to work in the Public Way, and respond to the City in damages for failure to conform therewith;
(2) That after work is commenced, the Permittee shall proceed with diligence and shall
promptly complete such work and restore the Public Way to construction Specifications, so as not to obstruct the public place or travel thereon more than is reasonably necessary;
(3) That the Permittee shall guarantee the materials and workmanship for a period of two
years from completion of such work, with reasonable wear and tear excepted; and
(4) That unless authorized by the City Engineer on the permit, all paving, resurfacing or
replacement of street facilities on major or collector streets shall be done in conformance with the regulations contained herein within three calendar days, and within seven calendar days from the time the excavation commences on all other streets, except as provided for during excavation in winter or during weather conditions which do not allow paving according to Engineering Regulations. In winter, a temporary patch must be provided. In all excavations, restoration or pavement surfaces shall be made immediately after backfilling is completed or concrete is cured.
116
If work is expected to exceed the above duration, the Permittee shall submit a detailed construction schedule for approval. The schedule will address means and methods to minimize traffic disruption and complete the construction as soon as reasonably possible.
6-9-215. Hold Harmless Agreement; Limitations on City Liability.
(a) The Permittee agrees to save the City, its officers, employees and agents harmless from any and all costs, damages and liabilities which may accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of any work performed under the permit. The issuance and acceptance of any permit under this Chapter shall constitute such an agreement by the Permittee to this Section.
(b) This Chapter shall neither be construed as imposing upon the City, its officers, employees and agents, any liability or responsibility for damages to any Person injured by or by reason of the performance of any work within the Public Way, or under a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter; nor shall the City, its officers, officials, employees, agents, volunteers or assigns thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspection authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of any work.
6-9-216. Work without Permit - Penalty.
A stop order may be issued by the City Engineer directed to any Person or Persons doing or causing any work to be done in the public way without a permit. Any Person found to be doing work, or causing work to be done, in the Public Way without having obtained a permit, as provided in this Chapter, shall be required to pay a permit fee equal to two times the normal permit fee. For replacement work, where a fee is not normally charged, the normal permit fee for new construction shall apply.
6-9-217. Failure to Comply; Default in Performance.
(a) Any permit may be revoked or suspended and a stop order issued by the City Engineer, after notice to the Permittee for:
(1) Violation of any condition of the permit, the security, or of any provision of this Chapter;
(2) Violation of any provision of any other ordinance of the City or law relating to the work;
or
(3) Existence of any condition or the doing of any act which does constitute, may constitute,
or cause a condition endangering life or property.
(b) A suspension or revocation by the City Engineer, and a stop order, shall take effect immediately upon entry thereof by the City Engineer and notice to the Person performing the work in the Public Way. Notice to the Person performing the work shall be accomplished when the City Engineer has posted a stop work order at the location of the work and written notice has been mailed, return receipt requested, to the address indicated by the Permittee on the permit.
(c) Whenever the City Engineer finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of the permit, written notice thereof may be given to the principal and to the surety on the bond, if there is a surety bond. Such notice shall state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the City Engineer to be reasonably necessary for the completion of the work.
117
(d) In the event that the surety (or principal), within a reasonable time following the giving of such notice (taking into consideration the exigencies of the situation, the nature of the work, the requirements of public safety and for the protection of Persons and property), fails either to commence and cause the required work to be performed with due diligence, or to indemnify the City for the cost of doing the work, as set forth in the notice, the City may perform the work, at the discretion of the City Engineer, with City forces or contract forces or both, and suit may be commenced by the City Attorney against the contractor and bonding company and such other Persons as may be liable, to recover the entire amount due to the City, including attorney fees, on account thereof. In the event that cash has been deposited, the cost of performing the work may be charged against the amount deposited, and suit brought for the balance due, if any.
6-9-218. Failure to Conform to Design Standards - Penalty.
For failure to conform to the Design Standards and Regulations, the City Engineer may:
(a) Suspend or revoke the permit;
(b) Issue a stop order;
(c) Order removal and replacement of faulty work;
(d) Require an extended warranty period; and/or
(e) Negotiate a cash settlement to be applied toward future maintenance costs.
6-9-219. Appeal of Suspension, Revocation, or Stop Order.
Any denial, suspension, revocation or stop order by the City Engineer may be appealed by the Permittee to the Bountiful City Administrative Law Judge by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days of the action of the City Engineer.
6-9-220. Tampering with Traffic Barricades.
It shall be unlawful for any Person to maliciously or wantonly or without authorization and legal cause, extinguish, remove or diminish any light illuminating any barricade or excavation, or to tear down, remove or in any manner alter any rail, fence, marker or barricade protecting any excavation or other construction site.
6-9-221. Conflict with Governing Provisions.
Should there be a conflict between the provisions of this Chapter and the provisions of any other ordinance, agreement, franchise, or other document governing the excavation of a Public Way, the more restrictive provisions of the aforesaid documents shall apply.
6-9-222. Violation - Penalty.
Unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, a violation of any provision of this Chapter, or failure to comply with an order of suspension, revocation or stop work, shall be a class B misdemeanor. Each day
118
the violation exists shall be a separate offense. No criminal conviction shall excuse the Person from otherwise complying with the provisions of this Chapter.
Chapter 10: Existing Utilities
6-10-101. Interference. Permit and Procedure.
6-10-102. Protection of Work.
6-10-103. Damage and Liability.
6-10-101. Interference. Permit and Procedure.
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with any existing utility without a written permit of the City Engineer and the owner of the utility. If it becomes necessary to relocate an exiting utility, this may be done to accommodate a person if the cost of such work be borne by said person. The cost of moving privately owned utilities shall be similarly borne by the said person unless he makes other arrangements with the person owning the utility.
6-10-102. Protection of Work.
Any person granted a permit hereunder shall support and protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or across said work.
6-10-103. Damage and Liability.
In case any of said pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, and for this purpose pipe coating or other encasement or devises are to be considered as part of a substructure, said person shall promptly notify the owner thereof. All damaged facilities shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the person granted a permit. It is the intent of this Chapter that the person granted a permit shall assume all liability for damage to substructure, and any resulting damage or injury to anyone because of such substructure damage and such assumption of liability is a contractual obligation of the permittee. The only exception will be such instances where damage is exclusively due to the negligence of the owning utility. The City shall not be made a party to an action because of this Chapter. The person granted a permit hereunder shall inform himself as to the existence and location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage.
Chapter 11: Reserved.
Chapter 12: Parks and Recreation.
6-12-101. Appointment of Director.
6-12-102. Permit from Director.
6-12-103. Interference with Director Prohibited.
6-12-104. Actions Damaging Roots Prohibited.
6-12-105. Permission Required for Attachments to Trees.
6-12-106. Protecting Trees During Building Construction.
6-12-107. Building Construction or Removal Necessitating
Trimming and Pruning Application for Permit.
6-12-108. Protection of Trees During Movement of Buildings.
119
6-12-109. Acts Prohibited within Public Parks.
6-12-110. Tennis Shoes.
6-12-111. Offensive Conduct Unlawful.
6-12-112. Unlawful to Injure or Destroy Property.
6-12-113. Park Hours.
6-12-114. Parks Reservations.
6-12-101. Appointment of Director.
The City Manager may appoint or designate a qualified person to be Director of all parks and city-owned recreation facilities. The Director shall be responsible for the planting, trimming, pruning and caring for all trees, shrubs or plants in and upon any street, park, boulevard, or public place of the city. He may designate the kind of trees, shrubs, or plants to be planted upon any street, park, boulevard, or public place of said city, provided, however, that the owners of property fronting on any street, alley or public place may petition the governing body that such trees, shrubs or plants shall be a certain kind of variety and such petition shall be merely advisory to the action of said governing body.
6-12-102. Permit from Director.
It is unlawful to cut, trim, prune, plant, remove, injure or interfere with any tree, shrub or plant upon any street, park, boulevard, or public place of the city without a permit therefor from the Director. The Director is hereby authorized to grant such permission at his discretion but no such permit shall be valid for a longer period than thirty days after its date of issuance.
6-12-103. Interference with Director Prohibited.
It is unlawful to interfere with the Director or persons acting under his authority while engaged in planting, mulching, pruning, trimming, spraying, treating or removing any tree, shrub or plant in any park, street, boulevard, or public place of the city, or in the removing of any stone, cement or other substance from about the trunk of any tree, shrub or plant in any such street, park, boulevard, or public place.
6-12-104. Actions Damaging Roots Prohibited.
It is unlawful to cause, authorize or procure any brine water, oil, liquid dye or other substance deleterious to tree life, to lie, leak, pour, flow or drip upon or into the soil about the base of any tree, shrub or plant in any street, park, boulevard, or public place of the city or into any sidewalk, road, or pavement within said city at a point from which such substance may be lying upon or by flowing, dripping or seeping into such soil injure such tree, shrub or plant. No person without the approval of the Director shall place or maintain any stone, cement or other substance so that it shall impede the free access of water or air to the roots of any tree, shrub or plant in any street, park, boulevard, or public place of the city.
6-12-105. Permission Required for Attachments to Trees.
It is unlawful, without the permission of the Director, to attach or keep attached to any tree, shrub or plant in any street, park, boulevard, or other public place in the city or to the guard or stake intended for the protection thereof, any wire, rope, sign or any other device whatsoever.
6-12-106. Protecting Trees During Building Construction.
120
During the erection, repair, alteration or removal of any building, house or structure in the city, no person in charge of such work shall leave any tree, shrub or plant in any street, park, boulevard, or public place of the city in the vicinity of such building or structure without such good and sufficient guards or protectors as shall prevent injury to said tree, shrub or plant arising out of or by reason of said erection, alteration or removal.
6-12-107. Building Construction or Removal Necessitating
Trimming and pruning Application for Permit.
When the erection, repair, alternation or removal of any building, house or structure necessitates the trimming, pruning or removal of any tree, shrub or plant on any street, park, or other public place of the city, except any trimming, pruning or removal required by the construction of a residential driveway, it shall be within the discretion of the Director to refuse permission to do such work. Applications for a permit to trim, prune, or remove any tree or plant on any of the above mentioned places for the above mentioned reasons shall be filed with the Director at least three days prior to the time of doing such work. The Director may stipulate the conditions upon which any trimming, pruning or removal may be done and may require the applicant to enter into an agreement whereby said applicant shall agree to pay all costs incurred for any inspection, labor, equipment or service deemed necessary by the Director.
6-12-108. Protection of Trees During Movement of Buildings.
It is unlawful to move any building, house or portion thereof, along a public street or place, without first notifying the Director at least three days in advance of such moving. Said notice shall designate the route to be followed and all other details pertinent to such work. The Director shall have the authority to change such route and designate one which in his opinion will cause less damage to trees, shrubs or plants owned by the city along and adjacent to the said route. If necessary to protect such trees, shrubs or plants, the Director may require that said house, building or portions thereof be cut into segments small enough to fit the available width between such trees, shrubs or plants along the designated route. As a condition to approving any route for the moving of any building, house or portion thereof, the Director may require the person doing such work to enter into an agreement to pay all costs incurred for any labor, equipment or material used to protect or preserve such trees, shrubs or plants either before or after such moving.
6-12-109. Acts Prohibited within Public Parks.
Unless prior written permission is given by the City, it is unlawful for any person within a public park, public trailhead or other public property to:
(a) Sleep, Camp or erect any tent or shelter.
(b) Build or ignite any fire, except in a fireplace or such other designated place.
(c) Leave or deposit rubbish or refuse anywhere except in containers for that purpose.
(d) Pick, cut, damage or destroy any tree, flower, vine, shrub or plant life of any kind.
(e) Set up, operate or use a water slide or other similar device.
(f) Pollute any creek or stream of water.
121
(g) Have in possession or consume beer or alcoholic beverages.
(h) Conduct any business, fundraisers, or yard sales or distribute any commercial handbill or circular.
(i) Drive a motor vehicle in any place other than a street or public parking lot.
(j) Place hot or warm coals in a garbage can.
(k) Alter or tamper with park equipment, or move tables or garbage cans.
(l) Golf, drive a motorized vehicle of any description, or engage in any other activity which unreasonably disturbs others in their use of the park.
(m) Allow intentionally or negligently any dog off leash or horse upon park grounds. This does not apply to seeing-eye dogs and police dogs used by law enforcement agencies. This subsection does not apply to trailheads.
(n) Ride on, or otherwise use in any way, skateboards, roller skates, roller blades or similar wheeled or propelled devices. This prohibition applies to the entire area of every public park, including any and all sidewalks that surround them.
(o) put on a performance of a play, music or other type of public presentation.
(p) use any system of artificial lighting.
(q) operate any public address system or play any amplified music or instruments.
(r) Drive stakes, anchors or signs into the ground.
(s) Use park equipment and facilities in a manner other than that for which the equipment or facility is designed, or which will or may damage the equipment or facility.
(t) Violate any park use regulations or rules established by the City.
6-12-110. Tennis Courts.
(a) It is unlawful for any person, while on, or playing tennis upon any public tennis court in the city to wear shoes other than with soles and heels of soft rubber or other similar material.
(b) It is unlawful to engage in any activity on the tennis courts other than to play tennis. Other games, including soccer, and other uses, including using tricycles, bicycles, rollerblades, skateboards, etc., are prohibited.
6-12-111. Offensive Conduct Unlawful.
It is unlawful in any public park, public trailhead or other property to indulge in boisterous or offensive conduct or use any vulgar or profane language or not obey or comply with the posted regulations regarding the use of said park or property.
122
6-12-112. Unlawful to Injure or Destroy Property.
It is unlawful to injure or destroy any equipment or grounds of any public park or property.
6-12-113. Park Hours.
All City parks and public trailheads including parking lots and roadways within those parks, are closed to the public between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following morning, unless otherwise permitted in writing by the Director. It is unlawful to be within a park or trailhead during such hours.
6-12-114. Parks Reservations.
(1) The City may reserve City-owned parks and boweries for the occasional exclusive use of specific citizens or groups, subject to availability and compliance with applicable rules and fees established by the City.
(2) It is an unlawful trespass and a class C misdemeanor for any person, who has been informed by a City employee or the party holding the reservation that the park is reserved for the exclusive use of those with a reservation and their invitees, to enter or remain upon parks, boweries and other park areas which have been reserved by the City for use by others. This subsection does not apply to City employees acting within the scope of their employment.
Chapter 13: Municipal Improvement District Act
6-13-101. Adoption.
The Utah Municipal Improvement District Act, which is set forth at Section 10-16-1 et seq, Utah Code, is hereby adopted.
Chapter 14: Impact Fees
6-14-101. Citywide Impact Fee Area.
6-14-102. Impact Fee Schedule.
6-14-103. Adjustment of Impact Fees.
6-14-104. Administrative Appeals Procedure.
6-14-101. Citywide Impact Fee Area.
The entire City of Bountiful is hereby established as a service area within which impact fees shall be calculated and imposed.
6-14-102. Impact Fee Schedule.
Based upon the Capital Facilities Plan and the Impact Fee Analysis approved and adopted by the City Council, which is incorporated herein by this reference, the following impact fees are imposed for each type of system improvement stated:
123
(a) Storm Water Fee:
(1) Single family residential - $ 2,100.00 per acre;
(2) Multi-family residential - $ 2,350.00 per acre; and
(3) Commercial / retail - $ 3,500.00 per acre.
(b) Water Development Fee:
The total water connection impact fee shall be the sum of a water supply impact fee and a water storage impact fee.
(1) The water supply impact fee shall be based on a 1" equivalent residential connection fee of $1,300.00, and modified for other sized meters by the multipliers set forth in paragraph (3).
(2) The storage impact fee shall be based on a 1" equivalent residential connection fee of $538.00, and modified for other sized meters by the multipliers set forth in paragraph (3), except as shown on the attached map for areas with existing agreements for prepayment of storage fees. In those area of exception, the multipliers for areas with pressure irrigation shall be used.
(3) Equivalent Residential Connection Multipliers:
Water Meter Areas with Areas without
Size Pressure Irrigation Pressure Irrigation
5/8 x 3/4" .4 .8
3/4" .6 1.2
1" 1 2
1 1/2" 2 3
2" 4 5
3" 9.6 11
4" 16.8 18
6" 36.8 38
(c) Park Development Fee: None imposed at this time.
(d) Public Safety Impact Fee: None imposed at this time.
(e) Street Impact Fee: None imposed at this time.
6-14-103. Adjustment of Impact Fees.
With the approval of the City Engineer, the standard impact fees adopted in this ordinance may be adjusted -
(a) to respond to unusual circumstances in specific areas, and to ensure that the impact fees are fairly imposed; or
124
(b) by re-calculating the amount of the impact fee to be imposed on a particular development based upon studies and data submitted by the developer, if found appropriate by the City Engineer.
6-14-104. Administrative Appeals Procedure.
Any party with standing to challenge an impact fee under State law has the right to appeal the imposition of any impact fee to the Bountiful City Administrative Law Judge by filing a written notice with the City Recorder within 30 days of paying the fee to be challenged.
Chapter 15: Storm Water Management
Chapter 15: Storm Water Management
6-15-101. Purposes and objectives.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the City and its inhabitants by improving the City’s storm sewer system, managing and controlling storm water runoff, protecting property, preventing polluted water from entering the City’s storm water system and other receiving waters as required by federal and state law. The objectives of this chapter are to:
(a) Provide and maintain an adequate Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) for handling storm water runoff.
(b) Provide fair, equitable and non-discriminatory rates for using the storm drainage system which user fees will generate sufficient revenues for operating, improving and maintaining the storm drainage utility adequately. Rates shall be applied consistently for the same class of customers.
(c) Establish a policy that fees should be set after considering such factors as:
(1) Intensity of development of land parcels;
(2) Types of development on land parcels;
(3) Cost of maintaining, operating, repairing and improving the system;
(4) Quantity and quality of the run-off generated;
(5) Public health, safety and welfare; and,
(6) Any other factors that should be considered.
(d) Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by storm water discharges by any user
125
(e) Prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4
(f) Guide, regulate and control the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other activity that results in the movement of soil on land within the city
(g) Minimize increases in non-point source pollution caused by storm water runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local water quality
(h) Reduce storm water runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and non-point source pollution, wherever possible, through storm water management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety
(i) Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
6-15-102. Definitions.
Where terms are not defined by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases and words shall mean:
“Authorized Enforcement Agency” – Employees or designees of the director of the municipal agency designated to enforce this chapter.
“Best Management Practices (BMPs)” – Includes schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, design standards, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly into the waters of the State. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, educational activities, and practices to control plant site runoff spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
“City” – Bountiful City, a municipal corporation of the State of Utah.
“City Engineer” – means the City Engineer or his/her authorized representatives.
“Clean Water Act” – The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
“Construction Activity” – Activities subject to NPDES Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition
126
“Conveyance System” – Any channel or pipe for collecting and directing the storm water.
“County” – Davis County
“Council” – Bountiful City Council
“Culvert” – A covered channel or large diameter pipe that directs water flow below the ground surface.
“Customer” or “Person” – Any individual; public or private corporation and its officers; partnership; association; firm; trustee; executor of an estate; the State or its departments, institutions, bureaus, agencies; county; city; political subdivision; or any other governmental or legal entity recognized by law.
“Degradation” – (Biological or chemical) The breakdown of chemical compounds into simpler substances, usually less harmful than the original compound, as with the degradation of a persistent pesticide. (Geological) Wearing down by erosion. (Water) The lowering of the water quality of a watercourse by an increase in the amount of pollutant(s).
“Design Storm” – A theoretical selected storm event that is used as a basis for design, defined in terms of the probability of occurrence over time.
“Discharge” – to dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, seep, dump, leak or place by any means, or that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured, injected, seeped, dumped, leaked, or placed by any means any solid or liquid matter into the MS4..
“Drainage”– Refers to the collection, conveyance, containment, and/or discharge of surface and storm water runoff.
“Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU)” – An ERU is equal to 3,828 square feet of impervious surface area. This is based on a single-family residential parcel in Bountiful City, which has an average of 3,828 square feet of impervious surface according to a study completed in April 2000.
“Erosion” – The wearing away of land surface by wind or water. Erosion occurs naturally from weather or runoff but can be intensified by land-clearing practices related to farming, residential or industrial development, road building, or timber-cutting.
“Fill” – A deposit of earth material placed by construction activity.
“General Permit” – A permit issued under the UPDES program to cover a class or category of storm water discharges.
“Grading” – The cutting and/or filling of the land surface to a desired slope or elevation.
“Hazardous Waste” – By-products of society that can pose a substantial or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly managed. Possesses at least one of four
127
characteristics (flammable, corrosivity, reactivity, or toxicity), or appears on special EPA lists.
“Illicit Connection” – Any physical connection to a publicly maintained storm drain system which has not been permitted by the public entity responsible for the operation and maintenance of the system.
“Impervious Surface” – A surface which prevents or retards the infiltration of water. Some examples of impervious surfaces are rooftops, concrete or asphalt paving, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, and gravel that has been subject to surface traffic, compacted native surfaces, and earthen materials, and oiled, macadam, or other surfaces which impede the natural infiltration of storm water.
“Infiltration” – The downward movement of water from the surface to the subsoil. The infiltration capacity is expressed in terms of inches/hour.
“Inlet” – An entrance into a ditch, storm sewer, or other waterway.
“Mitigation” – Storm water control facilities located on a parcel, which either hold runoff for a short period of time before releasing it to the storm drainage system, or hold water until it evaporates or infiltrates into the ground.
“Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4)” – A municipally owned and operated storm water collection system that may consist of any or all of the following: curb & gutter, drainage swales, piping, ditches, canals, detention basins, inlet boxes, or any other system used to convey storm water that discharges into canals, ditches, streams, rivers, or lakes not owned and operated by that municipality.
“Mulch” – A natural or artificial layer of plant residue or other materials covering the land surface which conserves moisture, holds soil in place, aids in establishing plant cover, and minimizes temperature fluctuations.
“Non-point Source” – A group of diffuse sources of storm water runoff (not a single location such as a pipe) such as agricultural or urban land from which pollutants are or may be discharged.
“Off-site” – Any area lying upstream of the site that drains onto the site and any area lying downstream of the site to which the site drains.
“On-site” – The entire property that includes the proposed development.
“Parcel” – The smallest, separately segregated unit of land having an owner. A parcel has boundaries and surface area, and is documented with a property number by the County.
“Plat” – A map or representation of a subdivision showing the division of a tract or parcel of land
128
into lots, blocks, streets, or other divisions and dedications.
“Point Source” – Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, or vessel or other floating craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged.
“Pollutant” – Generally, any substance introduced into the environment that adversely affects the usefulness of a resource. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; sediment, floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
“Receiving Waters” – Bodies of water or surface water systems receiving water from upstream constructed (or natural) systems.
“Retention” – The holding of runoff in a basin without release except by means of evaporation, infiltration, or emergency bypass.
“Riparian” – A relatively narrow strip of land that borders a stream or river.
“Runon” – Storm water surface flow or other surface flow which enters property other than that where it originated.
“Runoff” – That part of precipitation, snow melt, or irrigation water that runs off the land into streams or other surface water.
“Single-Family Residential Parcel” – Any parcel of land containing a single-family dwelling unit.
“Source Control” – A practice or structural measure to prevent pollutants from entering storm water runoff or other environmental media.
“Storm Drainage Facilities” – Any facility, improvement, development, or property made for controlling storm water quantity and quality.
“Storm Drainage System” – All man-made storm drainage facilities and conveyances, and natural storm water drainage channels owned or maintained by the City that store, control, treat, and/or convey storm water.
“Storm Drainage Utility” or “Utility” – The utility created by this ordinance, which operates,
129
maintains, regulates, and improves storm drainage facilities and programs within Bountiful City.
“Storm Water” – Runoff produced by precipitation events and snowmelt.“Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP)” – The set of drawings and other documents that comprise all the information and specifications for the programs, drainage systems, structures, BMPs, concepts and techniques intended to maintain or restore quality and quantity of storm water runoff to pre-development levels during and after construction.
“Swale” – An elongated depression in the land surface that is at least seasonally wet, is usually heavily vegetated, and is normally without flowing water. Swales direct storm water flows into primarily drainage channels and allow some of the storm water to infiltrate into the ground surface.
“Treatment Control BMP” – A BMP that is intended to remove pollutants from storm water.
“Undeveloped Parcel” – Any parcel that has not been altered by grading, filling, or construction.
“UPDES(Utah Pollutant Discharge Elimination System)” – means the State-wide program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements under the Utah Water Quality Act (Title 19, Chapter 5, Utah Code Annotated). UPDES is described in the Rules of the Utah Administrative Code R317-8.
“Waters of the State” – All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, water-courses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state of Utah or any portion thereof, except that bodies of water confined to and retained within the limits of private property, and which do not develop into or constitute a nuisance, or a public health hazard, or a menace to fish and wildlife.
“Wetland” – An area that is regularly saturated by surface or ground water and subsequently characterized by a prevalence of vegetation that is adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Examples include: swamps, bogs, marshes, and estuaries.
6-15-103. Storm Drainage Utility Created.
(a) There is hereby created and established a Bountiful City Storm Drainage Utility. All storm drainage facilities owned by the City constitute the physical assets of the Bountiful Storm Drain Utility.
(b) Responsibility of Administration.
The City Engineer shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the City may be delegated by the City Engineer to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the City.
130
(c) Ultimate Responsibility.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this ordinance are minimum standards; therefore this ordinance does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure compliance with federal regulations, or that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
6-15-104. City Storm Drainage Utility facilities and assets.
The Utility shall operate, maintain, and improve all existing City storm drainage facilities used for the conveyance of storm waters, through, under or over lands or watercourses, beginning at a point where the storm waters first enter the storm drainage system of the city and ending in each instance at a point where the storm waters exit from the system. However, the utility does not include government-owned streets or those facilities operated and maintained by or for the County or the State of Utah.
6-15-105. Waters discharged to storm drains.
The only substance dischargeable into the City’s storm drainage system is non-polluted water. Such water may be discharged only into storm drains which have adequate capacity for the accommodation of such water. Such discharged water shall comply with the established storm water quality standards.
6-15-106. System of rates and charges.
(a) Service fees imposed. The City will by resolution of the City Council impose storm drainage fee rates and charges on each parcel of real property within the City except governmentally-owned streets. The charges shall fund the administration, planning design, construction, water quality programming, operation, maintenance and repair of existing and future storm water facilities.
(b) Method of determining contribution of storm water.
(1) Contributions of storm water from non-residential parcels and residential parcels larger than duplexes have been ascertained through aerial photography and by evaluating land surface and measuring the amount of impervious surface.
(2) Contributions of storm water from residential parcels up to and including duplexes have been ascertained by sampling the amount of residential impervious areas.
(c) Storm drainage service fees shall be assessed on each parcel of real property within the City (including City-owned properties), except government-owned streets and City storm water facilities. Service fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council and may be differentiated according to the following classifications:
131
Residential parcels: Single-family residential and duplex parcels shall constitute one ERU per month.
Undeveloped parcels: Undeveloped parcels shall have no charges assessed.
Other parcels: Charges for all other parcels shall be computed by multiplying the total ERUs for a parcel by the monthly rate. Total ERUs are calculated by dividing total square feet of impervious surface by 3,828 (one ERU), rounded to the nearest half or whole number.
Credit for on-parcel mitigation: Non-residential parcels with mitigating storm water facilities, e.g. approved on-site detention/retention of storm water, approved discharge of storm water through a sewer connection or other approved and complete on-site detention methods that meet the City’s design and maintenance standards may be eligible for a service fee credit. The parcel’s owner or agent must make application for this credit to the City Engineer. The amount of credit is based on the following formula:
P = 50 + 50 (Qr/Qp)
Formula symbols have the following meaning:
P = Percentage of storm drainage fees to be applied to the parcel
50 = Percentage representing Utility’s fixed operation and maintenance costs
50 = Percentage representing costs for Utility’s capital improvement program
Qr = Restricted storm water discharge from a parcel
Qp = Peak storm water discharge from the same parcel that would result if the mitigating facilities were not in place.
The City Engineer may, if requested, provide a complete on-site mitigation evaluation at the expense of the parcel’s owner or authorized agent.
Credit for regional storm water mitigation: Non-residential parcels with mitigating storm water facilities, that serve the City’s regional storm water needs as prescribed by the storm water master plan and utilizing methods that meet the City’s design and maintenance standards, may be eligible for a service fee credit. The credit may be granted if property owners have not already been compensated for or agreed to construct the facilities as part the development process. The parcel’s owner or agent must make application for this credit to the City Engineer.
If a request for mitigation credit is granted, the credit shall be applied to all charges from the time of the appealed billing, and will be reflected on the next billing thirty days after appeal is granted.
Credit for maintenance of long-term storm water controls: Non-residential properties with long-term storm water controls or measures that meet the city’s standards for reducing storm water runoff pollution may be eligible for a service fee credit of up to 20%. The credit may be granted if the storm water controls are kept in effective operating condition as shown by an
132
annual inspection report that must be provided to the city. The parcel’s owner or agent must make application for this credit to the City Engineer annually.
Low income relief: A single family residential parcel owner who qualifies for the City’s low income relief, as determined by resolution of the City Council and set forth in the fee schedule, may also be eligible for a reduction in the service charge for their parcel.
6-15-107. Billing and collection.
(a) Utility Enterprise Fund – This ordinance creates the Storm Drainage Utility Fund. All revenues received from storm drainage user fees shall be placed in the enterprise fund as a designated fund, to be left separate and apart from all other City funds. The collection, accounting, and expenditure of all storm water utility funds shall be in accordance with the Utah Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act.
(b) Billing – The City shall bill property owners for storm drainage utility services. Billing amounts shall be included as a separate line item on utility bills. A billing will also be sent to owners of parcels within the city who are not City utility customers.
(c) Collection – Partial payments on a combined utility bill shall be applied consistent with the billing procedures established by the City. Fees and charges shall be considered delinquent if not paid as determined by the procedures established by the City and will be a debt to the City, which shall be subject to recovery in a civil action. Pursuant to 10-8-38 Utah Code Ann., the City may cause the water service to the property to be shut off for failure to pay for the storm drainage service furnished, as set forth on the billing.
6-15-108. Appeal of charges.
(a) Any non-residential customer who disagrees with the storm drainage user fee for his or her parcel may apply to the City Engineer for a user fee adjustment. The adjustment request must state the grounds for adjustment and must be filed in writing with the City Engineer no later than thirty days after receipt of billing. The City Engineer shall review the request and basis for user charges to determine whether an error was made in the calculation or application of the fee.
(b) An appeal of a City Engineer’s decision may be brought before the City Manager within thirty days after the date of the City Engineer’s decision. The decision of the City Manager is final and conclusive. If an appeal of charges is successful, credit will be applied to all charges from the time of the appealed billing, and will be reflected on a future billing after the appeal is granted.
6-15-109. Prohibitions.
It is unlawful for any person to:
(a) Track mud or sediment onto public streets by construction or delivery vehicles. Provisions shall be made at all construction sites to clean the vehicles before vehicles leave the site.
133
(b) Washout concrete trucks at sites other than pre-approved designated areas. Dumping of excess concrete shall not be allowed.
(c) Stockpile construction or yard improvement materials or debris in the street or in the gutter. This includes but is not limited to ramps being constructed for temporary access across the existing curb and gutter; stockpiling of topsoil or other fill material; stockpiling of sand, gravel, landscape rock, bark, mulch or any other material that may be considered a source of pollution in the storm water system.
6-15-110. Illicit discharges.
(a) No person shall discharge or cause or allow to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than storm water.
(b) The commencement, conduct or continuance of any discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
(1) water line flushing or other potable water sources,
(2) landscape irrigation or lawn watering,
(3) diverted stream flows,
(4) rising ground water,
(5) ground water infiltration to storm drains,
(6) uncontaminated pumped ground water,
(7) foundation or footing drains,
(8) crawl space pumps,
(9) air conditioning condensation,
(10) springs,
(11) individual residential washing of vehicles,
(12) natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows,
(13) swimming pools (if dechlorinated to less than one PPM chlorine),
134
(14) residual street wash water
(15) emergency fire fighting activities,
(16) discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
(17) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test.
(c) The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge permitted under a UPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the State of Utah, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
(d) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
(e) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, connections of sanitary sewer lines to the MS4.
6-15-111. Construction Storm Water Discharge Permit Required .
(a) Owners and operators of any construction sites within the jurisdictional limits of the City which disturb one acre or more of surface area, or are part of a common plan of development that disturbs one acre or more and have not passed a final storm water inspection for notice of termination are required to obtain a Storm Water Discharge Permit from the City.
(b) No person shall be granted a storm water discharge permit without the approval of a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan by the City Engineer.
(c) No storm water discharge permit is required for the following activities:
(1) Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources.
(2) Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use.
(3) Activities at construction sites which qualify for a Rainfall Erosivity Waiver according to the current UPDES Storm Water General Permit for Construction Activites.
(4) Additions or modifications to existing single-family structures unless otherwise specifically required in this chapter.
135
6-15-112. Permit Application Requirements
(a) Application for a construction storm water discharge permit shall be filed with the City Engineer. Applicants are required to obtain a permit prior to commencement of work. Each permit application shall bear the name and address and contact information of the owner of the site, developer of the site, contractor(s) working at the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee and a site specific storm water pollution prevention plan.
(b) The applicant is required to file a letter of credit or cash deposit in an amount deemed sufficient by the Engineering Department to cover all costs of implementation and maintenance of the approved Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan including costs for improvements, landscaping, and maintenance of improvements for such period as specified by the city, and also to cover engineering and inspections costs and the cost to repair improvements installed on the site and damaged by uncontrolled erosion and sediment from the construction site.
6-15-113. Permit Fees.
(a) The City shall charge and the Permittee shall pay upon issuance of the permit, fees for costs associated with the work performed under the permit. Such costs could include costs for reviewing the project and issuing the permit, inspections of the project, deterioration of existing Public Improvements or diminution of the useful life of existing Public Improvements, and other costs to the City associated with the work to be done under the permit. All costs shall be assessed in a non-discriminatory manner.
(b) The City Engineer may reduce or waive permit fees or penalties or portion thereof provided for in this Chapter, when he/she determines that such permit fee or penalty:
(1) pertains to construction or rehabilitation of housing for Persons whose income is below the median income level for the City; or
(2) pertains to work by a contractor on City owned systems at the request of the City.
(c) Additional charges to cover the reasonable cost and expenses of any required engineering review, inspection, and work site restoration associated with each undertaking may be charged by the City to each Permittee, in addition to the initial permit fee.
(d) The fee structure for review of any storm water discharge permit application shall be established by the City Engineer. All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to a local budgetary category to support local plan review, inspection and program administration, and shall be made prior to the issuance of any permit for the development.
6-15-114. Permit - Contents - Duration and Extensions.
136
(a) Each permit application shall state the estimated starting date and estimated completion date. Work shall be completed within a reasonable period of time from the starting date or as determined by the City Engineer. Such determination shall be based upon factors reasonable related to the work to be performed under the permit. Such factors may include, in addition to other factors related to the work to be performed, the following:
(1) The scope of work to be performed under the permit;
(2) Protecting existing public improvements impacted by the work;
(3) The seasons of the year during which the work is to be performed as well as the current weather and its impact on public safety and the environment.
The City Engineer shall be notified by the Permittee of commencement of the work a minimum of twenty-four hours prior to commencing work. The permit shall be valid for the time period specified in the permit or as amended.
(b) If the work is not completed during such period, prior to the expiration of the permit, the Permittee may apply to the City Engineer for an additional permit or an extension, which may be granted by the City Engineer for good cause shown. The length of the extension requested by the Permittee shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
(c) The Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan shall be amended as required for an extension.
6-15-115. Permit - No Transfer or Assignment.
Permits shall not be transferable or assignable, and work shall not be performed under a permit in any place other than that specified in the permit. Nothing herein contained shall prevent a Permittee from subcontracting the work to be performed under a permit; provided, however, that the holder of the permit shall be and remain responsible for the performance of the work under the permit, and for all bonding, insurance and other requirements of this Chapter and under said permit. Subcontractors shall also be appropriately licensed, insured and bonded.
6-15-116. Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
(a) A Storm Water Pollution Prevention plan shall be required with all permit applications providing for erosion and sediment control and storm water management during the land disturbing activity and after the activity has been completed. The Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan must meet the requirements of the current UPDES Storm Water General Permit for Construction Activities. The Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan shall be prepared in accordance with the checklist provided by the Engineering Department and must be certified by a professional engineer.
(b) For development or redevelopment occurring on a previously developed site, an applicant
137
shall be required to include within the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan measures for controlling existing storm water runoff discharges from the site in accordance with the standards of this Ordinance.
6-15-117. Review and Approval
(a) The Engineering Department will review each application to determine its conformance with the provisions of this regulation. Within 30 days after receiving an application, the Engineering Department shall, in writing:
(1) Approve the permit application;
(2) Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
(3) Disapprove the permit application, indicating the reason(s) and procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission.
(b) Failure of the Engineering Department to act on an original or revised application within the specified time period shall authorize the applicant to proceed in with the plans as filed unless such time is extended by agreement between the applicant and the Engineering Department.
6-15-118. Inspection
(a) Field inspections shall be conducted by the Engineering Department or other designated agent as outlined in the inspection checklist provided by the Engineering Department.
(b) Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this ordinance, or where the city engineer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this ordinance the city engineer or designee is authorized to enter the premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this ordinance, provided that if such premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such premises be unoccupied the city engineer shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the city engineer shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
6-15-119. Storm Water Discharge Permit Waiver.
(a) Every applicant shall provide for storm water management as required by this chapter unless a written request is filed to waive this requirement. Requests to waive the storm water management requirements shall be submitted to the City Engineer for approval.
138
(b) The minimum requirements for storm water management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant, provided that at least one of the following conditions applies:
(1) It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this ordinance.
(2) Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of storm water discharges have been established in a storm water management plan that has been approved by the Engineering Department.
(3) Provisions are made to manage storm water by an off-site facility. The off-site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of storm water control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there is a legally obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the facility.
(4) The Engineering Department finds that meeting the minimum on-site management requirements is not feasible due to the natural or existing physical characteristics of a site.
(5) Non-structural practices will be used on the site that reduce:
(A) the generation of storm water from the site,
(B) the size and cost of storm water storage and
(C) the pollutants generated at the site.
The amount of credit available for using such non-structural practices shall be determined by the Engineering Department.
(c) In instances where one of the conditions above applies, the City Engineer may grant a waiver from strict compliance with these storm water management provisions, as long as acceptable mitigation measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a waiver, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that the waiver will not result in the following impacts to downstream waterways:
(1) Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures;
(2) Degradation of biological functions or habitat;
(3) Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation;
(4) Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, property
(d) Furthermore, where compliance with minimum requirements for storm water management is waived, the applicant will satisfy the minimum requirements by meeting one of the mitigation
139
measures selected by the city. Mitigation measures may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) The purchase and donation of privately owned lands, or the grant of an easement to be dedicated for preservation and/or reforestation. These lands should be located adjacent to the stream corridor in order to provide permanent buffer areas to protect water quality and aquatic habitat,
(2) The creation of a storm water management facility or other drainage improvements on previously developed properties, public or private, that currently lack storm water management facilities designed and constructed in accordance with the purposes and standards of this ordinance,
(3) Monetary contributions (Fee-in-Lieu) to fund storm water management activities such as research and studies (e.g., regional wetland delineation studies, stream monitoring studies for water quality and macroinvertebrates, stream flow monitoring, threatened and endangered species studies, hydrologic studies, and monitoring of storm water management practices.)
(e) Fee in Lieu of Storm Water Management Practices. Where the Engineering Department waives all or part of the minimum storm water management requirements, or where the waiver is based on the provision of adequate storm water facilities provided downstream of the proposed development, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount as determined by the Engineering Department. When an applicant obtains a waiver of the required storm water management, the monetary contribution required shall be in accordance with a fee schedule (unless the developer and the storm water authority agree on a greater alternate contribution) established by the Engineering Department, and based on the cubic feet of storage required for storm water management of the development in question. All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to an appropriate capital improvements program project, and shall be made by the developer prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development.
(f) Dedication of Land. In lieu of a monetary contribution, partially or totally, an applicant may obtain a waiver of the required storm water management by entering into an agreement with the City Engineer for the granting of an easement or the dedication of land by the applicant, to be used for the construction of an off-site storm water management facility. The agreement shall be entered into by the applicant and the City Engineer prior to the recording of plats or, if no record plat is required, prior to the issuance of the building permit.
6-15-120. Long-Term Storm Water Management Requirements
Owners and operators of development and re-development sites within the jurisdictional limits of the City which disturb 1 acre or more of surface area, or are part of a common plan of development that disturbs one acre or more and have not passed a final storm water inspection for notice of termination are required to meet the following requirements:
140
(a) Controlling Runoff From Sites. All site designs shall establish storm water management practices to control the peak flow rates of storm water discharge associated with specified design storms and reduce the generation of storm water runoff. These practices should seek to mirror pre-development runoff from the site.
(b) Additional Storm Water Design Requirements. Storm water discharges from land uses or activities with higher potential pollutant loadings, as determined by the City Engineer, may require the use of specific structural BMPs and pollution prevention practices based on policy established by the City Engineer. Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the Engineering Department to determine if they are subject to additional storm water design requirements.
(c) Calculations. Hydrologic design calculations for the pre-development and post-development conditions must show that the proposed storm water management measures are capable of controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this ordinance based on a design storm having a 10-year return frequency or a 25-year return frequency if located in the Residential Foothill subzone. A description and source of all parameters used in the calculations shall be included. The calculations should be based on one of the following:
(1) Rational Method
(2) National Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Method
(3) Unit Hydrograph derived from locally-observed data
(4) Any methodology as approved by the city engineer
(d) Soils Information: If a storm water management control measure fundamentally depends on the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles and soil survey reports.
(d) Maintenance Agreements. All storm water treatment facilities shall have an enforceable operation and maintenance agreement to ensure the system functions as designed.
(1) This agreement shall include provisions allowing for access, inspections, and corrective action.
(2) If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance covenant, the Engineering Department, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. In the event that the storm water management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the Engineering Department shall notify the party responsible for maintenance of the storm water management facility in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have 30 days to complete maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner. After proper notice, the Engineering Department may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work and any penalties.
6-15-121. As Built Plans
141
All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any storm water management practices located on-site after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications and maintenance requirements for all storm water management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the Engineering Department is required before the release of any performance securities can occur.
6-15-122. Enforcement
(a) Stop-Work Order; Revocation of Permit. In the event that any person holding a building permit or site development permit pursuant to this ordinance violates the terms of the permit or implants site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare, environment, or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the Engineering Department may suspend or revoke the site development permit and/or building permit.
(b) Violation and Penalties. Whenever the Engineering Department finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this Ordinance, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice to the responsible person or property owner. Such notice may require, without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(3) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
(4) The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
(c) Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and each day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance is committed, continued, or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense.
(d) Any work done or condition created or allowed, in violation of this ordinance is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by a civil legal action by the City Attorney.
Chapter 16: Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
6-16-101. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methords.
142
(a) Statutory Authorization. The Legislature of the State of Utah has in Section 10-8-38 of the Utah Code delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the Bountiful City Council does hereby ordain as follows:
(b) Findings of Fact.
(1) The flood hazard areas of Bountiful, Utah, are subject to periodic inundation which may potentially result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(2) These flood loses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(c) Statement of Purpose.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in flood plains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(d) Methods of Reducing Flood Losses
(1) In order to accomplish its purposes, this ordinance uses the following methods:
(2) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(3) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(4) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters;
(5) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(6) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
143
6-16-102. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING - means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX - means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING - means a designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD - is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
BASE FLOOD -means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) - The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year.
BASEMENT - means any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.
CRITICAL FEATURE - means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT -means any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
LEVATED BUILDING -means a non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the
144
floor of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. In the case of Zones V1-30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls met the standards of Section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION - means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures."
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION-
means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD OR FLOODING -means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1 the overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2 the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) - means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY - is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA - means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding).
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT - means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS - means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
145
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM -means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOOD PROOFING - means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY) - means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE - means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE - means any structure that is:
1 Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
2 Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
3 Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or
4 Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
a) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or; b) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
LEVEE -means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM -means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
146
LOWEST FLOOR - means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood insurance Program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME - means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL -means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION - means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - means a vehicle which is:
1 built on a single chassis;
2 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
3 designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
4 designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
SPECIAL FOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) -An area having special flood, mudflow, or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or a Flood Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, AR/A1-A30, V!-V30, VE or V. For the purpose of determining Community Rating System premium discounts, all AR and A99 zones are treated as non-SFHAs.
START OF CONSTRUCTION - (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
147
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE - means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT -means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions or
(2) Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure."
VARIANCE - is a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this ordinance when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
VIOLATION - means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION - means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
6-16-103. General Provisions.
148
(a) Lands to which this Ordinance applies.
The ordinance shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Bountiful City.
(b) Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current effective scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Davis County, Utah" with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM and FBFM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance.
(c) Establishment of development permit. A Development Permit is required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this ordinance.
(d) Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
(e) Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(f) INTERPRETATION
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be:
1 considered as minimum requirements;
2 liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
3 deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes or City ordinances.
(g) WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OR LIABILITY
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
6-16-104. ADMINISTRATION
a) DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR
149
The City Engineer or his authorized representative is hereby appointed the Floodplain
Administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
(b) DUTIES & RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR
Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1 Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance.
2 Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
3 Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this ordinance.
4 Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required.
5 Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
6 Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
7 Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
8 When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Article 3, Section B, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Article 5.
9 When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
10 Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA (Conditional Letter of Map Revision).
(c) PERMIT PROCEDURES
Application for a Development Permit shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the
150
placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
1 Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
2 Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
3 A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of Article 5, Section B(2);
4 Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
5 Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with Article 4, Section (B)(1).
Approval or denial of a Development Permit by the Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this ordinance and the following relevant factors:
1 The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
2 The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
3 The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
4 The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
5 The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
6 The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
7 The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
8 The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
9 The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
10 The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
(d) VARIANCE PROCEDURES
1 The appeal Board as established by the community shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance.
2 The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance.
3 Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
4 The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
5 Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this ordinance.
1 6. Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
2 structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in Section C(2) of this Article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
6 Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this ordinance, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and
151
objectives of this ordinance (Article 1, Section C).
7 Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
8 Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
9 Prerequisites for granting variances:
a) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
b) Variances shall only be issued upon:
1) showing a good and sufficient cause;
2) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and
3) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
c) Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
11. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
a) the criteria outlined in Article 4, Section D(1)-(9) are met, and
b) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
6-16-105. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
(a) GENERAL STANDARDS
In all areas of special flood hazards all new construction, substantial improvements and manufactured homes shall be:
1 be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2 be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
3 be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
4 be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
5 be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
6 be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the sanitary sewage system and
152
discharge from the sanitary sewage systems into flood waters; and,
7 have any on site waste disposal systems located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(b) SPECIFIC STANDARDS
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) Article 3, Section B, (ii) Article 4, Section B(8), or (iii) Article 5, Section C(3), the following provisions are required:
1 Residential Construction -new construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in Article 4, Section C(1)a., is satisfied.
2 Nonresidential Construction - new construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
3 Enclosures - new construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
4. Manufactured Homes -
a) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist
153
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
b) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
c) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of paragraph (4) of this section be elevated so that either:
1) the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or
2) the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
5. Recreational Vehicles - Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
a) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
b) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
c) meet the permit requirements of Article 4, Section C(1), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
(c) STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS
1 All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with Article 1, Sections B, C, and D of this ordinance.
2 All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet Development Permit requirements of Article 3, Section C; Article 4, Section C; and the provisions of Article 5 of this ordinance.
154
1 3. Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions
2 which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to Article 3, Section B or Article 4, Section B (8) of this ordinance.
3 All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
4 All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(d) STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES)
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Article 3, Section B, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
1 All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
2 All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures;
3
a) have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified), or;
b) together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.
1 A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this Section, as proposed in Article 4, Section C (1)a., are satisfied.
2 Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.
(e) FLOODWAYS
Floodways - located within areas of special flood hazard established in Article 3, Section B, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
1 Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the
155
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
2 If Article 5, Section E (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article 5.
3 Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA.
6-16-106. Penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this ordinance by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a class B misdemeanor for each violation. Nothing herein contained shall prevent Bountiful City from
making such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Chapter 17: Public Utility Easements
6-17-101. Public Utility Easements.
Public utility easements may be vacated only by the Bountiful City Council.
156
Title 7
Reserved
157
Title 8
Public Health
Chapter 1: Disposition of Garbage
Chapter 2: Animal Control Ordinance
Chapter 3: Pigeons
Chapter 4: Pest Control
Chapter 5: Cost Recovery for Hazardous Materials Emergencies
Chapter 6: Refuse and Weed Control
Chapter 7: Noise Ordinance
Chapter 8: Drinking Water Source Protection Ordinance
Chapter 9: Public Nuisance Abatement Ordinance
Chapter 1: Disposition of Garbage
8-1-101. Spilling Garbage.
8-1-102. Dumping Garbage.
8-1-103. Bountiful City Landfill.
8-1-104. City Garbage Collection Program.
8-1-101. Spilling Garbage.
It is unlawful for any person transporting garbage, rubbish or other matter of any kind to permit, allow or cause it to fall and remain on any public street, public property, or upon the property of others.
8-1-102. Dumping Garbage.
It is unlawful to dump, deposit, leave, or permit to be dumped, deposited or left, any garbage, rubbish, tree clippings, cut grass or any other waste material at any location other than the Bountiful City Landfill without the consent of the landowner.
8-1-103. Bountiful City Landfill.
The City Council may by resolution establish one or more City landfills to be used for public or private dumping grounds. The Council may adopt rules and regulations with respect to the same, which may specify the location of the landfill and the kind or classes of material which may be dumped there. It is unlawful to dump, or to permit or cause to be dumped, any waste material at any place within the City which has not been approved by the City Council for such purpose.
8-1-104. City Garbage Collection Program.
(a) All residences in the City, including single family housing, and multiple family housing of less than eight units, shall have City garbage collection service available to them, and all shall be charged for the City’s garbage collection service.
(b) Institutional, commercial and multiple family housing projects of eight or more units shall have such commercial garbage collection service as they may arrange.
(c) Rates to be charged for City garbage collection service shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
158
8-1-105. Cleaning Required of Vacated Premises.
Any person vacating a dwelling, business, detached building or any other structure or the immediate adjacent grounds, shall remove all garbage, trash, refuse, cut tree branches or other vegetation, or inoperable vehicles, and leave the property in a sanitary condition, withn 24 hours after vacating.
8-1-106. Placement of Garbage Containers for Collection.
Garbage containers shall not be placed in the street prior to the evening of the day before the day scheduled for garbage collection. All empty containers shall be removed from the street the same day as they are emptied.
Chapter 2: Animal Control
8-2-101. Comprehensive Animal Control Ordinance.
8-2-102. Definitions.
8-2-103. Appointment of Animal Control Director.
8-2-104. Duties of Director.
8-2-105. Power and Authority of Animal Control Officials.
8-2-106. Right of Entry for Enforcement.
8-2-107. Interfering with Officers Prohibited.
8-2-108. Licensing and Registration of Dogs.
8-2-109. Exemptions for Licensing.
8-2-110. Tag and Collar Required.
8-2-111. Removal of Tag Unlawful.
8-2-112. Kennel License.
8-2-113. Number of Dogs per Residence.
8-2-114. Regulatory Permits
8-2-115. Display of Permit.
8-2-116. Renewal of Permit.
8-2-117. Exemptions.
8-2-118. Inspections.
8-2-119. Suspension or Revocation of Permit.
8-2-120. Notice Served.
8-2-121. Nuisance Animals.
8-2-122. Abatement of Public Nuisance Animals.
8-2-123. Control and Fencing.
8-2-124. Female Dogs in Heat.
8-2-125. Possession of a Potentially Dangerous Animal.
8-2-126. Possession of Dangerous or Wild Animal.
8-2-127. Animals at Large Prohibited.
8-2-128. Allowing Domestic Fowls to Trespass Prohibited.
8-2-129. Staking Animals Improperly on Unenclosed Premises.
8-2-130. Animal Waste.
8-2-131. Impoundment Authorized.
8-2-132. Impoundment/Recordkeeping Requirements.
8-2-133. Redemption Requirements.
8-2-134. Terms of Impoundment Destruction and Disposal of Animals.
8-2-135. Declaration and Disposal of Vicious Animals.
8-2-136. Animal Rabies Vaccination Requirements.
159
8-2-137. Exception for Transient Animals.
8-2-138. Vaccination Certification and Tags.
8-2-139. Impoundment of Animals without Valid Vaccination Tags.
8-2-140. Rabid Animal Reports.
8-2-141. Quarantine and Disposition of Biting or Rabid Animals.
8-2-142. Duty to Report Bites.
8-2-143. Cruelty to Animals.
8-2-144. Defenses.
8-2-145. Injuries and Communicable Diseases.
8-2-146. Charge of Violator Seizure of Animals.
8-2-147. Harboring of Animals Prohibited Duty to Notify.
8-2-148. Motorist Duty to Report upon Striking an Animal.
8-2-149. Places Prohibited to Animals.
8-2-150. Power and Authority of Animal Control Officer.
8-2-151. Investigation.
8-2-152. Penalties.
8-2-153. Applicability of Procedure for all Peace Officers.
8-2-154. Barns and Stables, Bins for Manure - Distance from Dwellings.
8-2-101. Comprehensive Animal Control Ordinance.
This Ordinance shall be known as the "Comprehensive Animal Control Ordinance of Bountiful".
8-2-102. Definitions.
ANIMAL. Any and all types of livestock, dogs and cats, and all other subhuman creatures, both domestic and wild, male and female, singular and plural.
ANIMAL SHELTER. Any facility owned or operated by a governmental entity or any animal welfare organization which is incorporated within the State of Utah for the purpose of preventing cruelty to animals and used for the care and custody of seized, stray, homeless, quarantined, abandoned, or unwanted dogs, cats, or other small domestic animals.
ANIMALS AT LARGE. An animal shall be considered to be "at large" when it is off the owners property and not under immediate control by means of a durable restraint device, capable to keeping the animal restrained; or animal on the property of the owner and not securely confined by a leash, building, fenced area, or appropriate transport device.
BITE. Any actual puncture, tear, or abrasion of the skin inflicted by the teeth of an animal.
CAT. Any age feline of the domesticated types.
CATTERY. An establishment for boarding, breeding, buying, grooming, or selling cats for profit.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal that, according to the records of the Davis County Animal Control department, or other City or County Police agency and or officer;
(a) Has inflicted injury on a human being with or without provocation on public or private property, or
(b) has killed a domestic animal with or without provocation while off the owner's property, or
160
(c) has previously been found to be "Potentially Dangerous", the owner having received notice of such, and it is witnessed and documented that the animal aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals, or
(d) the animal is found to be in violation of any of the restrictions placed upon the animal by the Department of Animal Control, pertaining to a Potentially Dangerous animal, as designated in this ordinance.
DOG. Any canis familiaris over four months of age. Any canis familiaris under the age of four months is a puppy.
ESTRAY. Any livestock found running at large, whose owner cannot be found after a reasonable search.
KENNEL. Land or buildings used in the keeping of three or more dogs, four months or older.
LIVESTOCK. Any normally domesticated animal that is not a cat, or dog, such as; cattle, sheep, goats, mules, burros, swine, horses, geese, ducks, turkeys, etc.
PET. A domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility, including but not limited to, birds, cats, dogs, fish, hamsters, mice, and other animals associated with man's environment.
PET SHOP. Any establishment containing cages or exhibition pens, not part of the kennel or cattery, wherein dogs, cats, birds, or other pets for sale are kept or displayed.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal that with or without provocation chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds in a threatening or menacing fashion, or apparent attitude of attack, or any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack with or without provocation. In addition a potentially dangerous animal is any animal that because of witnessed and documented action is believed capable of causing injury, or otherwise posing a threat to the safety of humans or domestic animals.
QUARANTINE. The isolation of an animal in a substantial enclosure so that the animal is not subject to contact with other animals or unauthorized persons.
RESTRAINT DEVICE. Any chain, leash, cord, rope or other device commonly used to restrain an animal.
RIDING SCHOOL OR STABLE. An establishment which offers boarding and/or riding instruction for any horse, pony, donkey, mule, or burro or which offers such animals for hire.
VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal which has
(a) inflicted severe injury on a human being with or without provocation on public or private property,
(b) has killed a domestic animal with or without provocation while off the owner's property, or
(c) has been previously found to be dangerous, the owner having received notice of such and the animal again bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals, or it is witnessed and documented that the animal is in violation of restrictions placed upon it as a potentially dangerous or dangerous animal pursuant to Sections 8-2-125 and 8-2-126 of this ordinance.
WILD ANIMAL. Any animal which is not commonly domesticated or which is of a wild or predatory nature, or any animal which, because of its size, growth propensity, vicious nature or other characteristics,
161
would constitute an unreasonable danger to human life, health, or property if not kept, maintained or confined in a safe and secure manner. Those animals, however domesticated, shall include but are not limited to:
(a) Alligators, crocodiles, caiman.
(b) Bears (ursidae). All bears including grizzly bears, brown bears, and black bears.
(c) Cat family (felidae). All except the commonly accepted domesticated cats; including cheetahs, cougars, leopards, lions, lynx, panthers, mountain lions, tigers, and wildcats.
(d) Dog family (canidae). All, except domesticated dogs, and including wolf, fox, coyote, and wild dingo. Any dog cross bred with a wild animal as described above shall be considered to be a wild animal.
(e) Porcupine.
(f) Primate. (All subhuman primates)
(g) Raccoon. (All varieties)
(h) Skunks.
(i) Venomous snakes or lizards.
(j) Weasels. (All, weasels, martins, wolverines, ferrets, badgers, otters, ermine, mink and mongoose, except that the possession of mink shall not be prohibited when raised commercially for their pelts, in or upon a properly constructed legally operated ranch.
8-2-103. Appointment of Animal Control Director.
Bountiful has contracted with Davis County concerning the enforcement of this Comprehensive Animal Control Ordinance. However, no such contract divests Bountiful City and its employees of any right or power of enforcement, and all actions of the Animal Control Director of Davis County and her agents as it affects the city of Bountiful shall be subject to the review and approval of the Bountiful City Manager.
8-2-104. Duties of Director
The Animal Control Director of Davis County shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
(a) The Director shall see that taxes and licenses imposed by this ordinance are collected and properly
distributed.
(b) The Director shall supervise the collection of carcasses of all dead dogs and cats from the streets of
participating communities, and shall supervise the delivery of them together with the carcasses of all animals put to death at the Animal Control Shelter, as hereinafter provided, to the North Davis Refuse Disposal site or such other place as designated by the Davis County Board of Commissioners.
(c) The Director shall keep an accurate account of all monies collected by the department and from
whom all fees are collected from the sale of licenses, and all other services rendered by himself or his employees, and deliver the said funds to the Davis County Auditor as set forth in the County Financial Policy.
162
(d) The Director shall supervise the keeping of a register showing the breed, sex and color of each
animal impounded, the date and reason for such impounding and the disposition of each impounded animal.
(e) The Director shall supervise the Animal Shelter and keep the same in a sanitary and orderly
condition.
(f) The Director shall supervise the Animal Control Officers and other agents and employees of the
Animal Control Department.
8-2-105. Powers and Authority of Animal Control Officials.
(a) The Animal Control Director or any person employed by the Department of Animal Control as an Animal control shall be vested with the power and authority to enforce this ordinance.
(b) The Animal Control Director, assistants, and Animal Control Officers are hereby authorized and empowered to apprehend and take with them and impound any animal found in violation of this ordinance, and all other duties prescribed in the enforcement of this ordinance.
8-2-106. Right of Entry for Enforcement
In the enforcement of this ordinance, all Peace officers or Animal Control officials or employees of the Davis County Health Department, are hereby authorized to enter onto the open premises of any person or entity to take possession of any animal in violation of this ordinance.
8-2-107. Interfering with Officers Prohibited
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally interfere with the director or any Animal Control Officer in the lawful discharge of his duties as prescribed in this ordinance.
8-2-108. Licensing and Registration of Dogs
It is unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor, or maintain a dog over the age of four months, without registering and obtaining a license for such dogs from the Animal Control Department or authorized vendor. All dogs brought into Davis County shall require registering and licensing within thirty days after they enter Davis County, or within thirty days after having reached the age of four months. The annual fee for all dog licenses shall be from time to time set by resolution by the board of County Commissioners. For any dog not registered within thirty days after having been brought into Davis County, or within thirty days of being four months old, the owner thereof will be required to pay an additional license "late fee" which shall be set from time to time by resolution of the board of County Commissioners. No dog shall be licensed as spayed or neutered without proof that the surgery has been performed.
Dog licenses shall be renewed each year, with each license being valid from the date of purchase for twelve consecutive months with the license expiration date one year from the date of purchase. Licenses not renewed within thirty days of expiration shall be subject to the applicable late fee.
8-2-109. Exemptions for Licensing.
The provisions of Section 6 of this ordinance shall not apply to the following:
(a) Licensed dogs whose owners are non-residents, temporarily (up to thirty days) within Davis County, provided however, that licensed dogs whose owners remain within Davis County longer than thirty days may transfer current license from another county to Davis County upon payment of a transfer fee and proof of current rabies vaccination.
163
(b) Individual dogs within a property licensed kennel or other such establishment.
(c) A person 60 years of age or older may, upon proof of age, obtain a dog license for an unsterilized dog or cat at a reduced rate as set from time to time by the Commission. A person 60 years of age or older may obtain a dog license for a spay or neutered dog for a one-time fee as established by the County Commission.
(d) "Seeing-eye" dogs properly trained to assist blind persons if such dogs are actually being used by the blind person to assist them in moving from place to place, or "Seeing eye" dogs registered in a recognized training program.
(e) "Hearing" dogs properly trained to assist deaf person if such dogs are actually used by deaf persons to aid them in responding to sounds.
(f) Dogs especially trained to assist officials of governmental agencies in the performance of their duties, and which are owned or maintained by such agencies.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this section shall be construed so as to exempt any dog from having a current rabies vaccination every two years.
8-2-110. Tag and Collar Required.
Upon payment of the license fee, there shall be issued to the owner, a metallic tag for each dog so licensed. Every owner shall be required to provide each dog with a collar to which the license tag must be affixed, and shall see that the collar and tag are constantly worn. In the event a dog tag is lost of destroyed, a duplicate will be issued by the Animal Control Department upon presentation of a receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the current year, and payment of a fee to be set from time to time by the Board of County Commissioners. The license shall not be transferable from one dog to another and no refund shall be made on any dog license for any reason whatsoever.
8-2-111. Removal of Tag Unlawful
It is unlawful to remove from a registered dog its collar and/or its tag.
8-2-112. Kennel License.
It is unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a kennel without first obtaining a "Kennel license" from the Animal Control Department, which license shall be in addition to all other required zoning and health inspections and permits as required by City and State Law. Animal owners making application for a Kennel License shall first seek approval from the city or county zoning department, and an inspection approval from the Davis County Health Department. Upon notification from the health department that the kennel facility has been inspected and approved, Davis County Animal Control personnel will perform an additional and final inspection, and upon approval, issue a Kennel License. Kennel licenses shall also be valid for one year from the date of purchase. No kennel license shall be issued to any location where it is prohibited by zoning regulations.
8-2-113. Number of Dogs and/or Cats per Residence.
No person or persons at any one residence within the jurisdiction of this ordinance shall at any one time own, harbor, license or maintain more than two dogs and/or cats, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
164
8-2-114. Regulatory Permits.
It is unlawful for any person to operate a boarding kennel, cattery, pet shop, groomery, riding stable, or any similar establishment, unless such person first obtains a regulatory permit from the Animal Control Department, which permit shall be in addition to all other required licenses. All applications for permits to operate such establishments shall be submitted together with the required permit fee on a printed form provided by the Animal Control Department. Before the permit is issued, approval shall be granted by the Davis County Health Department, and appropriate zoning authority and the Animal Control Division. Establishments in existence prior to the ratification of this ordinance shall obtain such regulatory permit with ninety days of written notification of the "Regulatory Inspector" that such a permit is necessary. Permits are not transferable to another person, business, owner or location.
8-2-115. Display of Permit.
A valid permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place in each establishment. The permittee shall notify the Animal Control Department with thirty days of any change of it's establishment, or operation which may affect the status of the permit. In the event of a change in ownership of the establishment, the permittee shall notify the department of Animal Control immediately.
8-2-116. Renewal of Permit.
Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall automatically expire one year immediately following the date of issue. Within two months prior to the date of expiration of the permit, the permittee shall apply for a renewal of the permit and pay the required fee. Any application made after the expiration date, except in application for a new establishment opening subsequent to that date shall be accompanied by a late application fee in addition to the regular permit fee.
8-2-117. Exemptions.
Research facilities where bona fide medical or related research is being conducted, humane shelters and other animal establishments operated by state or local government or which are licensed by federal law are excluded from the licensing requirements of this ordinance.
8-2-118. Inspections.
All establishments required to obtain a permit under this ordinance shall be subject to periodic inspections, and the inspector shall make a report of such inspection with a copy to be filed with the Department of Animal Control.
8-2-119. Suspension or Revocation of Permit.
(a) Grounds. A permit may be suspended or revoked or a permit application rejected on any one or more of the following grounds:
(1) Falsification of facts in a permit application,
(2) violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance or any other regulation governing the establishment, including noise, building and zoning ordinances, or maintaining or selling illegal species.
(3) Conviction of a charge of cruelty to animals.
(b) Procedure. If an inspection of any facility operating with a Regulatory permit reveals a violation of
165
this ordinance, the inspector shall notify the permit holder or operator of such violation by means of an inspection report form, or other written notice. The notification shall:
(1) Set forth the specific violation found.
(2) Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of the violation(s)
found.
(3) State that any failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance with the provisions of
this ordinance shall result in immediate suspension of the permit.
(4) State that an opportunity for an appeal from any notice of inspection finding shall be
provided if a written request for hearing is filed with the Division of Animal Control within five days of the date of notice.
Upon request of a hearing, a minimum of five days notice shall be given to the permittee advising him the date and time of such hearing and listing the cause or causes for such suspension or revocation.
No new permit shall be issued to any person whose permit has been previously revoked except upon application for a new permit, accompanied by the required application fee and unless or until all requirements of this ordinance have been met.
Any permit granted under this ordinance may be suspended or revoked by the Animal Control Department for violations listed in this chapter.
8-2-120. Notice Served.
Notice provided for under this ordinance shall be deemed to have been properly served when the original of the inspection report form or other notice has been delivered personally to the permit holder or person in charge. Or such notice has been sent by certified mail to the last known address of the permit or license holder. A copy of such notice shall be filed with the records of the Department of Animal Control.
8-2-121. Nuisance Animals.
All persons having custody of animals shall exercise proper care and control of his/her animal(s) in order to prevent them from becoming a nuisance. Any owner or possessor of an animal who keeps such animal contrary to the provision of the ordinance shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and subject to punishment under authority of this ordinance.
An animal shall be deemed to be a nuisance if the animal:
(a) Causes damage to the property of anyone other than it owner.
(b) Causes unreasonable odors.
(c) Causes unsanitary conditions
(d) Barks, whines, howls, or makes other disturbing noises for an extended period of time.
(e) Chases vehicles.
(f) Is an animal which has been impounded for being at large, or it's owner or possessor has
been convicted for the dog being at large on three separate occasions within a twelve month period.
166
(g) Is an animal previously declared potentially dangerous or dangerous and is found in violation of restrictions placed on that dog by the Department of Animal Control.
(h) Charges, attacks, bites or injures a person or another animal off the owner’s property with or without provocation.
8-2-122. Abatement of Public Nuisance Animals.
When it reasonably appears to the Animal Control Director that any animal is a nuisance as defined in this chapter, and that such nuisance should be abated, the Director shall first attempt to obtain the written consent of the animal's owner to abate the animal. Abatement shall be defined to include either relocating or euthanizing the animal. If the animal owner's consent cannot be readily obtained, the Animal Control Director may file a complaint with a court of competent jurisdiction charging the maintenance of a nuisance. The charge shall set forth the facts according to the best of the Director's information and belief, indicating that the owner is maintaining a nuisance. and the nuisance should be abated. Until such time as the owner may be summoned to appear before the court, the animal(s) may be taken into impound by the department of Animal Control and held there pending a decision by the court. If the complaint is denied, a hearing will be set purusant to the normal procedure of the court. If the court finds that the complaint of maintaining a nuisance has been proven, the Department will seek an order from the court setting out the method of abatement. Abatement by relocation shall not be an option if the animal represents a continuing threat of serious harm, such as in the case of a vicious dog. If relocation is ordered, the court may set whatever conditions are necessary to guarantee that the said animal shall not constitute a nuisance in the future.
In the event the court determines that the animal is a nuisance, the owner shall pay the cost of all impoundment fees, maintenance fees, or any other fee that may incur as a result of such impoundment.
8-2-123. Control and Fencing.
(a) It is unlawful for any person owning or having the custody, possession or control of any livestock to allow, either negligently or with specific intent, the livestock to run at large in or about a public property or roadway, where such is not permitted by law, or to otherwise permit the animal to be herded, pastured or to go upon the land of another without permission.
(b) All fencing of property where livestock are kept shall be of sufficient construction to prevent the escape of or injury to the animals being confined within the fencing. The fencing shall be maintained so that no part of such fence, absent extraordinary circumstances, may be broken, damaged or in any way create the possibility of injury to the confined livestock or to allow the escape thereof.
Failure to property confine any class of livestock shall constitute a violation of this section.
8-2-124. Female Dogs in Heat.
Except for planned breeding, any owner or person having charge, care, custody or control of any female dog in heat shall, in addition to restraining such dog from running at large, cause such dog to be constantly confined in a building or secure enclosure so as to prevent it from attracting by scent or coming into contact with other dogs, or creating a nuisance.
8-2-125. Possession of a Potentially Dangerous Animal.
Any person who owns or maintains a potentially dangerous animal shall use all reasonable means at his or her disposal to restrict a potentially dangerous animal from injuring any other person or animal. The Department of Animal Control may, at the discretion of the Director or his authorized agents, from time to
167
time impose specific restrictions regarding the housing of potentially dangerous animals.
8-2-126. Possession of Dangerous or Wild Animal.
(a) It is unlawful to own, harbor or maintain a dangerous or wild animal in any residential zone in the city.
(b) It is unlawful to own, harbor or maintain a dangerous or wild animal in any commercial zone in the city except a governmentally-owned animal shelter or a veterinarian office or hospital. In such cases, animals must be maintained by means of protective devices adequate to prevent such animals from escaping or injuring the public. Every facility controlling or maintaining such animals shall comply with all state and federal regulations regarding quarantine and vaccination as directed for each species. All such wild animals shall be kept under confinement on the premises, and shall be maintained in such a manner as to not endanger the life or limb of any persons lawfully entering such premises.
8-2-127. Animals at Large Prohibited.
It is unlawful for the owner or keeper of any animal to allow, permit or suffer such animal to run at large. Any animal at large is hereby declared to be a public nuisance which may be summarily abated by capture and removal by the City or its agents.
8-2-128. Allowing Domestic Fowls to Trespass Prohibited.
It is unlawful for the owner of any domestic fowls such as turkeys, ducks, geese, chickens, peacocks or any other variety of fowl to permit such fowls to trespass or go upon the premises of another or to run at large on any public property or roadway. Fowls kept and maintained by municipalities within the confines of public parks or aviaries are exempt, except that they shall not be allowed on public roadways.
8-2-129. Staking Animals Improperly on Unenclosed Premises.
It is unlawful for any person to chain, stake out or tether any animal on any unenclosed premises in such a manner that the animal may go beyond the property line unless such person has permission of the owner of the affected property. No animals are to be staked along public roadways and sidewalks.
8-2-130. Animal Waste.
The person having custody of an animal shall be responsible for the immediate removal of any excreta deposited by his animal on any public walk, recreation area, or private property other than that belonging to the owner of the animal. It is unlawful to fail to do so.
8-2-131. Impoundment Authorized.
The Animal Control Department shall place all animals which are taken into custody in a designated animal impound facility.
The following animals may be taken into custody and impounded as deemed necessary:
(a) Any animal being kept or maintained contrary to the provisions of this ordinance.
(b) Any animal running at large, with any reasonable means used to immobilize or capture such animal.
(c) Any animal which is by this ordinance required to be licensed and is not licensed; an animal not
wearing a tag shall be presumed to be unlicensed for the purposes of this section.
168
(d) Sick or injured animals whose owner cannot be immediately located or whose owner requests
impoundment and agrees to pay a reasonable fee for the services rendered.
(e) Any abandoned, neglected animal, whose safety may be threatened should the animal not be readily
placed into protective custody.
(f) Animals which are not vaccinated for rabies in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.
(g) Any animal needing to be held for quarantine.
(h) Any potentially dangerous or dangerous animal not properly confined as required by sections
__________ and _ of this ordinance.
(i) Any animal in the custody of any person or persons who are arrested or otherwise detained by any
police officer, in the event another responsible party cannot be located by the owner.
8-2-132. Impoundment/Recordkeeping Requirements.
The impounding facility shall keep a record of each animal impounded, which includes the following information;
(a) Complete description of the animal including any tag numbers.
(b) The manner and date of impound.
(c) The location of the pickup and identification number of the impounding officer.
(d) The manner and date of disposal.
(e) The name and address of the redeemer or purchaser.
(f) The name and address of any person relinquishing the animal.
(g) All fees received.
(h) All expenses accruing during impoundment.
8-2-133. Redemption Requirements.
(a) The owner of any impounded animal or his authorized representative may redeem such animal before disposition, provided he pays:
(1) The impound fees,
(2) The daily board charge,
(3) The veterinary costs incurred during the impound period,
(4) License fee, if applicable,
(5) A transportation fee if transportation of an impounded animal by specialized equipment is
169
required. "Specialized equipment" is that equipment, other than the usual patrol and operation vehicles of animal control, which is designed for specific purposes such as, but not limited to, livestock trailers and carcass trailers. This fee shall be determined by the Davis County Commission at a level which approximates the cost of utilizing the specialized equipment in the particular situation.
(6) Any other expenses incurred to impound an animal in accordance with state or local laws,
including any reasonable restitution for property damage created by the animal, or that occurs as a result of the impoundment.
(b) The Davis County Commission, at the recommendation of the Director of Animal Control shall from time to time set impound fees and daily board charges for the impounding of animals. Such fees shall take into account the type of animal impounded.
8-2-134. Terms of Impoundment Destruction and Disposal of Animals.
(a) Animals shall be impounded for a minimum of three calendar days before further disposition unless the animal is wearing a license tag or other identification, in which case it shall be held a minimum of five calendar days. Reasonable effort shall be made to notify the owner of any animal wearing a license or other identification during that time. Notice shall be deemed given when sent to the last known address of the listed owner. Any animal voluntarily relinquished to the animal control facility by the owner thereof for destruction or other disposition need not be kept for the minimum holding period before release or other disposition as herein provided.
(b) All animals, except those quarantined or confined by court order, or those subject to Section 4-25-4, Utah Code Annotated, which are held longer than the minimum impound period, and all animals voluntarily relinquished to the impound facility, may be destroyed or disposed of as the Director of Animal Control shall direct. Any healthy dog or cat may be sold in compliance with the Davis County Animal Control Adoption Policy after payment of all applicable fees. Other small animals, not included as livestock may also be sold as determined by the director.
(c) Any licensed animal impounded and having or suspected of having serious physical injury or contagious disease, requiring medical attention may, at the discretion of the Animal Control Director, be released to the care of a Veterinarian with or without the consent of the owner.
(d) When, in the judgment of the Director of Animal Control, it is determined that an animal should be destroyed for humane reasons or to protect the public from imminent danger to persons or property, such animal may be destroyed without regard to any time limitation otherwise established in this ordinance, and without court order.
(e) The Animal Control Director or any of his agents may destroy an animal upon request of the owner without transporting the animal to County facilities. An appropriate fee shall be charged to the owner for the destruction and any subsequent disposal of the carcass done by the department of Animal Control.
(f) Cats may be dealt with in conformity with the Davis County Animal Service program under the “Community Cat Act” (Utah Code §11-46-301 et seq).
8-2-135. Declaration and Disposal of Vicious Animals.
If the Davis County Animal Control Director, his assistants, or authorized agents determine, as a result of witnessed incident, that an animal is potentially dangerous or dangerous, and find that the animal is in violation of such restrictions as the department deems necessary for the safety of persons and/or animals in
170
the community, the department may declare the animal to be a vicious animal. The department of Animal Control, including any officers or agents thereof, are hereby authorized to immediately take possession of the vicious animal and place the animal in a proper quarantine facility.
After placing the animal in the animal control facility, the Director shall first attempt to obtain the written consent of the animal’s owner to destroy the animal in a humane manner. If the animal owner's consent cannot be readily obtained, the Animal Control Director shall file a complaint with the Circuit or District Court claiming that the animal is vicious and needs to be destroyed. If the court finds that the animal is vicious, then the Animal Control Department will seek an order from the Court allowing the Department to destroy the animal in a humane manner.
In the event the Court determines that the animal is a vicious animal, the owner shall pay the cost of all impoundment fees, maintenance fees, or any other fee that may be incurred as a result of such impoundment.
8-2-136. Animal Rabies Vaccination Requirements.
All dogs, cats or other animals susceptible to rabies for which a federally approved vaccine is available shall be vaccinated at six months of age by a licensed veterinarian or rabies clinic. Every dog shall be revaccinated every twenty four months and every cat revaccinated every twelve months thereafter. Any unvaccinated dog or cat over six months of age adopted or brought into the jurisdiction must likewise be vaccinated initially. Thereafter valid protection must be maintained.
8-2-137. Exception for Transient Animals.
The provisions of this chapter with respect to vaccination shall not apply to any animal owned by a person temporarily remaining within the jurisdictions for less than thirty days. Such animals shall be kept under strict supervision of the owner. It is unlawful to bring any animal into the jurisdiction which does not comply with the animal health laws and import regulations.
8-2-138. Vaccination Certification and Tags.
(a) It is the duty of each veterinarian, when vaccinating any animal for rabies, to complete a certificate of rabies vaccination, in duplicate, which includes the following information;
(1) Owner's name and address
(2) Description of the animal
(3) Date of vaccination
(4) Rabies vaccination tag number
(5) Type of vaccine administered
(6) Manufacturer's serial number of vaccine
(b) A copy of the certificate shall be distributed to the owner of the animal, and original retained by the issuing veterinarian. The veterinarian and the owner shall retain their copies of the certificate for the interval between vaccinations specified in this chapter.
(c) Additionally, a metal or durable plastic rabies vaccination tag, serially numbered, shall be securely attached to the collar or harness of the animal. An animal not wearing such a tag shall be deemed to be unvaccinated and may be impounded and dealt with pursuant to this ordinance.
171
8-2-139. Impoundment of Animals without Valid Vaccination Tags.
(a) Any vaccinated animal impounded because of a lack of a rabies vaccination tag may be reclaimed by it's owner by furnished proof of a rabies vaccination and payment of all impoundment fees prior to release.
(b) Any unvaccinated animal may be reclaimed prior to disposal by payment of impound fees and by obtaining a rabies vaccination within seventy-two hours of release.
(c) Any animal not reclaimed within the prescribed period of time shall be disposed of pursuant to provisions of Chapter 5.04.
8-2-140. Rabid Animal Reports.
Any person having knowledge of the whereabouts of an animal known to have been exposed to, or suspected of having rabies, or of an animal or person bitten by such a suspect animal, shall notify the division of Animal Control, or the State or Health Department.
8-2-141. Quarantine and Disposition of Biting or Rabid Animals.
(a) An animal that has rabies or shows signs of having rabies, and every animal bitten by another animal affected with rabies, or that has been exposed to rabies shall be reported by the owner as set forth above, and shall immediately be confined in a secure place by the owner. The owner shall turn over the animal to the Animal Control agents upon demand.
(b) The owner of any animal of species subject to rabies which has been bitten by another animal known to be capable of harboring the rabies virus, shall surrender the animal to an authorized official upon demand. Any person authorized to enforce this ordinance may enter upon private property to seize the animal, if the owner refuses to surrender the animal.
(c) Any animal of a species subject to rabies that bites a person or animal or is suspected of having rabies may be seized and quarantined for observation for a period of not less than ten days by the Animal Control Department. The owner of the animal shall bear the cost of the confinement. The animal shelter shall be the normal place for such quarantine, but other arrangements, including confinement by the owner may be made by the Animal Control Department, if the animal has current rabies vaccinations at the time the bite is inflicted, or if there are other special circumstances justifying an exception. A person who has custody of an animal under quarantine shall immediately notify the department of Animal Control if the animal shows any signs of sickness or abnormal behavior, or if the animal escapes confinement. It is unlawful for any person who has custody of a quarantined animal to fail or refuse to allow a health or Animal Control Officer to make an inspection or examination during the period of quarantine. If the animal dies within ten days from the date of the bite, the person having custody shall immediately notify the Animal Control Department in order that the department may immediately remove and deliver the head to the State Health Department. If at the end of the ten day period, an investigating officer of the Department of Animal Care and Control examines the animal and finds no sign of rabies, the animal may be released to the owner or, in the case of a stray, it shall be disposed of as provided in chapter 5.04.
(d) Unvaccinated Bitten Animals.
(1) In the case of an unvaccinated animal species subject to rabies, which is known to have been bitten by a known rabid animal, such bitten or exposed animal shall be immediately destroyed.
(2) If the owner is unwilling to destroy the bitten or exposed animal, the animal shall be immediately isolated and quarantined for six months under veterinary supervision, the cost of such confinement to be paid in advance by the owner. The animal shall be destroyed if
172
the owner does not comply herewith.
(e) Vaccinated Bitten Animals.
(1) If the bitten or exposed animal is currently vaccinated, as prescribed herein, the animal shall be revaccinated within twenty-four hours and quarantined for a period of thirty days following the revaccination; or
(2) If the animal is not revaccinated within 24 hours, the animal shall be isolated and quarantined under veterinary supervision for 6 months.
(3) The animal shall be destroyed if the owner does not comply with subdivisions 1 or 2 of this subsection (d), regarding exposure by known rabid animals.
(f) Removal of Quarantined Animal. It is unlawful for any person to remove any such animal from the place of quarantine without written permission of the Director of Animal Control.
8-2-142. Duty to Report Bites.
(a) Any person having knowledge of any individual or animal having been bitten by an animal of a species subject to rabies shall report the incident immediately to the department of Animal Control.
(b) The owner of an animal that bites a person and any person bitten by an animal shall report the bite to the department of Animal Control within 24 hours of the bite, regardless of whether or not the biting animal is of a species subject to rabies.
(c) A physician or other medical personnel who renders professional treatment to a person bitten by an animal, the bite of which might cause rabies, shall report the fact that he has rendered professional treatment to the Department of Animal Control within 24 hours of his first professional attendance. He shall report the name, sex, and address of the person bitten as well as the type and location of the bite. If known, he shall give the name and address of the owner of the animal that inflicted the bite, and any other facts that may assist the Animal Control Department.
(d) Any person treating an animal bitten, injured, or mauled by another animal shall report the incident to the Department of Animal Control. The report shall contain the name and address of the owner of the wounded, injured or bitten animal, the name and address of the owner and description of the animal which caused the injury, and the location of the incident.
(e) Any person not conforming with the requirements of this chapter shall be in violation of this ordinance.
8-2-143. Cruelty to Animals.
A person commits cruelty to animals when he:
(a) Causes one animal or fowl to fight with another.
(b) Intentionally or carelessly administers or applies any poisonous or toxic drug or any material injurious to tissues or organs to any animal or livestock, or procures or permits the same to be done, whether the animals be his own property or that of another. This provision shall not be interpreted so as to prohibit the use of poisonous substances for the control of vermin in furtherance of public health when applied in such a manner as to reasonably prohibit access to other animals.
173
(c) By act or omission causes pain, suffering, terror or torment, or if he injures, mutilates, or causes disease or death to any animal or fowl.
(d) Administers or applies or procures or permits the administration of application of any trapping mechanism, other than a live capture trap or exposes such a trapping mechanism to domestic animals or livestock, with the intent to harm or take the animal whether the animal be his own property or that of another. All set live capture traps shall be checked and emptied daily. All traps must have owner identification permanently affixed to them.
(e) Neglects or fails to supply such animal with necessary and adequate exercise, care, rest, food, drink, air, light, space, shelter, protection from the elements, and/or medical care.
(f) Raises, trains, purchases, or sells any animal or fowl for fighting or harbors fowl for fighting purposes, which has the comb clipped or the spur altered or who is in possession of an artificial spur.
(g) Is present as a spectator at any animal contest wherein one animal or fowl is caused to fight with another, or rents any building, shed, room, yard, ground, or premises for the purpose of holding such a contest between animals; or knowingly suffers or permits the use of any building, shed, room, yard, ground, or premises belonging to him or under his control for any of these purposes.
(h) Abandons an animal.
(i) Performs or causes to be performed any of the following operations:
(1) Inhumanely removes any portion of the beak of any bird, domestic or wild.
(2) Alters the gait or posture of any animal, by surgical, chemical, mechanical, or any other means, including soring.
(3) Crops or cuts the ears, removes an animal's claws or sterilizes a dog or cat and is not a licensed veterinarian.
(4) Inhumanely docks the tail of an animal or removes an animals dewclaws.
(j) Sells, purchases, owns, or has custody of any animal or fowl that have been dyed, painted, or otherwise artificially colored.
(k) Sells or offer for sale, raffle, prizes, a premium, or an advertising device any chicks, goslings, ducklings, or other fowl younger than eight weeks of age in quantities of less than six birds to an individual recipient.
(l) Offers chicks, ducklings, goslings, or other fowl for sale; raffles, offers as a prize, a premium, or an advertising device, or displays chicks, ducklings, goslings, or other fowl to the public without providing and operating brooders or other heating devices that may be necessary to maintain the chicks, ducklings, goslings, or other fowl in good health, and without keeping adequate food and water available to the birds at all times.
(m) Awards live animals, fish, or fowl as prizes or inducements.
(n) Carries or causes to be carried any animal in a manner harmful to that animal. Suitable racks, cars, crates, or cages in which such animals may stand, move freely, or lie down during transportation, or while awaiting slaughter, must be provided.
174
(o) Leaves any animal confined in a vehicle unattended in excessively hot or cold weather.
(p) Continuously drives or works a horse or other animal to a point of observable strain, and denies the animal rest periods. Working animals shall be offered water periodically.
(q) Takes or kills any bird(s) or robs or destroys any nest, eggs, or young or any bird in violation of the laws of the State of Utah.
(r) Inhumanely hobbles livestock or other animals.
(s) Leaves any livestock species used for draught, driving, or riding purposes, on the street without protection from the weather and without food and water for a period of time that would endanger the health or safety of the animal.
(t) Recklessly rides or drives any horse, or other livestock species on any street, highway, or avenue within this jurisdiction.
(u) Induces or encourages an animal to perform through the se of chemical, mechanical, electrical or manual devices in a manner which will cause, or is likely to cause physical injury or unnecessary suffering.
8-2-144. Defenses.
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the conduct of the actor towards the animal was by a licensed veterinarian using an accepted veterinary practice or directly related to a bona fide experimentation for scientific research; provided, that if the animal is to be destroyed, the manner employed will not be unnecessarily cruel unless directly necessary tot he veterinary purpose or scientific research involved.
(b) Any person may kill a dog while it is attacking, chasing or worrying any domestic animal having a commercial value, or any species of hoofed protected wildlife, while attacking domestic fowls, or while such dog is being pursued thereafter.
(c) Any dog making a vicious and unprovoked attack on any person, except when the attack is in defense of the person, family or property of the dog's owner, may be killed by any person while it is making such an attack.
8-2-145. Injuries and Communicable Diseases.
No person shall knowingly harbor or keep any animal with a serious injury, or afflicted with mange, ringworm, distemper, parvo, kennel cough, or any other contagious disease, unless such animal is being given adequate treatment to control or eliminate disease.
8-2-146. Charge of Violator Seizure of Animals.
It is the duty of a person filing charges under this chapter to seize or arrange to be seized an animal found in the keeping or custody of a person being charged, and which are being used or will be used as evidence in the case resulting from such charge. The person making said seizure shall cause such animals to be delivered immediately to the department of Animal Control, or in such cases as may be necessary to a veterinarian for treatment. It shall be the duty of that department to humanely hold such animals until further court order regarding their disposal. The perpetrator of any such act shall be responsible for the costs of impound, board, and any medical expenses incurred during the holding period of the animal.
175
8-2-147. Harboring of Animals Prohibited Duty to Notify.
It is unlawful for any person to harbor or keep within this jurisdiction any lost or strayed animal. Whenever any animal shall be found which appears to be lost or strayed, it shall be the duty of the finder to notify the Davis County Animal Shelter within 72 hours. The Animal Control Director may take the Animal into protective custody.
8-2-148. Motorist Duty to Report upon Striking an Animal.
It is the duty of the operator of any motor vehicle or self propelled vehicle upon the streets of this jurisdiction to immediately notify, upon injuring, striking, maiming or running down any domestic animal, the animal's owner, the department of animal control, or the police department. In addition, it shall be the duty of the operator of the motor vehicle to remain with the animal or to obtain a responsible person to remain with the animal until professional assistance arrives. Emergency vehicles are exempted from the requirements of this section.
8-2-149. Places Prohibited to Animals.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to take or permit any animals, excluding hearing or seeing eye dogs, whether on a leash or in the arms of their owners, in any establishment or place of business where food or food products are sold or distributed, including but not limited to restaurants, grocery stores, meat markets, and fruit or vegetable stores or the Bountiful City Cemetery.
(b) Dogs, whether on a leash or not on a leash, shall be completely prohibited from school premises or posted picnic, pond, and play areas. This, however, shall not apply to guide dogs in the company of a blind or hearing impaired person, or trained dogs in the present of their masters for the purpose of public education programs or law enforcement exercises.
(c) Dogs are permitted in all City parks subject to the following:
(1) All dogs must remain on a leash and under the direct control of the dog owner or custodian. Leashes must be of suitable strength and shall not be more than six feet (6’) in length. No more than two (2) dogs per owner or keeper of any dog are permitted.
(2) Each dog must be properly registered with the license tag affixed to a collar which must be worn at all times.
(3) An owner or keeper of any dog shall not allow, permit or suffer a dog to be inside the designated boundary of a playground or sandbox, on any play structure or component, inside any designated water play area or component, inside the boundary of a tennis, pickleball or volleyball court, baseball diamond or any other sports court.
(4) All dogs must remain on leash and under the immediate control of an owner or keeper. Dogs shall not be fastened or otherwise tethered to any tree, bench, table, play equipment or any other structure or vegetation within a City park.
(5) An owner or keeper of any dog shall immediately remove all animal waste and place it in a City park waste receptacle.
176
8-2-150. Power and Authority of Animal Control Officer.
In the performance of his duties, the animal control officer is hereby vested with the power and authority of that office within the County Animal Control Department. Badges of authority shall be issued by the County Animal Control Director, officers having received and been sworn to the oath of office by the Clerk of Davis County.
8-2-151. Investigation.
Animal Control Officers and/or Peace officers may enter upon privately owned land to investigate reports of vicious animals, cruelty cases, rabies and other contagious animal disease, and to investigate violations of and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
8-2-152. Penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a Class B Misdemeanor and shall be punished within the confines of that class as prescribed by the laws of the state of Utah. If any violation be continued, each day's violation is a separate offense.
8-2-153. Applicability of Procedure for all Peace Officers.
The foregoing provisions of this ordinance shall govern all peace officers in issuing citations for violations of this ordinance, but the procedure prescribed herein shall not otherwise be exclusive of any other method prescribed by law for the arrest and prosecution of a person for offense of like grade.
8-2-154. Barns and Stables, Bins for Manure - Distance from Dwellings.
(a) Every owner, lessee or occupant of a building or premises used for a barn, or stable shall provide the same with a fly-tight bin for manure, pending its removal, of such dimensions as to contain all accumulations of manure or barn cleanings, and no manure or barn cleanings shall be allowed to accumulate on the floors or adjacent grounds.
(b) No such bins shall be built, kept of maintained nearer to any adjoining house than 100 feet, and then the contents thereof shall be removed from the said bin and said bin thoroughly cleaned at lease once every seven days.
(c) No manure or barn cleanings shall be stacked or piled or caused or permitted to be stacked or piled for any fertilizing purposes on any truck, farm, or garden in the City within 200 feet of any place used in whole or in part for dwelling purposes, unless stored in a closed bin covered to prevent breeding and access of flies thereto.
(d) No owner, lessee or occupant shall keep in any unsanitary condition or improperly ventilated any barn or stable or premises adjacent thereto or in connection therewith.
(e) No animals, excepting household pets, shall be kept or maintained closer than 200 feet from a dwelling.
(f) No barn, pen or corral shall be kept closer than 200 feet from any street.
177
Chapter 3: Pigeons
8-3-101. Definitions.
8-3-102. Maximum Allowed.
8-3-103. Pigeon Loft Permit
8-3-104. Pigeon Lofts - Minimum Distance from Adjacent Dwellings.
8-3-105. Pigeon Loft Maintenance
8-3-106. Revocation.
8-3-101. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise defined, the following terms shall have the meaning herein given:
"Pigeon". Any bird belonging to the family columbidae except those members of the family columbidae whose taking or keeping is subject to regulation by the federal government or the Utah Division of Wildlife Resources.
"Pigeon Loft". Any structure, building or facility used to keep, house, raise, breed, care or maintain pigeons and that meets the requirements of this section.
8-3-102. Maximum Allowed.
It is lawful to own, harbor, keep or maintain pigeons in the City of Bountiful, but only in accordance with the provisions of this section:
(a) It is unlawful to own, harbor, keep or maintain more than 75 pigeons.
(b) It is unlawful to own, harbor, keep or maintain 25 or more pigeons without first as a condition precedent, obtaining a pigeon loft permit as required and provided in subsection 8-3-103.
(c) It is required of those persons who own, harbor, keep or maintain more than 10 pigeons, to maintain such pigeons in a pigeon loft, which shall be maintained in accordance with the provisions of subsection 8-3-105.
8-3-103. Pigeon Loft Permit.
(a) Permit. Any person who desires to keep pigeons in a number of 25 or more shall make application to the License Assessor for a pigeon loft permit.
(b) Application. Applications for a pigeon loft permit shall be made in writing to the License Assessor. The application shall show:
(1) The name of the person desiring a pigeon loft permit.
(2) Location of the pigeon loft.
(3) Basic plans and specifications of the proposed pigeon loft, showing size and dimensions.
(4) The distance between the location of the proposed pigeon loft and the nearest dwelling.
(5) A statement granting unto the License Assessor or Code Enforcement Officer, or such other
authorized agent of the City, permission to enter upon the premises for the purpose of inspecting the
178
premises and the pigeon loft.
(c) Issuance - Expiration - Non-transferable. Upon receipt of the application, the License Assessor or his designee shall inspect the applicant's premises and if, in his judgment, the applicant can and will comply with the provisions of this section, shall issue a pigeon loft permit. Such permit, if granted, will permit the holder thereof to keep not to exceed 75 pigeons. The pigeon loft permit shall expire on the last day of the calendar year, but may be renewable on a calendar year basis thereafter. Such permit shall not be transferable to another person by the holder thereof.
(d) Fee. The fee for the pigeon loft permit shall be assessed annually on a calendar year basis and shall be in the amount of $50.00, provided however that the fee for the pigeon loft permit during the first year of issuance shall be prorated as of the date of the application.
8-3-104. Pigeon Lofts - Minimum Distance from Adjacent Dwellings.
All pigeon lofts, as permitted by this section, shall be located and maintained at a distance not less than 100 feet from neighboring adjacent dwellings.
8-3-105. Pigeon Loft Maintenance.
Those persons who own, harbor, keep or maintain 10 or more pigeons as permitted by this section, shall be required to maintain them in a pigeon loft and in accordance with the following provisions and requirements:
(a) Pigeon lofts shall be maintained so as to adhere to the following requirements and standards:
(1) The pigeon loft shall be operated, maintained in a clean and sanitary condition in order to
prevent insect or rodent propagation or conditions for the transmission of disease.
(2) All waste material shall be removed and properly disposed of and the property kept free of
litter, trash or garbage.
(3) Odors, nuisances and vermin-producing conditions shall be minimized by regular cleaning
and the reasonable use of insecticides.
(4) Each pigeon loft shall be constructed in such a manner as being capable of retaining the
pigeons therein to prevent escape.
(b) Pigeons shall be confined to an approved pigeon loft at all times with the exception of controlled exercise periods, which exercise periods shall be limited to one hour in the daylight morning and one hour in the daylight afternoon of each day.
8-3-106. Revocation.
The License Assessor, upon reasonable notice and hearing, may revoke said pigeon loft permit if the applicant violates any of the provisions of this section or for good cause shown.
Chapter 4: Pest Control
8-4-101. Rodents.
8-4-102. Mosquitoes.
8-4-103. Flies and Other Insect Pests.
8-4-104. Bees.
179
8-4-101. Rodents.
(a) Every person owning or occupying or controlling any real property in the City shall prevent the ingress of rats or other rodents thereto, and to this end shall use such materials in construction or repair of such structures as are rat and rodent proof.
(b) Every person owning, occupying or controlling any premises in the City shall maintain the same in a clean and sanitary condition and remove therefrom any matter detrimental to health. All foods, provisions, goods, wares and merchandise shall be so located as to prevent rats from gaining access thereto or coming in contact therewith.
(c) No rubbish, waste matter or manure or other material shall be placed, left or dumped, or permitted to accumulate or remain in any building, place or premises in the City so that the same shall or may afford food or a harboring or breeding place for rats, rodents or other pests.
(d) Every person owning, occupying or controlling any premises in the City when evidence of rat or rodent infestation on these premises is discovered, shall at once take any and every appropriate action to eradicate such rat or rodent infestation and shall make such changes in the use of the premises or such changes in the structures on the premises as to prevent recurrence of the rat or rodent infestation.
8-4-102. Mosquitoes.
(a) The County Health Officer and his duly appointed deputies may:
(1) Take all necessary and proper steps for the extermination of mosquitoes within the City limits.
(2) Enter upon, without hindrance, any lands within the City for the purpose of inspection to ascertain whether breeding places of mosquitoes exit upon such lands, or to abate public nuisances in accordance with provisions of this Chapter; or to ascertain if notices to abate the breeding of mosquitoes upon such lands have been complied with; or to treat with oil or other larvicidal material any breeding places of mosquitoes upon such lands.
(b) Any breeding place for mosquitoes which exists by reason of any use made of the land on which it is found, or of any artificial change in its natural condition, is a public nuisance.
(1) The nuisance may be abated in any action as provided by law.
(2) Whenever a nuisance specified in this Chapter exists upon any property in the City, the Health Officer may, in writing, notify the record owner or person in charge or in possession of the property of the existence of the nuisance.
(3) The notice may direct that the owner shall, within a specified time, abate the nuisance by destroying the larvae or pupae that are present.
(4) The notice may further direct that the owner shall, within a specified time, perform any work that may be necessary to prevent the recurrence of breeding in the place specified in the notice.
(5) The notice shall be served upon the owner of record or person having charge or possession of the property upon which the nuisance exits, or upon the agent of either.
(c) Before complying with the requirements of the notice, the owner may request a hearing before the Board of Health at a time and place fixed by the Health Commissioner within ten days of the request.
180
At a hearing the Board of Health shall redetermine whether or not the owner shall abate the nuisance and prevent its recurrence and shall specify a time within which the work shall be completed.
(d) In the event that the nuisance is not abated within the time specified in the notice or at the hearing, the City may abate the nuisance by destroying the larvae or pupae and by taking appropriate measure to prevent the recurrence of further breeding.
The cost of abatement shall be repaid to the City by the owner.
8-4-103. Flies and Other Insect Pests.
It is unlawful to suffer or permit to have upon his premises, whether owned or occupied by him, either one or more of the following unsanitary conditions:
(a) Manure which is not securely protected from flies.
(b) Any privy, vault, cesspool, sink, pit or like place which is not securely protected from flies.
(c) Garbage which is not securely protected from flies.
(d) Vegetable waste, trash, litter or refuse of any kind in which flies may breed or multiply.
Every person owning, occupying or controlling any premises in the City when evidence of fly or other insect infestation or breeding on these premises is discovered, shall at once take any and every appropriate action to eradicate such fly or other insect infestation or breeding and shall make such changes in the conditions on the premises as to prevent the recurrence of the fly or other insect infestation or breeding.
8-4-104. Bees.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to authorize beekeeping subject to certain requirements intended to avoid problems that may otherwise be associated with beekeeping in populated areas.
(b) Definitions.
Apiary: Any place where one or more colonies of bees are located.
Beekeeper: A person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of bees.
Beekeeping: The keeping, maintaining or allowing of one or more colonies of bees.
Beekeeping Equipment: Anything used in the operation of an apiary, such as hive bodies, supers, frames, top and bottom boards, and extractors.
Colony: Bees in any hive including queens, workers, or drones.
Hive: A frame hive, box hive, box, barrel, log, gum skep, or other artificial or natural receptacle which may be used to house bees.
Honeybee: The common honeybee, Apis mellifera species, at any stage of development, but not including the African honeybee, Apis mellifera scutellata species, or any hybrid thereof.
(c) Registration.
(i) Each beekeeper shall be registered with the Utah Department of Agriculture and Food as provided in the Utah Bee Inspection Act set forth in Title 4, Chapter 11 of the Utah Code, as amended.
181
(ii) Any beekeeping by a person who is not registered is illegal and declared to be a public nuisance, which may be summarily abated.
(d) Beekeeping.
(i) Hives on Residential Lots. As provided in this section, and notwithstanding any contrary provision in Title 14 of this Code, an apiary, consisting of not more than five hives or an equivalent capacity, may be maintained in a side yard or the rear yard of any residential lot that is larger than 5,000 square feet. On a residential lot that is 0.5 acre or larger, the number of hives located on the lot may be increased to ten hives. Hives shall not be located in front yards. Rooftop hives shall be situated in such a way as to minimize the impact on adjacent properties.
(ii) Hives. Honeybee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames which shall be kept in sound and usable condition, and shall be operated and maintained as provided in the Utah Bee Inspection Act and the Utah Administrative Code. Hives shall be placed at least ten feet from any property line (which limit may be waived in writing by the adjacent property owner) or sidewalk or street right of way, and six inches above the ground, as measured from the ground to the lowest portion of the hive. Hives within twenty-five feet of a property line or sidewalk or street right of way shall be shielded by a flyway barrier. Ownership of hives shall be conspicuously marked as required by State law. Hives shall not exceed seven feet in height above ground or rooftop level, including all brooders, stands or other component.
(iii) Flyways. A hive shall be placed on property so the general flight pattern of bees is in a direction that will deter bee contact with humans and domesticated animals. If any portion of a hive is located within twenty-five feet from an area which provides public access or from a property line on the lot where an apiary is located, as measured from the nearest point on the hive to the property line, a flyway barrier at least six feet in height shall be established and maintained around the hive except as needed to allow access. Such flyway, if located along the property line or within five feet of the property line, shall consist of a solid wall, fence, dense vegetation, or a combination thereof, which extends at least ten feet beyond the hive in each direction so that bees are forced to fly to an elevation of at least six feet above ground level over property lines in the vicinity of the apiary.
(iv) Water. Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water on the beekeeping property is available to the colony continuously between March 1 and October 31 of each year. The water shall be in a location that minimizes any nuisance created by bees seeking water on neighboring property.
(v) Equipment. Each beekeeper shall ensure that no bee comb or other beekeeping equipment is left upon the grounds of an apiary site. Upon removal from a hive, all such equipment shall promptly be disposed of in a sealed container or placed within a building or other bee-proof enclosure.
(vi) Permission. A person shall not locate or maintain a hive on property owned or occupied by another person without first obtaining written permission from the owner or occupant.
(f) Conflict of Regulations.
182
In the event of a conflict between any regulation set forth in this section and chapter any honeybee management regulations adopted by the State of Utah or the Davis County Health Department, the most restrictive regulations shall apply.
(g) Violations.
(i) It is unlawful to house, raise, keep or maintain bees within the limits of the City of Bountiful except in strict compliance with this ordinance. Any such unlawful activity is a class C misdemeanor and hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and may be summarily abated and/or prosecuted by criminal and/or civil action.
(ii) Even if conducted in compliance with this section, it is unlawful for any person to maintain an apiary or keep any colony on any property in any manner that is a public nuisance or threatens public health or safety.
Chapter 5: Cost Recovery for Hazardous Materials Emergencies
8-5-101. Definitions.
8-5-102. Recovery of Expenses.
8-5-103. Recovery Procedure.
8-5-104. Action to Recover Costs.
8-5-101. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms phrases and words shall mean:
A “hazardous materials emergency” means a sudden and unexpected release of any substance that, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, presents a direct and immediate threat to public safety or the environment, and requires immediate action to mitigate the threat.
“Expenses” means all costs incurred for the response, containment and/or removal and disposal of hazardous materials on initial remedial action. It includes, but is not necessarily limited to, the actual labor costs of government and other personnel, including workers compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative overhead, and any costs of equipment, equipment operation, materials, disposal and any contract labor or materials.
8-5-102. Recovery of Expenses.
Bountiful City may recover expenses incurred by the City from those persons whose negligent or intentional actions caused the hazardous materials emergency. The payment of expenses under this section does not constitute an admission of liability or negligence in any legal action for damages.
8-5-103. Recovery Procedure.
(a) The City shall determine responsibility for the emergency and notify the responsible party by mail of the city’s determination of responsibility and the costs to be recovered.
(b) The notice shall specify that the party determined to be responsible may appeal the City’s decision to the Bountiful City Administrative Law Judge.
8-5-104. Action to Recover Costs.
183
In the event that the responsible party does not pay the hazardous materials emergency costs within thirty days after assessment or determination of appeal, the City may initiate a legal action to recover such costs, including reasonable attorney’s fees.
Chapter 6: Refuse and Weed Control
8-6-101. Definitions.
8-6-102. Noxious Weeds, Unsightly or Deleterious Objects.
8-6-103. Removal by City and Collection of Costs.
8-6-101. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter:
"Inspector" means the Bountiful City Code Enforcement Officer or his authorized representatives.
"Noxious Weeds" means any plant the Commission of Agriculture of the State of Utah determines to be especially injurious to public health, crops, livestocks, land or other property.
8-6-102. Noxious Weeds, Unsightly or Deleterious Objects
It is unlawful for any owner or tenant of real property to permit, cause or to allow:
(a) Weeds to be upon the premises in excess of 6 inches in height:
(b) Garbage, refuse, unsightly or deleterious objects or structures to be upon the property except in an enclosed building.
8-6-103. Removal by City and Collection of Costs.
The City may give notice to property owners, remove the weeds and collect costs in the manner provided by State law.
Chapter 7: Noise Ordinance
8-7-101. General Prohibitions.
8-7-102. Specific Prohibitions.
8-7-103. Exemptions.
8-7-101. General Prohibitions.
It is unlawful to:
(a) intentionally disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in his dwelling by making unreasonably loud noises, which under the circumstances would disturb a person of average and reasonable sensitivities; or
(b) make unreasonably loud noises with a reckless disregard that the noise is disturbing the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in his dwelling, which under the circumstances would disturb a person of average and reasonable sensitivities, after being informed that the noise is having that effect; or
(c) make unreasonably loud noises with the intention of preventing or disrupting a lawful meeting, gathering, business or other lawful activity, which under the circumstances would disturb a person of average and reasonable sensitivities; or
184
(d) make unreasonably loud noises with a reckless disregard that the noise is preventing or disrupting a lawful meeting, gathering, business or other lawful activity, which under the circumstances would disturb a person of average and reasonable sensitivities, after being informed that the noise is having that effect.
8-7-102. Specific Prohibitions.
The following acts are unlawful between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.:
(a) Loading Operations. Loading, unloading, opening or otherwise handling boxes, crates, containers, garbage containers or other objects;
(b) Construction Work. Operating, or causing to be operated, any equipment used in construction, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures or streets.
(c) Commercial Power Equipment. Operating, or permitting to be operated, any power equipment, in excess of five horsepower.
(d) Garbage Collection. The collection of garbage, waste or refuse.
8-7-103. Exemptions.
(a) The restrictions set forth in the preceding two sections do not apply in case of actual emergencies.
(b) Applications for a temporary permit for relief from the foregoing restrictions on the basis of undue hardship may be made to the City. The applicant must explain why no other reasonable alternative is available. Any permit granted by the City Manager or his or her authorized representative shall contain all conditions upon which the permit has been granted, including but not limited to the effective dates, any time restrictions, location, and any other reasonable requirements to minimize adverse affects upon the surrounding neighborhood.
(c) The foregoing prohibitions do not apply to snow removal activities.
Chapter 8: Repealed.
[See the Davis County Drinking Water Source Protection Ordinance]
Chapter 9: Public Nuisance Abatement Ordinance
8-9-101. Nuisance Abatement Ordinance.
8-9-102. Purpose
8-9-103. Definitions.
8-9-104. Appointment and Duties of the Municipal Inspector.
8-9-105. Inspection, Notice and Order by the Municipal Inspector.
8-9-106. Enforcement.
8-9-101. Nuisance Abatement Ordinance.
185
This Chapter of the Bountiful City Code is entitled, “The Public Nuisance Abatement Ordinance.” It is based upon the authority granted in Sections 10-11-1 through 10-11-4, 10-8-60, 10-3-702 and other sections of the Utah Code.
8-9-102. Purpose.
(a) It is the purpose of this Ordinance to:
(i) designate, regulate, and provide a procedure for, the abatement of the growth and spread of injurious and noxious weeds, garbage and refuse, public nuisances, and illegal objects or structures, under §§10-11-1 through 10-11-4 of the Utah Code and this Bountiful Nuisance Ordinance; and
(ii) provide a procedure for the abatement of the growth and spread of injurious and noxious weeds, garbage and refuse, public nuisances, and illegal objects or structures, under the Bountiful City Code, the Bountiful City Land Use Ordinance, and other applicable laws.
(b) The procedure provided herein is not exclusive and does not repeal or replace other remedies and procedures legally available.
8-9-103. Definitions. “Illegal object or structure” means any object or structure that (1) is prohibited or otherwise illegal in its location, condition or for any other reason, under the Bountiful City Code, the Bountiful City Land Use Ordinance, the International Building Code, the Fire Code, or any other code adopted by the City, or by State law, or (2) is declared illegal by decision of the Municipal Inspector, Bountiful Planning Director, Bountiful City Council, Planning Commission, Administrative Committee, City Engineer, Building Official or Building Inspector, City Power Director, Fire Marshal, or Administrative Law Judge under applicable law.
“Noxious weeds” means those weeds designated by the Utah State Commissioner of Agriculture and Food under the Utah Noxious Weed Act (§4-17-1 et seq Utah Code).
“Public nuisances” means any structure or condition declared to be a public nuisance by (a) the Municipal Inspector appointed under §8-9-104, (b) the Bountiful City Code, including the Bountiful City Land Use Ordinance (c) decision of the Bountiful City Council, Planning Director, Planning Commission, Administrative Committee, City Engineer, Building Official or Building Inspector, City Power Director, or Administrative Law Judge, (d) the Fire Marshal or Fire Chief of the South Davis Fire Agency; (e) the Utah State Code or any State rules or regulations, (f) Davis County or any of its agencies, (g) the State of Utah or any of its agencies, (h) the United States government or any of its agencies, or (i) any court of competent jurisdiction.
8-9-104. Appointment and Duties of the Municipal Inspector.
(a) The Bountiful City Engineer, Assistant City Engineer, Building Official, Building Inspector, Power Director, Fire Marshal, Fire Chief and Planning Director are each appointed as “Municipal Inspector” under the provisions of §10-11-1(1)(a) of the Utah Code.
(b) The Municipal Inspector shall have the duty to examine and investigate real property for the growth and spread of injurious and noxious weeds, garbage and refuse, a public nuisance, or an illegal object or structure.
8-9-105. Inspection, Notice and Order by the Municipal Inspector.
186
(a) If a Municipal Inspector conducts an inspection under §8-9-104(b), the Inspector shall afterward enter written findings of the inspection, examination and investigation, and deliver written notice thereof in accordance with the provisions of §10-11-2(2) of the Utah Code.
(b) The Municipal Inspector shall require the property owner, occupant, or other person responsible for the property, to abate, eradicate or destroy, or remove any item or condition found in violation of applicable law or which constitutes a public nuisance.
(c) The Notice and Order shall notify that the property owner may file a written objection to all or part of the findings or order within 20 days after the day of the statement post-mark or date of personal delivery. If a property owner files an objection, the City shall mail or deliver notice of the hearing date and time to the property owner. If an objection is filed, in all hearings hereunder the Bountiful City Administrative Law Judge shall hold a hearing in accordance with the Open and Public Meetings Act, and shall review the matter de novo. The Administrative Law Judge shall take and receive evidence and fully hear and determine the matter which relates to the Notice, and shall uphold the findings and order of the Municipal Inspector if there is sufficient evidence to justify the findings. “Sufficient evidence to justify the findings” means that the City has presented substantial evidence (more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance) that the findings and order are justified.
8-9-106. Enforcement.
If the property owner, occupant or other person responsible for the property fails to comply with the Notice and Order, the Municipal Inspector may abate the nuisance and recover the cost of the abatement in accordance with the provisions of §§10-11-3 and 10-11-4 of the Utah Code.
Title 9
Bountiful Redevelopment Agency
Chapter 1: Establishment of Redevelopment Agency
Chapter 2: C.B.D. Neighborhood Development Plan
Chapter 3: Bountiful Gateway Neighborhood Development Plan
Chapter 4: Rules Governing Participation
Chapter 1: Establishment of Redevelopment Agency
9-1-101. Purpose.
9-1-102. Need.
9-1-103. Designation.
9-1-101. Purpose.
187
The purpose of this ordinance is to designate the City Council of Bountiful as the Redevelopment Agency of the City of Bountiful, pursuant to the provisions of the Utah Neighborhood Development Act.
9-1-102. Need.
The City Council of Bountiful, Utah, finds that in order to preserve and further promote the continued peace, health, safety, welfare and good order of the City and that it is necessary to create and designate the City Council of the City as the Redevelopment Agency.
9-1-103. Designation.
The Bountiful City Council is designated as the Redevelopment Agency of Bountiful, and shall have the powers and duties as are specified in the Utah Neighborhood Development Act.
Chapter 2: C.B.D. Neighborhood Development Plan
9-2-101. Neighborhood Development Plan Officially Adopted.
9-2-102. Project Boundaries.
9-2-103. Purposes of Redevelopment Plan.
9-2-104. Plan Incorporated by Reference.
9-2-105. Council Findings.
9-2-106. Housing Facilities.
9-2-107. Tax Increment Financing.
9-2-101. Neighborhood Development Plan Officially Adopted.
The "C.B.D. Neighborhood Development Plan," dated April 22, 1981, is hereby designated as the official redevelopment plan of the project area.
9-2-102. Project Boundaries.
The legal description of the boundaries of the project area covered by the redevelopment plan entitled "C.B.D. Neighborhood Development Plan," dated April 22, 1981, as amended through August 9, 2011, is as follows:
Beginning at the southwest corner of Block 4, Plat A, Bountiful Townsite survey. Said point of beginning is also N 89°38’33” E 34.96 ft., along the Section line, S 0°11’26” E 483.71 ft. along the westerly line of an existing street (400 East Street) and S 89°44’04” W 2220.30 ft. along the northerly line of an existing street (500 South Street) from the northeast corner of Section 30, T.2N, R.1E, SLB&M and running thence S 0°36’11” E 1,006.1 ft., more or less, along the easterly line of an existing street (Main Street) to a point on the south line of the property owned by Davis County and occupied by the Davis County Library South Branch; thence along said south line N 89°06’45” E 250.00 ft.; thence Due South 330.00 ft.; thence S 77°35’21” W 353.3 ft. more or less to a point S 85°34’ E 363 ft., more or less, from the northeast corner of Lot 30 of Park View Subdivision; thence N 85°34’ W 363 ft., more or less, along property lines to said northeast corner of Lot 30, thence N 85°34’ W 100 ft., more or less, along the northerly line of said Lot 30 to a point 2.5 ft. S 0°09’34” W of the southwest corner of Carriage Crossing Condominiums Phase 3; thence N 0°09’34” E 2.5 ft. along the extended westerly line of said Carriage Crossing Condominiums Phase 3 to the southwest corner of said Phase 3; thence Westerly, northerly, easterly, and northerly four (4) courses along the westerly boundary of amended Carriage Crossing Condominiums Phase 7 as follows: N 85°51’00” W
188
181.53 ft., N 0°02’20” W 74.71 ft., N 89°34’20” E 159.36 ft., and N 0°09’34” E 616.99 ft.; thence leaving said Phase 7, N 0°09’34” E 125ft., more or less, to the centerline of Mill Creek; thence westerly nine courses along said centerline of Mill Creek as follows: N 65°43’56” W 167.48 ft., S 0°09’34” W 11.81 ft., S 64°22’34” W 94.41 ft., N 81°08’26” W 162.7 ft., N 67°22’26” W 88.10 ft., S 59°27’34” W 87 ft., S 86°28’34” W 130.6 ft., N 72°24’26”W 42.40 ft., N 88°51’26” W 89.60 ft., to the easterly line of an existing street (200 West Street); thence Westerly along said centerline of Mill Creek 560 ft., more or less, to the southwest corner of property recorded in Book 926, Page 1029, Entry No. 630514 of Davis County records; thence N 0°18’ W 301.53 ft. along the property line to the northwest corner of said property; thence S 89°41’14” W 1253 ft., more or less, along the southerly line of an existing street (500 South Street) to the southeast corner of intersection at 500 West Street and 500 South Street; thence S 0°00’04” E 2505 ft., more or less, along the easterly line of an existing street (500 West Street) to the southeast corner of intersection at 500 West Street and 1250 South Street; thence N 89°56’ E 400.00 ft. along the southerly line of an existing street (1250 South Street); thence S 0°07’ E 686.28 ft. along the westerly line of Meadow Lane Subdivision Plat E and a westerly line of the Corporation of the Presiding Bishop property located in Book 344, Page 539, Entry No. 298731 of Davis County records; thence S 89°56’ W 101.72 ft. along a northerly line of said Presiding Bishop property; thence S 0°07’ E 198 ft. along a westerly line of said Presiding Bishop property; thence N 89°44’03” E 810 ft., more or less, to the northeast corner of intersection at 1500 South Street and State Road (U-106); thence N 26°48’30” E 407 ft., more or less, along the southeast line said State Road (U-106) to the southwest corner of Continental Townhouse Condominiums; thence N 89°49’30” E 294.58 ft. along a southerly line of said Continental Townhouse Condominiums; thence S 0°10’ W 90.35 ft. along a westerly line of said Continental Townhouse Condominiums; thence Easterly 146 ft. along a southerly line of said Continental Townhouse Condominiums; thence Southerly 815 ft., more or less, along the westerly line of an existing street (200 West Street) to the southeast corner of property recorded in Book 636, Page 417, Entry No. 454188 of Davis County records; thence N 87°50’12” W 221.05 ft. to the southwest corner of said property; thence Southwesterly 4,350 ft., more or less, along the southeasterly line of said Main Street and the easterly line of 500 West Street to a point east 66.00 ft. from the northeast corner of Summer Garden Townhouse Condominiums; thence West 66.00 ft. to said northeast corner of Summer Garden Townhouse Condominiums; thence Thirteen (13) courses along the boundary (including the northwesterly right-of-way) of said Summer Garden Townhouse Condominiums as follows: N 63°54’15” W 203.69 ft., N 59°36’20” W 200.00 ft., N 64°53’20” W 203.19 ft., N 64°53’20” W 163.81 ft., S 31°19’40” W 30.00 ft. along the southeasterly line of Highway 91 (South Main Street), S 64°53’20” E 163.81 ft., S 31°19’40” W 234.82 ft., S 89°41’20” E 29.20 ft.; S 31°19’40” W 120.0 ft., S 89°58’20” E 162.0 ft., S 31°19’40” W 13.813 ft., S 89°58’20” E 102.387 ft., S 0°05’00” E 142.00 ft.; thence S 89°58’20” E 453.22 ft. along the northerly line of an existing street (2600 South Street); thence S 0°05’30” E 634.31 ft. along the westerly line of said 500 West Street; thence Westerly and northerly nine (9) courses along the southerly and westerly boundary line of Colonial Square Subdivision as follows: S 89°32’04” W 347.32 ft., N 76°58’26” W 132.16 ft., N 37°54’30” W 162.18 ft., S 89°42’02” W 154.96 ft., N 0°05’30” W 58.35 ft., S 89°34’30” W 162.58 ft., N 0°05’30” W 42ft., S 89°35’30” E 233.03 ft., N 0°16’00” E 317 ft., thence N 89°58’20” W 456.22 ft., more or less, along the southerly line of said 2600 South Street to the centerline of an existing street (South Main Street); thence Northeasterly 3,460 ft., more or less, along said centerline of South Main Street; thence N 89°54’ W 410.04 ft., more or less, along the extended southerly line of property recorded in Book 1170, Page 1002, Entry No. 788585 and said southerly line to the southeasterly line of an existing highway (U-106); thence Northeasterly 2,040 ft., more or less, along the southeasterly line of said U-106 Highway to the southeast corner of the intersection of U-106 Highway and 1500 South Street; thence S 89°44’03” W 1,136 ft., more or less, along the southerly line of an existing street (1500 South Street); thence Northerly four (4) courses along the existing Bountiful city limit line as follows: N 0°00’12” W 2803.64 ft. along the centerline of an existing street (500 West Street), S 89°59’48” W 462.00 ft., N 0°00’12” W 480.00 ft., and S 87°58’43” W 538.33 ft. to a point 1000.0 ft. west of the centerline of said 500 West Street; thence N 0°00’12” W 194.0 ft. more or less to a point on the Bountiful City Limit Line; thence along said City Limit Line the following four (4) courses, N 89°46’41” E 758.14 ft, N 0°11’12” W 297.95 ft., S 89°48’48” W 90.00 ft., and N 0°11’12” W 290.16 ft., more or less, to the north line of Section 25, T.2N, R.1W, SLB&M; thence S 89°59’16” E 372 ft., more or less, along said north line of Section 25; thence S 0°11’12” E 522 ft., more or
189
less, along the easterly line of said 500 West Street; thence N 89°41’14” E 1781.20 ft. along the northerly line of said 500 South Street to the centerline of an existing street (200 West Street); thence N 89°44’04” E 1,317.40 ft. along said northerly line of 500 South Street; thence N 0°15’24” W 1,044.45 ft. along the westerly line of said Main Street; thence S 89°32’55” W 154.00 ft. along the southerly line of an existing street (200 South Street); thence S 0°11’29” E 165.00 ft. along a property line; thence S 89°40’49” W 110.00 ft. along the northerly line of Lot No. 1, Block 17, Plat A of Bountiful Townsite Survey; thence S 0°08’38” E 214.50 ft. along the westerly line of said Lot No. 1 and said lot line extended southerly; thence S 89°48’43” W 360.70 ft. along the southerly line of an existing street (300 South Street); thence N 0°01’51” W 709.00 ft. along the westerly line of an existing street (100 West Street); thence easterly along the southerly line of an existing street (100 South Street) to the southwest corner of the intersection of 100 South Street and Main Street; thence northerly along the westerly line of an existing street (Main Street) to the northwest corner of the intersection of Center Street and Main Street; thence westerly along the northerly line of an existing street (Center Street) to the northwest corner of the intersection of Center Street and 100 West Street; thence N 0°01’51” W along the westerly line of an existing street (100 West Street) 379.0 ft.; thence N 89°42’06” E 620.50 ft. along the northerly line of an existing street (100 North Street); thence N 0°03’00” W 1090.90 ft. along the westerly line of said Main Street; thence N 89°44’29” E 363.00 ft. along the southerly line of an existing street (400 North Street); thence S 0°09’23” E 165.00 ft. along the westerly line of Lot No.4, Block 52, Plat A Bountiful Townsite Survey; thence N 89°44’28” E 72.00 ft. along the southerly line of said Lot No.4; thence S 0°11 ‘07” E 214.50 ft. along a property line; thence N 89°44’27” E 60.00 ft. along the southerly line of an existing street (300 North Street); thence S 0°12’34” E 330.00 ft. along property lines; thence S 89°44’24” W 396.00 ft. along the northerly line of an existing street (200 North Street); thence S 0°03’00” E 381.4 ft. along said easterly line Main Street; thence N 89°41’32” E 610.5 ft. along the northerly line of an existing street (100 North Street); thence S 0°15’45” E 379.5 feet; thence westerly 610.5 ft. along the northerly line of an existing street (Center Street); thence southerly 429.0 ft. along the easterly line of an existing street (Main Street); thence easterly 264.0 ft. along the southerly line of an existing street (100 South Street); thence South 165.0 ft.; thence West 99.0 feet; thence South 214.5 ft., more or less, to the southerly line of an existing street (200 South Street); thence S 89°32’55” W 165.0 ft. along said southerly line of 200 South Street; thence S 0°15’24” E 1,044.45 ft. along the easterly line of said Main Street to the point of beginning.
9-2-103. Purposes of Redevelopment Plan.
The purposes and intent of the City Council of Bountiful, Utah with respect to the project area is to accomplish the following purposes by adoption of the redevelopment plan entitled, "C.B.D. Neighborhood Development Plan," dated April 22, 1981.
(a) Removal of structurally substandard buildings to permit the return of the project area land to economic use and new construction.
(b) Removal of impediments to land disposition and development through assembly of land into reasonably sized and shaped parcels served by improved public utilities and new community facilities.
(c) Rehabilitation of buildings to assure sound long term economic activity in the core area of the City of Bountiful.
(d) The elimination of environmental deficiencies, including among others, small and irregular lot subdivision, overcrowding of the land and inadequate off-street parking.
(e) Achievement of an environment reflecting a high level of concern for architectural and urban design principles developed through encouragement, guidance, appropriate controls and professional assistance to
190
owner participants and redevelopers.
(f) Implement the tax increment financing provisions of the Utah Neighborhood Development Act, which is incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this ordinance.
(g) The strengthening of the tax base and economic health of the entire community and of the State of Utah.
(h) Provisions for improvements to public streets, curbs and sidewalks, other public rights-of-way, street lights, landscaped areas, public parking and other public improvements.
9-2-104. Plan Incorporated by Reference.
The redevelopment plan entitled, "C.B.D. Neighborhood Development Plan," dated April 22, 1981, is incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this ordinance. Three copies of said plan shall be filed and maintained in the office of the City Recorder for public inspection.
9-2-105. Council Findings.
The City Council of Bountiful, Utah, hereby determines and finds as follows:
(a) The project area comprising the major portion of the commercial area of the City of Bountiful as above described is a "blighted area" as defined in Section 11-19-2, Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended, and that the redevelopment of said area is necessary to effectuate the public purposes set forth in the Utah Neighborhood Development Act and public purposes intended by the establishment of the Redevelopment Agency of the City of Bountiful.
(b) The redevelopment plan would redevelop the above-described area in conformity with the Utah Neighborhood Development Act and is in the best interests of the public peace, health, safety and welfare of the area and the community.
(c) The adoption and carrying out of the plan is feasible and economically sound.
(d) The redevelopment plan conforms to and is compatible with the master plan of the City of Bountiful, Utah.
(e) The carrying out of the redevelopment plan will promote the public peace, health, safety and welfare of the community and will effectuate the purposes and policy of the Utah Neighborhood Development Act.
(f) The condemnation of the real property, if and as provided for in the redevelopment plan, is necessary to the execution of the redevelopment plan and adequate provisions have been made for the payment of said property to be acquired as required by law.
(g) The Redevelopment Agency of the City of Bountiful has a feasible plan for the relocation of persons, if any, to be temporarily or permanently displace from housing facilities in the project area.
(h) Persons displaced from the project area, if any, are able to find or will be able to find either in the project area or in areas not generally less desirable in regard to public utilities and public and commercial facilities, and at rents or prices within their financial means and available to them, decent, safe and sanitary dwellings equal in number to the number of dwellings displaced and reasonably accessible to their places of employment.
191
9-2-106. Housing Facilities.
The City Council of the City of Bountiful is satisfied that permanent housing facilities will be available within three years from the time occupants of the project area, if any, are displaced and that pending the development of such facilities, temporary housing at comparable rents to those existing at the time of the displacement will be available in the general area.
9-2-107. Tax Increment Financing.
This ordinance adopting the redevelopment plan entitled, "C.B.D. Neighborhood Development Plan," dated April 22, 1981, incorporates the provisions of tax increment financing permitted by the Utah Neighborhood Development Act and specifically Section 11-19-29, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, which provides as follows:
(a) Any redevelopment plan may contain a provision that taxes, if any, levied upon taxable property in a redevelopment project each year by or for the benefit of the State of Utah, any city, county, city and county, district or other public corporation (hereinafter sometimes called "Taxing agencies") after the effective date of the ordinance approving the redevelopment plan, shall be divided as follows:
(1) That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate upon which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing agencies upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the redevelopment project as shown upon the assessment roll used in connection with the taxation of such property by such taxing agency, last equalized prior to the effective date of such ordinance, shall be allocated to and when collected shall be paid into the funds of the respective taxing agencies as taxes by or for said taxing agencies on all other property are paid (for the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing agency or agencies which did not include the territory in a redevelopment project on the effective date of such ordinance but to which such territory has been annexed or otherwise included after such effective date, the assessment roll of the county last equalized on the effective date of the ordinance shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the project on the effective date); and
(2) That portion of the levied taxes each year in excess of such amount shall be allocated to and when collected shall be paid into a special fund of the redevelopment agency to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advance to or indebtedness (whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise) incurred by such redevelopment agency to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, such redevelopment project. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in a redevelopment project exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in such project as shown by the last equalized assessment roll referred to in subsection (1) of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in such redevelopment project shall be paid into the funds of the respective taxing agencies. When such loans, advances and indebtedness, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all moneys thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in such redevelopment project shall be paid into the funds of the respective taxing agencies as taxes on all other property are paid.
Chapter 3: Bountiful Gateway Neighborhood Development Plan
9-3-101. Neighborhood Development Plan.
9-3-102. Project Boundaries.
9-3-103. Purposes of Redevelopment Plan.
9-3-104. Plan Incorporated by Reference.
9-3-105. Plan Officially Designated.
9-3-106. Council Findings.
192
9-3-107. Housing Facilities.
9-3-108. Tax Increment Financing.
9-3-101. Neighborhood Development Plan.
It has become necessary and desirable to adopt a redevelopment plan entitled, "Bountiful Gateway Neighborhood Development Plan," dated November 10, 1989.
9-3-102. Project Boundaries.
The legal description of the boundaries of the project area covered by the redevelopment plan entitled, "Bountiful Gateway Neighborhood Development Plan," dated November 10, 1989, is as follows, to-wit:
The Bountiful Gateway Neighborhood Development Project Area, hereinafter referred to as the project area, is enclosed within the following boundaries:
The West Bountiful City portion of the Project Area is as follows:
Beginning at a point North 89 degrees 59'16" West along the section line 450.10 feet from the Northeast corner of Section 25, Township 2 North, Range 1 West, Salt Lake Base and Meridian, Davis County, Utah and running thence along the East line of West Bountiful City the following courses and distances: North 0 degrees 12'25" West 325.61 feet; thence North 89 degrees 47'35" East 278.12 feet to the West line of 500 West Street; thence North 0 degrees 12'25" West 173.00 feet; thence South 89 degrees 47'35" West 278.12 feet; thence North 0 degrees 12'25" West 535.53 feet; thence leaving said City line South 89 degrees 47'35" West 749.72 feet to the East line of I-15; thence South 0 degrees 56'00" West 208.88 feet to a point on the 895.37 foot radius curve to the left; thence Southeasterly along the arc of said curve 481.32 feet (central angle = 30 degrees 48'); thence South 29 degrees 52'00" East 231.45 feet to a point on the 1015.37 foot radius curve to the right; thence Southerly along the arc of said curve 545.83 feet (central angle = 30 degrees 48'); thence South 0 degrees 56'00" West 148.41 feet; thence South 0 degrees 10'37" East 33.00 feet to the centerline of 500 South Street; thence North 89 degrees 49'23" East 255.24 feet; thence North 0 degrees 10'37" West 33.00 feet; thence North 0 degrees 12'25" West 217.78 feet; thence North 89 degrees 49'23" East 67.08 feet; thence North 89 degrees 49'23" East 100.02 feet; thence North 0 degrees 12'25" West 289.97 feet to a point of beginning. Containing 20.81 acres.
The Bountiful City portion of the Project Area is as follows:
Beginning at a point North 89 degrees 59'16" West along the section line 450.10 feet from the Northeast Corner of Section 25, Township 2 North, Range 1 West, Salt Lake Base and Meridian, Davis County, Utah and running thence South 89 degrees 59'16" East 107.64 feet; thence North 0 degrees 00'44" East 163.30 feet; thence South 89 degrees 59'16" East 169.85 feet to the West lien of 500 West Street; thence South 0 degrees 12'25" East 163.35 feet to the section line; thence South 89 degrees 59'16" East 80.00 feet to the East line of 500 West Street; thence North 0 degrees 12'25" West 1035.20 feet; thence South 89 degrees 47'35" West 358.12 feet to the West line of Bountiful City; thence along the City line the following courses and distances South 0 degrees 12'25" East 535.53 feet; thence North 89 degrees 47'35" East 278.12 feet to the West line of 500 West Street; thence South 0 degrees 12'25" East 173.00 feet; thence South 89 degrees 47'35" West 278.12 feet; thence South 0 degrees 12'25" East 325.61 feet to the point of beginning. Containing 6.67 acres.
The entire project area including both Bountiful City and West Bountiful City is described as follows:
Beginning at a point North 89 degrees 59'16" West along the section line 450.10 feet from the Northeast Corner of Section 25, Township 2 North, Range 1 West, Salt Lake Base and Meridian, Davis County, Utah and running thence South 89 degrees 59'16" East 107.64 feet; thence North 0 degrees 00'44" East 163.30 feet; thence South 89 degrees 59'16" East 169.85 feet to the West line of 500 West Street; thence South 0 degrees 12'25" East 163.35 feet to the section line; thence South 89 degrees 59'16" East 80.00 feet to the East line of 500 West Street; thence North 0 degrees 12'25" West 1035.20 feet; thence South 89 degrees 47'35" West 1107.84 feet to the East line of I-15; thence South 0 degrees 56'00" West 208.88 feet to a point
193
on a 895.37 foot radius curve to the left; thence Southeasterly along the arc of said curve 481.32 feet (central angel = 30 degrees 48'); thence South 29 degrees 52'00" East 231.45 feet to a point on a 1015.37 foot radius curve to the right; thence Southerly along the arc of said curve 545.83 feet (central angle = 30 degrees 48') thence South 0 degrees 56'00" West 148.41 feet; thence South 0 degrees 10'37" East 33.00 feet to the centerline of 500 South Street; thence North 89 degrees 49'23" East 255.24 feet; thence North 0 degrees 10'37" West 33.00 feet; thence North 0 degrees 12'25" West 217.78 feet; thence North 89 degrees 48'23" East 67.08 feet; thence North 89 degrees 49'23" West 289.97 feet to the point of beginning. Containing 27.57 acres.
9-3-103. Purposes of Redevelopment Plan.
The purpose and intent of the City Council of the City of Bountiful with respect to the project area, is to accomplish the following purposes by adoption of the redevelopment plan entitled, "Bountiful Gateway Neighborhood Development Plan," dated November 10, 1989:
(a) Removal of structurally substandard buildings to permit the return of the project area land to economic use and new construction.
(b) Removal of impediments to land disposition and development through assembly of land into reasonably sized and shaped parcels serviced by improved public utilities and new community facilities.
(c) Rehabilitation of buildings to assure sound long-term economic activity in the core area of the City of Bountiful.
(d) Elimination of environmental deficiencies, including among others, small and irregular lot subdivision, overcrowding of the land and inadequate off-street parking.
(e) Achievement of an environment reflecting a high level of concern for architectural and urban design principles, developed through encouragement, guidance, appropriate controls and professional assistance to owner participants and redevelopers.
(f) Implement the tax increment financing provisions of the Utah Neighborhood Development Act, Utah Code Annotated, Section 11-19-29, et seq., which is incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this Ordinance.
(g) Strengthening of the tax base and economic health of the entire community and of the State of Utah.
(h) Provisions for improvements to public street, curbs and sidewalks, other public rights-of-way, street lights, landscaped areas, public parking, and other public improvements.
9-3-104. Plan Incorporated by Reference.
The redevelopment plan entitled, "Bountiful Gateway Neighborhood Development Plan," dated November 10, 1989, together with supporting documents is incorporated herein by reference, is attached hereto, and made a part of this Ordinance. Copies of said Plan shall be filed and maintained in the office of the City Recorder for public inspection.
9-3-105. Plan Officially Designated.
The "Bountiful Gateway Neighborhood Development Plan," dated November 10, 1989, is hereby designated as the official redevelopment plan of the project area.
194
9-3-106. City Council Findings.
The City Council of the City of Bountiful City hereby determines and finds as follows:
(a) The project area, as above described, is a "blighted area" as defined in Section 11-19-2, Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended, and that the redevelopment of said area is necessary to effectuate the public purposes set forth in the Utah Neighborhood Development Act.
(b) The redevelopment plan would redevelop the area in conformity with the Utah Neighborhood Development Act and is in the interests of the public peace, health, safety and welfare of the area and the community.
(c) The adoption and carrying out of the redevelopment plan is feasible and economically sound.
(d) The redevelopment plan conforms to the master plan or general plan of the City of Bountiful.
(e) The carrying out of the redevelopment plan will promote the public peace, health, safety and welfare of the community and will effectuate the purposes and policy of the Utah Neighborhood Development Act.
(f) The condemnation of the real property, as provided for in the redevelopment plan, is necessary to the execution of the redevelopment plan and adequate provisions have been made for the payment for property to be acquired as provided by law.
(g) The Redevelopment Agency of Bountiful City has a feasible method or plan for the relocation of families and person displaced from the project area, if the redevelopment plan may result in the temporary or permanent displacement of any occupants of housing facilities in the project area.
(h) There are or are being provided in the project area or in other areas not generally less desirable in regard to public utilities and public and commercial facilities and at rents or prices within the financial means of the families and person displaced from the project area, decent, safe, and sanitary dwelling sequel in number to the number of and available to such displaced families and persons and reasonably accessible to their places of employment.
9-3-107. Project Area Restrictions.
The City Council finds that the Project Area is restricted to buildings, improvements or lands which are detrimental or inimical to the public health, safety or welfare of the community.
9-3-108. Housing Facilities.
The City Council of the City of Bountiful is satisfied that permanent housing facilities will be available within three years from the time occupants of the project area are displaced and that pending the development of such facilities, there will be available to such displaced occupants adequate temporary housing facilities at rents comparable to those in the community at the time of their displacement.
9-3-109. Tax Increment Financing.
This Ordinance adopting the redevelopment plan adopted, "Bountiful Gateway Neighborhood Development Plan," dated November 10, 1989, specifically incorporates the provisions of tax increment financing permitted by Section 11-19-29, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, which provides in part the following:
195
(a) Any redevelopment plan may contain a provision that taxes, if any, levied upon taxable property in a redevelopment project each year by or for the benefit of the State of Utah, any city, county, city and county, district or other public corporation (hereinafter sometimes called "taxing agencies") after effective date of the ordinance approving the redevelopment plan, shall be divided as follows:
(1) That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate upon which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing agencies upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the redevelopment project as shown upon the assessment roll used in connection with the taxation of such property by such taxing agency, last equalized prior to the effective date of such ordinance, shall be allocated to and when collected shall be paid into the funds of the respective taxing agencies as taxes by or for said taxing agencies on all other property are paid (for the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing agency or agencies which did not include the territory in a redevelopment project on the effective date of such ordinance but to which such territory has been annexed or otherwise included after such effective date, the assessment roll of the county last equalized on the effective date of the ordinance shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the project on the effective date); and...
(2) In a redevelopment project with a redevelopment plan adopted after April 1, 1983, that portion of the levied taxes each year in excess of the amount allocated to and when collected paid into funds of the respective taxing agencies under subsection (1)(a) shall be allocated to and when collected shall be paid into a special fund of the redevelopment agency according to the limits set forth in subsection (f) to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies advanced to, or indebtedness (whether funded, refunded, assumed, or otherwise) incurred by such redevelopment agency after April 1, 1983, to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, such redevelopment project. Payment of tax revenues to the redevelopment agency shall be subject to and shall except uncollected or delinquent taxes in the same manner as payments of taxes to other taxing agencies are subject to collection. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in a redevelopment project exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in such project as shown by the last equalized assessment roll referred to in subsection (1)(a) of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in such redevelopment project shall be paid into the funds of the respective taxing agencies. When such loans, advances, and indebtedness, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in such redevelopment project shall be paid into the funds of the respective taxing agencies as taxes on all other property are paid.
Chapter 4: Rules Governing Participation
9-4-101. General Provisions.
9-4-102. Types of Participation Available.
9-4-103. Priorities and Preferences.
9-4-104. Participation Procedure.
9-4-105. Enforcement.
9-4-106. Amendments of Owner Participation Rules.
9-4-101. General Provisions.
(a) Purpose. These rules are promulgated by the Redevelopment Agency of Bountiful City, Utah, (hereinafter the "Agency") to provide for reasonable participation in the redevelopment of property in project areas adopted by the Agency (hereinafter the "Project Area" by owners, operators of businesses, tenants, and other persons and entities holding interests in property within the Project Area, and to set forth the procedures governing such participation and preferences.
196
(b) Rules. The Rules governing participation and preference by owners, operators of business and tenants of the Redevelopment Agency of Bountiful City for Redevelopment Project Areas adopted by the Agency be and the same are hereby approved pursuant to law.
(c) Participants. Persons or entities holding interests in property within the Project Area shall have a reasonable opportunity to become "participants" in the Plan, in contrast to "developers," whose interests in the Project Area are acquired solely from the Agency without having held other interests in the Project Area.
(d) Priorities and Preferences. The Agency shall extend priorities to persons or entities holding interests in property in the Project area, to have the opportunity to continue in, or, if the Agency acquires the land of the owner or the land with which the person or entity's interest is associated, to re-enter the Project Area if such persons or entities otherwise meet the requirements for participation in project areas adopted by the Agency (hereinafter the "Redevelopment Project") prescribed in any Redevelopment Plan adopted by the Agency (hereinafter the "Redevelopment Plan") and in these Rules. Priorities are opportunities conferred on participants to be given reasonable priority over developers with respect to any aspect of the redevelopment of the Project Area under the Redevelopment Plan.
9-4-102. Types of Participation Available.
(a) General. The Agency may permit owners and tenants within the Project Area to be given the opportunity to participate in the redevelopment of the Project Area by:
(1) Owners retaining, maintaining, and, if necessary, rehabilitating all or portions of their properties;
(2) Owners acquiring adjacent or other properties in the project area;
(3) Owners selling all or portions of their improvements to the Agency, retaining the land, and developing their properties;
(4) Owners selling all or portions of their properties to the Agency and purchasing other properties in the project area;
(5) Owners selling all or portions of their properties to the Agency and obtaining preferences to re-enter the project area;
(6) Tenants having opportunities to become owners of property in the project area, subject to the opportunities of owners of property in the project area; and
(7) Other methods approved by the Agency.
(b) Remaining in Substantially the Same Location. Participation may consist of persons or entities with property interests in the Project Area remaining in substantially the same location either by retaining all or portions of the property, or by purchasing all or portions of the property and purchasing adjacent property from the Agency. Persons or entities which participate in the same location may be required to rehabilitate or demolish all or part of their existing buildings or the Agency may acquire improvements only, then remove or demolish the improvements, and permit the participants to develop the land.
(c) Exchanges. Participation may consist of the Agency buying land and improvements from existing owners, and offering other parcels for purchase by such participants.
(d) Preferences. Participation may consist of obtaining participants' preferences to re-enter the Project
197
Area.
(e) Other Forms of Participation. The Agency may allow such other forms of participation by persons or entities holding interest in property within the Project Area as are necessary and appropriate to advance the purposes of the Redevelopment Plan and are consonant with Utah Laws.
9-4-103. Priorities and Preferences.
(a) Priorities and Preferences. The Agency shall extend reasonable preferences to persons or entities holding interests within the Project area to participate in the Redevelopment Project, subject to the requirement prescribed in the Redevelopment Plan and these Rules. The Agency may structure priorities and preferences in any manner it deems necessary to further the ends of the Redevelopment Plan and which is consonant with its obligation to extend reasonable priorities and preferences to participants.
(b) Participants and Developers. In view of the priorities and preferences, the Agency is obligated to extend to participants over developers, participants shall have first claim to opportunities to participate in any and all phases of the Redevelopment Project, and shall be given priority over developers unless the Agency determines that the interested participants are not capable or qualified to undertake the aspect of the Redevelopment Project in question. If no participants are interested in undertaking a particular aspect of the Redevelopment Project, the Agency is free to allow developers to take advantage of the opportunity.
(c) Factors Limiting Participation Opportunities in General. Participation in the redevelopment of the Project Area by as many owners, tenants and other interest holders as possible is desired. However, participation opportunities shall necessarily be subject to and limited by such factors as the following:
(1) Removal, relocation and/or installation of public utilities and public facilities.
(2) The elimination and changing of some land uses.
(3) The realignment, abandonment, widening or opening of public streets and rights-of-way.
(4) The ability of participants to finance acquisition and development in accordance with the Redevelopment Plan.
(5) Reduction in the total number of individual parcels in the Project Area.
(6) The assembly and development of areas for public and/or private development in accordance with the Redevelopment Plan.
(7) Change in orientation and character of the Project Area.
(d) Factors Affecting Priorities and Preference of Participants. If conflicts develop among participants desiring to participate in the Redevelopment Plan with respect to particular sites or land uses, the Agency is authorized to establish reasonable priorities and preferences among the parties and to determine a solution by consideration of such factors as:
(1) Length of time in the area.
(2) Accommodation of as many participants as possible.
(3) Ability to perform.
(4) Similar land use to similar land uses.
(5) Conformity with intent and purpose of the Redevelopment Plan.
(6) Any other factors the Agency deems relevant in the particular circumstances.
198
(e) Participation by Joint Entities. To the extent feasible, opportunities to participate may be exercised by entities formed by two or more persons, or entities which join together in partnerships, corporations, or other joint entities for the purpose of participating in the Redevelopment Project. So long as one of the person or entities joining in the joint entity is a participant, the joint entity may be treated as a participant.
9-4-104. Participation Procedure.
(a) Participation Agreements. The Agency is authorized to enter into participation agreements with all participants in the Redevelopment Project. Such agreements may relate to properties not purchased or not to be purchased by the Agency. Each agreement will contain provisions necessary to insure that the participation proposal will be carried out, and that the subject property will be developed or used in accordance with the conditions, restrictions, rules and regulations of the Redevelopment Plan and the agreement. Each agreement will require the participant to join in the recordation of such documents as the Agency may require in order to insure such development and use. Participation agreements will be effective only if approved by the Agency.
(b) Statements of Interest. Before making offers to purchase property in the Project Area, the Agency shall notify the persons or entities holding interest in any such properties by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the Agency is considering the acquisition of such property. The Agency shall include a form entitled "Statement of Interest in Participating" with the notification. Within 30 days of receipt of such notification, any owner interested in participating in the Redevelopment Project shall file a "Statement of Interest in Participating" with the Executive Director of the Agency. Any person or entity holding an interest in property within the Project Area may also submit such a statement at any time before such notification.
The notice letter shall inform the party to whom it is directed that failure to file a written Statement of Interest will result in waiver of the Party's opportunity to participate on a priority or preferred basis in the Redevelopment Project. The Agency may disregard any Statements of Interest received after the expiration of the 30-day period.
The Agency shall consider such Statements as are submitted on time and seek to develop reasonable participation for those submitting such Statements whether to stay in place, to move to another location, to obtain priorities and preferences to re-enter the Project Area, etc.
9-4-105. Enforcement.
In the event property is not developed, maintained, rehabilitated, or used in conformance with the Redevelopment Plan or a Participation Agreement, the Agency is authorized to (1) purchase the property, (2) purchase any interest in the property sufficient to obtain conformance, or (3) take any other appropriate action sufficient to obtain such conformance.
9-4-106. Amendments of Owner Participation Rules.
The Agency may amend these rules at any meeting two weeks after publication of one notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Bountiful at least seven days after written notice has been given to all members of the Agency's Governing Board. The effective date of any amendment shall be the date on which it is approved by the Agency or on such other date as the Agency may specify in approving the Amendment.
199
200
Title 10
Bountiful Criminal Code
10-1-101. Bountiful Criminal Code.
10-1-102. Battery.
10-1-103. Electric Fences.
10-1-104. Throwing Missiles.
10-1-105. Monuments.
10-1-106. Children in Vehicles.
10-1-107. Littering.
10-1-108. Handbills.
10-1-109. Firearms and Weapons.
10-1-110. Knives.
10-1-111. Curfew.
10-1-112. Reserved.
10-1-113. Spitting.
10-1-114. Allowing Minors at Taverns.
10-1-115. Resisting a Law Enforcement Officer.
10-1-116. Adoption of State Code Provisions.
10-1-117. Fighting.
10-1-118. Disconnecting Emergency Telephone.
10-1-119. Directing a laser pointer at law enforcement officers prohibited.
10-1-120. Entering Motor Vehicle Without Owner Permission.
10-1-121. Feeding of Deer Prohibited.
10-1-101. Bountiful Criminal Code.
The provisions of this Title shall be known as the "Bountiful Criminal Code". Unless otherwise, stated, all violations of this chapter are class B misdemeanors.
10-1-102. Battery.
It is a misdemeanor for any person to unlawfully use force or violence upon the person of another.
10-1-103. Electric Fences.
It is a class C misdemeanor for any person to maintain, erect or cause to be erected any electric fence along or adjacent to any street or as a division between adjoining parcels of land. Any such fence is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
10-1-104. Throwing Missiles.
It is unlawful to willfully or carelessly throw any stone, stick, snowball or any other missile at any person, window, vehicle, or other property, or in such a manner as to frighten or annoy any person.
201
10-1-105. Monuments.
It is unlawful to displace, remove, injure, in any way interfere with, or place obstructions upon any survey stake or monument marked as such.
10-1-106. Children in Vehicles.
It is unlawful for any person, having in his care or control a child under six years of age, to at any time lock or confine, or suffer to be locked or confined, or left unattended, even though not locked or confined, such child in any automobile, bus, trailer or other vehicle, upon a public street, public property, or in an area open to the public for parking, for a period of time exceeding ten minutes. A child is unattended under this section if the oldest person with the child is under the age of twelve years.
10-1-107. Littering.
It is unlawful for any person:
(a) to throw, deposit, or discard, or to permit to be dropped, thrown, deposited, or discarded upon any public road, highway, park, recreation area or other public or private land, or waterway, any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, barbed wire, boards, trash or garbage, paper or paper products, or any other substance which would or could mar or impair the scenic aspect or beauty of such land whether under private, state, county, municipal, or federal ownership without the permission of the owner, or person having control or custody of the land;
(b) who is distributing handbills, leaflets, etc., to fail to take whatever measures are reasonably necessary to keep such material from littering streets or public or private property;
(c) driving a vehicle to fail to secure any cargo in such a reasonable manner as will prevent the cargo, or any part of it, from littering or spilling upon streets or public or private property;
(d) in charge of a construction or demolition site to fail to take whatever measures are reasonably necessary to prevent the accumulation of litter at the site;
(e) operating a trailer park, drive-in restaurant, gasoline station, shopping center, grocery store, tavern, or public parking lot to fail to maintain sufficient litter receptacles on said premises to accommodate the litter that accumulates there; or
(f) to throw or otherwise deposit litter from a vehicle upon any street or upon public or private property.
10-1-108. Handbills.
It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, to place, attach or distribute any printed matter:
(a) on any public street, park or other public place, except to such persons who willingly accept it;
(b) upon any premises where signs against trespassing or advertising are posted;
(c) upon any premises where the owner or occupant thereof has verbally or in writing instructed the person not to do so;
(d) upon any premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
202
10-1-109. Firearms and Weapons.
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), it is unlawful:
(i) to hunt within the City limits of Bountiful;
(ii) to discharge any air gun, BB gun, slingshot, crossbow, bow and arrows, or similar contrivance;
(iii) to discharge any firearm within the City, or when the projectile will come to rest or is intended to come to rest within the City limits. This shall not apply, however, to peace officers acting within the scope of their duties, or to those acting in reasonable self-defense, or to patrons of a lawfully operated shooting range.
(b) Hunting and discharging firearms, bows and arrows and other weapons, are lawful if done with written permission from City officials pursuant to a City-authorized activity.
10-1-110. Knives.
It is unlawful to sell, offer for sale, or expose for sale any spring-blade, snap-blade or similar-type knife.
10-1-111. Curfew.
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) below, it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen years to be in or upon any sidewalk, street, alley or other public place between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. of any day.
(b) The provision of subsection (a) shall not apply when a minor is:
(1) accompanied by an adult who is the parent or other person having the care and custody of such minor;
(2) attending or returning home from a function of any school or church;
(3) on any emergency errand or specific activity authorized by his parent or other person having the care and custody of such minor; or
(4) engaged in legitimate employment which requires his presence at the public places during the prohibited hours.
(c) It is unlawful to assist, aid, abet or encourage any minor to violate the provisions of subsection (a). It is unlawful to use any influence or otherwise to entice or persuade any minor from his parents, guardians or other persons having charge or custody of such minor without the consent of such parents, guardians or custodians.
10-1-112. Snow Removal.
(a) Snow and ice must be removed from sidewalks within 24 hours of the end of a storm.
It is unlawful for any person owning, having charge or control of, or occupying any property, building, lot, land or any real estate abutting on any street to fail, refuse, or neglect to remove promptly and effectually every snowfall from the sidewalk in front of such property. In any event, all such snow and ice must be removed within 24 hours of the end of the storm.
203
Any area of a sidewalk which has not been cleared of snow as required in this subsection is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated by civil or criminal legal action. The City is hereby authorized to remove any such snow, and the owner of the property shall be liable for the costs thereof. The City Attorney shall collect any unpaid removal costs from the property owner by appropriate legal action.
(b) It is unlawful to place snow removed from private or public property, including from a driveway or sidewalk, into a public street.
10-1-113. Spitting.
It is unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit saliva or tobacco on the floor of any public building, or at or upon any person.
10-1-114. Allowing Minors at Taverns.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to operate any beer hall, tavern or lounge in the City where beer is kept or sold for consumption on the premises or consumed, without first making and posting in a conspicuous place a regulation which shall read, "No person under 21 years of age permitted in these premises", and enforcing the same.
(b) It is unlawful for any person in charge of or employed in such beer hall, tavern or lounge to permit any person under the age of 21 years to enter upon or remain in any such premises, or for any person under the age of 21 years to enter upon or remain in said premises for any purpose except to make deliveries or carry messages to the proprietor thereof and depart therefrom immediately.
(c) The restrictions of this section shall not apply to the presence of minors at restaurants.
10-1-115. Resisting a Law Enforcement Official
It is unlawful to wilfully:
(a) Resist, obstruct or prevent a person recognized to be a law enforcement official from performing any authorized act or duty, or effecting a lawful arrest or detention of such person or another; or
(b) Fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order of a person recognized to be a law enforcement official.
10-1-116. Adoption of State Code
The following provisions of the Utah Code are adopted as ordinances of the City. Violations of these provisions shall be of the same classification as provided under State law, provided, however, that the maximum penalty shall not be greater than that permitted by law for a class B misdemeanor.
(a) Punishments (Chapter 3 of Title 76), as follows: Section 76-3-301.
(b) Offenses Against the Person (Chapter 5 of Title 76) as follows:
- Part 1 Sections 76-5-102, 76-5-106, 76-5-106.5, 76-5-107.5, 76-5-108, and 76-5-109; and
- Part 3 Section 76-5-304.
(c) Offenses Against Property (Chapter 6 of Title 76) as follows:
- Part 1 Sections 76-6-102, 76-6-104, and 76-6-106;
204
- Part 2 Sections 76-6-205 and 76-6-206;
- Part 4 in its entirety;
- Part 5 Sections 76-6-504, 76-6-505, 76-6-506 through 76-6-506.6, 76-6-507, 76-6-513, 76-6-515, 76-6-518, and 76-6-521;
- Part 6 in its entirety; and
- Part 8 in its entirety.
(d) Offense Against the Administration of Government (Chapter 8 of Title 76) as follows:
- Part 1 Section 76-8-106;
- Part 2 Sections 76-8-201 and 76-8-203;
- Part 3 Sections 76-8-301, 76-8-302, 76-8-305, 76-8-306, 76-8-307, 76-8-308, 76-8-309, 76-8-312, 76-8-13 and 76-8-315;
- Part 4 Sections 76-8-405 through 76-8-411, 76-8-415, 76-8-417 & 76-8-420;
- Part 5 Sections 76-8-503, 76-8-504, 76-8-506, 76-8-507, 76-8-511, 76-8-512, 76-8-513 and 76-8-514;
- Part 7 Sections 76-8-703, 76-8-704, 76-8-705, & 76-8-71 through 76-8-717.
(e) Offenses Against Public Order and Decency (Chapter 9 of Title 76) in its entirety.
(f) Offenses Against Public Health, Safety, Welfare and Morals (Chapter 10 of Title 76) as follows: Parts 1 through 15 and Part 21 in their entirety.
(g) The Utah Controlled Substances Act (Chapter 37 of Title 58) as follows: §58-37-8.
(h) Offenses on School Property (Chapter 3 of Title 53A) as follows: Sections 53A-3-501 through 53A-3-504.
(i) Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (Chapter 12 of Title 32A) as follows: Sections 32A-12-101 through 32A-12-506.
(j) The Utah Drug Paraphernalia Act (Chapter 37a of Title 58) in its entirety.
(k) The Utah Imitation Controlled Substances Act (Chapter 37b of Title 58) in its entirety.
(l) The Cohabitant Abuse Procedures Act (Chapter 36 of Title 77) as follows: Sections 77-36-3 and 77-36-3.1.
(m) Provisions Concerning juveniles (Chapter 3a of Title 78) as follows: Sections 78-3a-19 and 78-3a-20.7.
(n) Utah Fireworks Act (Chapter 3 of Title 11).
10-1-117. Fighting.
It is unlawful to engage in fighting. It is no defense to this section that it was engaged in by mutual consent.
205
10-1-118. Disconnecting Emergency Phone.
It is unlawful to disconnect, or attempt to disconnect, a telephone (or similar device) with the intention of preventing or hindering another person from making a call to the police department, fire department or other law enforcement or emergency services.
10-1-119. Directing a laser pointer at law enforcement officers prohibited.
(a) “Laser pointer” means any device which projects a small area (or “dot”) of light onto another object.
(b) It is unlawful for any person to direct light from a laser pointer at a uniformed police officer, security guard, school safety officer, firefighter, emergency medical worker, or any other uniformed city, state or federal peace officer, investigator or emergency service worker, or the marked service vehicle of any such individual.
10-1-120. Entering Motor Vehicle Without Owner Permission.
It is unlawful and a class B misdemeanor to enter a motor vehicle without the permission of the owner of that motor vehicle.
10-1-121. Feeding of Deer Prohibited.
(a) Except as provided in subsection (c), it is unlawful for any person to intentionally feed deer or make food available for consumption by deer, elk or moose on private or public property. This includes any fruit, grain, mineral, salt, vegetable, or other material placed outdoors for consumption by deer.
(b) (1) Each property owner shall remove any materials placed on the owner’s property for the purpose of feeding deer, elk or moose. Failure to remove such materials within 24 hours of notice from the City shall constitute a class C misdemeanor .
(2) Any materials placed for the purpose of feeding deer, elk or moose are hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated summarily, by civil action, or by criminal prosecution.
(c) (1)This section does not apply to City police officers, animal control officers, or Federal or State wildlife officials who are acting within the scope of the person’s authority.
(2) This ordinance does not apply to naturally growing vegetation, or to planted vegetation growing in yards, gardens or beds.
206
Title 11
Bountiful City Franchise Ordinance
Part 1: Rights-of-Way Ordinance
Chapter 1: Declaration of Findings and Intent; Scope of Ordinance
Chapter 2: Defined Terms.
Chapter 3: Franchise Required.
Chapter 4: Compensation and Other Payments.
Chapter 5: Franchise Applications.
Chapter 6: Construction and Technical Requirements.
Chapter 7: Franchise and License Non-Transferable.
Chapter 8: Oversight and Regulation.
Chapter 9: Rights of the City.
Chapter 10: Obligations to Notify.
Chapter 11: General Provisions.
Chapter 12: Federal, State and City Jurisdiction.
Chapter 1: Declaration of Findings and Intent; Scope of Ordinance
11-1-101. Findings Regarding Rights of Way.
11-1-102. Finding Regarding Compensation.
11-1-103. Finding Regarding Local Concern.
11-1-104. Finding Regarding Promotion of Telecommunications Services.
11-1-105. Findings Regarding Franchise Standards.
11-1-106. Power to Manage Rights of Way.
11-1-107. Scope of Ordinance.
11-1-108. Excluded Activity.
11-1-101. Findings Regarding Rights-of-Way.
The City of Bountiful finds that the Rights-of-Way within the City:
(a) are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property in the business and social life of the City;
(b) are intended for public uses and must be managed and controlled consistent with that intent;
(c) can be partially occupied by the facilities of utilities and other public service entities delivering utility and public services rendered for profit, to the enhancement of the health, welfare, and general economic well-being of the City and its citizens; and
(d) are a unique and physically limited resource requiring proper management to maximize the efficiency and to minimize the costs to the taxpayers of the foregoing uses and to minimize the inconvenience to and negative effects upon the public from such facilities' construction, placement, relocation, and maintenance in the Rights-of-Way.
207
11-1-102. Finding Regarding Compensation.
The City finds that the City should receive fair and reasonable compensation for use of the Rights-of-Way.
11-1-103. Finding Regarding Local Concern.
The City finds that while Telecommunications Systems are in part an extension of interstate commerce, their operations also involve Rights-of-Way, municipal franchising, and vital business and community service, which are of local concern.
11-1-104. Finding Regarding Promotion of Telecommunications Services.
The City finds that it is in the best interests of its taxpayers and citizens to promote the rapid development of Telecommunications Services, on a nondiscriminatory basis, responsive to community and public interest, and to assure availability for municipal, educational and community services.
11-1-105. Findings Regarding Franchise Standards.
The City finds that it is in the interests of the public to Franchise and to establish standards for franchising Providers in a manner that:
(a) fairly and reasonably compensates the City on a competitively neutral and non-discriminatory basis as provided herein;
(b) encourages competition by establishing terms and conditions under which Providers may use the Rights-of-Way to serve the public;
(c) fully protects the public interests and the City from any harm that may flow from such commercial use of Rights-of-Way;
(d) protects the police powers and Rights-of-Way management authority of the City, in a manner consistent with federal and state law;
(e) otherwise protects the public interests in the development and use of the City infrastructure;
(f) protects the public's investment in improvements in the Rights-of-Way; and
(g) ensures that no barriers to entry of Telecommunications Providers are created and that such franchising is accomplished in a manner that does not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting Telecommunication Services, within the meaning of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (“Act”)
11-1-106. Power to Manage Rights-of-Way.
The City adopts this Telecommunications Ordinance pursuant to its power to manage the Rights-of-Way, pursuant to common law, the Utah Constitution and statutory authority, and receive fair and reasonable, compensation for the use of Rights-of-Way by Providers as expressly set forth by Section 253 of the Act.
11-1-107. Scope of Ordinance.
This Ordinance shall provide the basic local scheme for Providers of Telecommunications Services and Systems that require the use of the Rights-of-Way, including Providers of both the System and Service, those Providers of the System only, and those Providers who do not build the System but who only provide
208
Services. This Ordinance shall apply to all future Providers and to all Providers in the City prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, whether operating with or without a Franchise as set forth in Section 12.2.
11-1-108. Excluded Activity.
(a) Cable TV. This Ordinance shall not apply to cable television operators otherwise regulated by the cable television provisions of the Bountiful City Code.
(b) Wireless Services. This Ordinance shall not apply to Personal Wireless Service Facilities.
(c) Provisions Applicable to Excluded Providers. Providers excused by other law that prohibits the City from requiring a Franchise shall not be required to obtain a Franchise, but all of the requirements imposed by this Ordinance through the exercise of the City's police power and not preempted by other law shall be applicable.
Chapter 2: Defined Terms
11-1-201. Definitions.
For purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this Section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the single number include the plural number, words in the plural number include the singular. The word "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
(a) "Application" means the process by which a Provider submits a request and indicates a desire to be granted a Franchise to utilize the Rights-of-Way of all, or a part, of the City. An Application includes all written documentation, verbal statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by a Provider to the City concerning: the construction of a Telecommunications System over, under, on or through the Rights-of-Way; the Telecommunications Services proposed to be provided in the City by a Provider; and any other matter pertaining to a proposed System or Service.
(b) “City” means the city of Bountiful, Utah.
(c) "Completion Date" means the date that a Provider begins providing Services to customers in the City.
(d) "Construction Costs" means all costs of constructing a System, including make ready costs, other than engineering fees, attorneys or accountants fees, or other consulting fees.
(e) "Control" or "Controlling Interest" means actual working control in whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the System or of a Provider. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of Control or a Controlling Interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any Person, or group of Persons acting in concert, of more than thirty-five percent (35%) of any Provider (which Person or group of Persons is hereinafter referred to as "Controlling Person"). "Control" or "Controlling Interest" as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one Person or group of Persons.
(f) "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission, or any successor thereto.
(g) "Franchise" means the rights and obligation extended by the City to a Provider to own, lease, construct, maintain, use or operate a System in the Rights-of-Way within the boundaries of the City. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include: (i) any other permit or authorization
209
required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City required by the ordinances and laws of the City; (ii) any other permit, agreement or authorization required in connection with operations on Rights-of-Way or public property including, without limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits or other structures, whether owned by the City or a private entity, or for excavating or performing other work in or along the Rights-of-Way.
(h) "Franchise Agreement" means a contract entered into in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance between the City and a Franchisee that sets forth, subject to this Ordinance, the terms and conditions under which a Franchise will be exercised.
(i) "Gross Revenue" includes all revenues of a Provider that may be included as gross revenue within the meaning of Chapter 26, Title 11 Utah Code annotated, 1953, as amended. In the case of any Provider not covered within the ambit of Chapter 26, Title 11, Utah Code, the definition of “Gross Revenue” shall be that set forth in the Franchise Agreement.
(j) "Infrastructure Provider" means a Person providing to another, for the purpose of providing Telecommunication Services to customers, all or part of the necessary System which uses the Rights-Of-Way.
(k) "Open Video Service" means any video programming services provided to any Person through the use of Rights-of-Way, by a Provider that is certified by the FCC to operate an Open Video System pursuant to sections 651, et seq., of the Telecommunications Act (to be codified at 47 U.S.C. Title VI, Part V), regardless of the System used.
(l) "Open Video System" means the system of cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides, optic fiber, microwave, laser beams, and any associated converters, equipment, or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying or distributing Open Video Services to or from subscribers or locations within the City.
(m) "Operator" means any Person who provides Service over a Telecommunications System and directly or through one or more Persons owns a Controlling Interest in such System, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation of such a System.
(n) "Ordinance" or "Telecommunications Ordinance" means this Telecommunications Ordinance concerning the granting of Franchises in and by the City for the construction, ownership, operation, use or maintenance of a Telecommunications System.
(o) "Person" includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, or any other legal entity, but not the City.
(p) “Personal Wireless Services Facilities” has the same meaning as provided in Section 704 of the Act (47 U.S.C. 332(c)(7)(c)), which includes what is commonly known as cellular and PCS Services that do not install any System or portion of a System in the Rights-of-Way.
(q) "Provider" means an Operator, Infrastructure Provider, Resaler, or System Lessee.
(r) “PSC” means the Public Service Commission, or any successor thereto.
(s) "Resaler" refers to any Person that provides local exchange service over a System for which a separate charge is made, where that Person does not own or lease the underlying System used for the transmission.
(t) "Rights-of-Way" means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, sidewalk, alley,
210
or other public way of any type whatsoever, now or hereafter existing as such within the City.
(u) "Signal" means any transmission or reception of electronic, electrical, light or laser or radio frequency energy or optical information in either analog or digital format.
(v) "System Lessee" refers to any Person that leases a System or a specific portion of a System to provide Services.
(w) "Telecommunications" means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing (e.g., data, video, and voice), without change in the form or content of the information sent and received.
(x) "Telecommunications System" or “System” means all conduits, manholes, poles, antennas, transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic devices, equipment, Wire and appurtenances owned, leased, or used by a Provider, located in the Rights-of-Way and utilized in the provision of Services, including fully digital or analog, voice, data and video imaging and other enhanced Telecommunications Services. Telecommunications System or Systems also includes an Open Video System.
(y) "Telecommunications Service(s)" or “Services” means any telecommunications services provided by a Provider within the City that the Provider is authorized to provide under federal, state and local law, and any equipment and/or facilities required for and integrated with the Services provided within the City, except that these terms do not include "cable service" as defined in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (47 U.S.C. § 521, et seq.), and the Telecommunications Act of 1996. Telecommunications System or Systems also includes an Open Video System.
(z) “Wire” means fiber optic Telecommunications cable, wire, coaxial cable, or other transmission medium that may be used in lieu thereof for similar purposes.
Chapter 3: Franchise Required
11-1-301. Non-Exclusive Franchise.
11-1-302. Ever Provider Must Obtain.
11-1-303. Nature of Grant.
11-1-304. Current Providers.
11-1-305. Nature of Franchise.
11-1-306. Regulatory Approval Needed.
11-1-307. Term.
11-1-301. Non-Exclusive Franchise.
The City is empowered and authorized to issue non-exclusive Franchises governing the installation, construction, and maintenance of Systems in the City's Rights-of-Way, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. The Franchise is granted through a Franchise Agreement entered into between the City and Provider.
11-1-302. Every Provider Must Obtain.
Except to the extent preempted by federal or state law, as ultimately interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction, including any appeals, every Provider must obtain a Franchise prior to constructing a Telecommunications System or providing Telecommunications Services using the Rights-of-Way, and every Provider must obtain a Franchise before constructing an Open Video System or providing Open Video
211
Services via an Open Video System. Any Open Video System or Service shall be subject to the customer service and consumer protection provisions applicable to the Cable TV companies to the extent the City is not preempted or permitted as ultimately interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction, including any appeals. The fact that particular Telecommunications Systems may be used for multiple purposes does not obviate the need to obtain a Franchise for other purposes. By way of illustration and not limitation, a cable operator of a cable system must obtain a cable franchise, and, should it intend to provide Telecommunications Services over the same System, must also obtain a Telecommunications Franchise.
11-1-303. Nature of Grant.
A Franchise shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in the Rights-of-Way. A Franchise is only the right to occupy Rights-of-Way on a non-exclusive basis for the limited purposes and for the limited period stated in the Franchise; the right may not be subdivided, assigned, or subleased, except as may be expressly provided in the Franchise Agreement. A Franchise does not excuse a Provider from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements, and making required payments, before collocating its System on the property of others, including the City’s property. This section shall not be construed to prohibit a Provider from leasing conduit to another Provider, so long as the Lessee has obtained a Franchise.
11-1-304. Current Providers.
Except to the extent exempted by federal or state law, any Provider acting without a Franchise on the effective date of this Ordinance shall request issuance of a Franchise from the City within 90 days of the effective date of this Ordinance. If such request is made, the Provider may continue providing service during the course of negotiations. If a timely request is not made, or if negotiations cease and a Franchise is not granted, the Provider shall comply with the provisions of Section 9.4.
11-1-305. Nature of Franchise.
The Franchise granted by the City under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be a nonexclusive Franchise providing the right and consent to install, repair, maintain, remove and replace its System on, over and under the Rights-of-Way in order to provide Services.
11-1-306. Regulatory Approval Needed.
Before offering or providing any Services pursuant to the Franchise, a Provider shall obtain any and all regulatory approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses for the offering or provision of such Services from the appropriate federal, state and local authorities, if required, and shall submit to the City upon the written request of the City evidence of all such approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses.
11-1-307. Term.
No Franchise issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall have a term of less than five (5) years or greater than fifteen (15) years. Each Franchise shall be granted in a nondiscriminatory manner.
Chapter 4: Compensation and Other Payments
11-1-401. Compensation.
11-1-402. Application Fee.
11-1-403. Franchise Fees.
11-1-404. Excavation Permits.
11-1-405. Timing.
11-1-406. Fee Statement and Certification.
212
11-1-407. Future Costs.
11-1-408. Taxes and Assessments.
11-1-409. Interest on Late Payments.
11-1-410. No Accord and Satisfaction.
11-1-411. Not in Lieu of Other Taxes or Fees.
11-1-412. Continuing Obligation and Holdover.
11-1-413. Costs of Publication.
11-1-401. Compensation.
As fair and reasonable compensation for any Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance, a Provider shall have the following obligations:
11-1-402. Application Fee.
In order to offset the cost to the City to review an Application for a Franchise and in addition to all other fees, permits or charges, a Provider shall pay to the City, at the time of Application, $500 as a non-refundable Application fee.
11-1-403. Franchise Fees.
The Franchise fee, if any, shall be set forth in the Franchise Agreement. The obligation to pay a Franchise fee shall commence on the Completion Date. The Franchise fee is offset by any business license fee or business license tax enacted by the City.
11-1-404. Excavation Permits.
The Provider shall also pay fees required for an excavation permit as provided in the Excavation Permit Ordinance.
11-1-405. Timing.
Unless otherwise agreed to in the Franchise Agreement, all Franchise Fees shall be paid on a monthly basis within forty-five (45) days of the close of each calendar month.
11-1-406. Fee Statement and Certification.
Unless a Franchise Agreement provides otherwise, each fee payment shall be accompanied by a statement showing the manner in which the fee was calculated and shall be certified as to its accuracy.
11-1-407. Future Costs.
A Provider shall pay to the City and/or to third parties, at the direction of the City, an amount equal to the reasonable costs and reasonable expenses that the City incurs for the services of the City and/or third parties (including but not limited to attorneys and other consultants) in connection with any renewal or Provider-initiated renegotiation, or amendment of this Ordinance or a Franchise, provided, however, that the parties shall agree upon a reasonable financial cap at the outset of negotiations. In the event the parties are unable to agree, either party may submit the issue to binding arbitration in accordance with the rules and procedures of the American Arbitration Association. Any costs associated with any work to be done by the Power and Public Works Department to provide space on City owned poles shall be borne by the Provider.
213
11-1-408. Taxes and Assessments.
To the extent taxes or other assessments are imposed by taxing authorities, other than the City on the use of the City property as a result of a Provider's use or occupation of the Rights-of-Way, the Provider shall be responsible for payment of its pro rata share of such taxes, payable annually unless otherwise required by the taxing authority. Such payments shall be in addition to any other fees payable pursuant to this Ordinance.
11-1-409. Interest on Late Payments.
In the event that any payment is not actually received by the City on or before the applicable date fixed in the Franchise, interest thereon shall accrue from such date until received at the rate charged for delinquent state taxes.
11-1-410. No Accord and Satisfaction.
No acceptance by the City of any fee shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of such fee payment be construed as a release of any claim the City may have for additional sums payable.
11-1-411. Not in Lieu of Other Taxes or Fees.
The fee payment is not a payment in lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment except as specifically provided in this Ordinance, or as required by applicable law. By way of example, and not limitation, excavation permit fees and fees to obtain space on the City owned poles are not waived and remain applicable.
11-1-412. Continuing Obligation and Holdover.
In the event a Provider continues to operate all or any part of the System after the Term of the Franchise, such operator shall continue to comply with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance and the Franchise, including, without limitation, all compensation and other payment provisions throughout the period of such continued operation, provided that any such continued operation shall in no way be construed as a renewal or other extension of the Franchise, nor as a limitation on the remedies, if any, available to the City as a result of such continued operation after the term, including, but not limited to, damages and restitution.
11-1-413. Costs of Publication.
A Provider shall assume any publication costs associated with its Franchise that may be required by law.
Chapter 5: Franchise Applications
11-1-501. Franchise Application.
11-1-502. Application Criteria.
11-1-503. Franchise Determination.
11-1-501. Franchise Application.
To obtain a Franchise to construct, own, maintain or provide Services through any System within the City, to obtain a renewal of a Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance, or to obtain the City approval of a transfer of a Franchise, as provided in Subsection 7.1.2, granted pursuant to this Ordinance, an Application must be filed with City on the form attached to this Ordinance as Exhibit A, which is hereby incorporated by reference. The Application form may be changed by the City Manager so long as such changes request information that is consistent with this Ordinance. Such Application form, as amended, is incorporated by
214
reference.
11-1-502. Application Criteria.
In making a determination as to an Application filed pursuant to this Ordinance, the City may, but shall not be limited to, request the following from the Provider:
(a) A copy of the order from the PSC granting a Certificate of Convenience and Necessity, if any is necessary for Provider’s offering of services within the State of Utah.
(b) Certification of the Provider's financial ability to compensate the City for Provider's intrusion, maintenance and use of the Rights-of-Way during the Franchise term proposed by the Provider;
(c) Provider’s agreement to comply with the requirements of Section 6 of this Ordinance.
(d) Prior to making any attachments to poles or using any City conduit, the Provider must enter into a pole attachment or conduit agreement with the City.
11-1-503. Franchise Determination.
The City, in its discretion, shall determine the award of any Franchise on the basis of these and other considerations relevant to the use of the Rights-of-Way, without competitive bidding.
Chapter 6: Construction and Technical Requirements
11-1-601. General Requirement.
11-1-602. Quality.
11-1-603. Licenses and Permits.
11-1-604. Relocation of the System.
11-1-605. Protect Structures.
11-1-606. No Obstruction.
11-1-607. Safety Precautions.
11-1-608. Repair.
11-1-609. System Maintenance.
11-1-610. Trimming of Trees.
11-1-601. General Requirement.
No Provider shall receive a Franchise unless it agrees to comply with each of the terms set forth in this Section governing construction and technical requirements for its System, in addition to any other reasonable requirements or procedures specified by the City or the Franchise, including requirements regarding locating and sharing in the cost of locating portions of the System with other Systems or with City utilities. A Provider shall obtain an excavation permit, pursuant to the excavation ordinance, before commencing any work in the Rights-of-Way.
11-1-602. Quality.
All work involved in the construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade and removal of the System shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner using materials of good and durable quality, and shall be performed by qualified and licensed construction and maintenance personnel. If, at any time, it is determined by the FCC or any other agency granted authority by federal law or the FCC to make such determination, that any part of the System, including, without limitation, any means used to distribute
215
Signals over or within the System, is harmful to the public health, safety or welfare, or quality of service or reliability, then a Provider shall, at its own cost and expense, promptly correct all such conditions.
11-1-603. Licenses and Permits.
A Provider shall have the sole responsibility for diligently obtaining, at its own cost and expense, all permits, licenses or other forms of approval or authorization necessary to construct, maintain, upgrade or repair the System, including but not limited to any necessary approvals from Persons and/or the City to use private property, easements, poles and conduits. A Provider shall obtain any required permit, license, approval or authorization, including but not limited to excavation permits, pole attachment agreements, etc., prior to the commencement of the activity for which the permit, license, approval or authorization is required.
11-1-604. Relocation of the System.
(a) New Grades or Lines. If the grades or lines of any Rights-of-Way are changed at any time in a manner affecting the System, then a Provider shall comply with the requirements of the excavation ordinance.
(b) The City Authority to Move System in case of an Emergency. The City may, at any time, in case of fire, disaster or other emergency, as determined by the City in its reasonable discretion, cut or move any parts of the System and appurtenances on, over or under the Rights-of-Way of the City, in which event the City shall not be liable therefor to a Provider. The City shall notify a Provider in writing prior to, if practicable, but in any event as soon as possible and in no case later than the next business day following any action taken under this Section. Notice shall be given as provided in Section 11.4.
(c) A Provider Required to Temporarily Move System for Third Party. A Provider shall, upon prior reasonable written notice by the City or any Person holding a permit to move any structure, and within the time that is reasonable under the circumstances, temporarily move any part of its System to permit the moving of said structure. A Provider may impose a reasonable charge on any Person other than the City for any such movement of its Systems.
(d) Rights-of-Way Change - Obligation to Move System. When the City is changing a Rights-of-Way and makes a written request, a Provider is required to move or remove its System from the Rights-of-Way, without cost to the City, to the extent provided in the excavation ordinance. This obligation does not apply to Systems originally located on private property pursuant to a private easement, which property was later incorporated into the Rights-of-Way, if that private easement grants a superior vested right. This obligation exists whether or not the Provider has obtained an excavation permit.
11-1-605. Protect Structures.
In connection with the construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the System, a Provider shall, at its own cost and expense, protect any and all existing structures belonging to the City. A Provider shall obtain the prior written consent of the City to alter any water main, power facility, sewerage or drainage system, or any other municipal structure on, over or under the Rights-of-Way of the City required because of the presence of the System. Any such alteration shall be made by the City or its designee on a reimbursable basis. A Provider agrees that it shall be liable for the costs incurred by the City to replace or repair and restore to its prior condition in a manner as may be reasonably specified by the City, any municipal structure or any other Rights-of-Way of the City involved in the construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the System that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of any work thereon by or on behalf of a Provider pursuant to the Franchise.
216
11-1-606. No Obstruction.
In connection with the construction, maintenance, upgrade, repair or removal of the System, a Provider shall not unreasonably obstruct the Rights-of-Way of fixed guide way systems, railways, passenger travel, or other traffic to, from or within the City without the prior consent of the appropriate authorities.
11-1-607. Safety Precautions.
A Provider shall, at its own cost and expense, undertake all necessary and appropriate efforts to prevent accidents at its work sites, including the placing and maintenance of proper guards, fences, barricades, security personnel and suitable and sufficient lighting, and such other requirements prescribed by OSHA and Utah OSHA. A Provider shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local requirements including but not limited to the National Electric Safety Code.
11-1-608. Repair.
After written reasonable notice to the Provider, unless, in the sole determination of the City, an eminent danger exists, any Rights-of-Way within the City which are disturbed or damaged during the construction, maintenance or reconstruction by a Provider of its System may be repaired by the City at the Provider's expense, to a condition as good as that prevailing before such work was commenced. Upon doing so, the City shall submit to such a Provider an itemized statement of the cost for repairing and restoring the Rights-of-Ways intruded upon. The Provider shall, within thirty (30) days after receipt of the statement, pay to the City the entire amount thereof.
11-1-609. System Maintenance.
A Provider shall:
(a) Install and maintain all parts of its System in a non-dangerous condition throughout the entire period of its Franchise.
(b) Install and maintain its System in accordance with standard prudent engineering practices and shall conform, when applicable, with the National Electrical Safety Code and all applicable other federal, state and local laws or regulations.
(c) At all reasonable times, permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the City of the System and its effect on the Rights-of-Way.
11-1-610. Trimming of Trees.
A Provider shall have the authority to trim trees, in accordance with all applicable utility restrictions, ordinance and easement restrictions, upon and hanging over Rights-of-Way so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with its System.
Chapter 7: Franchise and License Non-Transferrable
11-1-701. Notification of Sale.
11-1-702. Events of Sale.
11-1-701. Notification of Sale.
(a) Notification and Election. When a Provider is the subject of a sale, transfer, lease, assignment, sublease
217
or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, consolidation or otherwise, such that it or its successor entity is obligated to inform or seek the approval of the PSC, the Provider or its successor entity shall promptly notify the City of the nature of the transaction. The notification shall include either:
(1) the successor entity’s certification that the successor entity unequivocally agrees to all of the terms of the original Provider’s Franchise Agreement, or
(2) the successor entity’s Application in compliance with Section 5 of this Ordinance.
(b) Transfer of Franchise. Upon receipt of a notification and certification in accordance with Subsection 11-7-101(a)(1), the City designee, as provided in this ordinance, shall send notice affirming the transfer of the Franchise to the successor entity. If the City has good cause to believe that the successor entity may not comply with this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement, it may require an Application for the transfer. The Application shall comply with Chapter 5.
(c) If PSC Approval No Longer Required. If the PSC no longer exists, or if its regulations or state law no longer require approval of transactions described in Section 11-1-701, and the City has good cause to believe that the successor entity may not comply with this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement, it may require an Application. The Application shall comply with Chapter 5.
11-1-702. Events of Sale.
The following events shall be deemed to be a sale, assignment or other transfer of the Franchise requiring compliance with Section 11-1-701:
(a) the sale, assignment or other transfer of all or a majority of a Provider's assets to another Person;
(b) the sale, assignment or other transfer of capital stock or partnership, membership or other equity interests in a Provider by one or more of its existing shareholders, partners, members or other equity owners so as to create a new Controlling Interest in a Provider;
(c) the issuance of additional capital stock or partnership, membership or other equity interest by a Provider so as to create a new Controlling Interest in such a Provider; or
(d) the entry by a Provider into an agreement with respect to the management or operation of such Provider or its System.
Chapter 8: Oversight and Regulation
11-1-801. Insurance, Indemnity and Security.
11-1-802. Oversight.
11-1-803. Maintain Records.
11-1-804. Confidentiality.
11-1-805. Provider’s Expense.
11-1-806. Right of Inspection.
11-1-801. Insurance, Indemnity and Security.
Prior to the execution of a Franchise, a Provider will deposit with the City an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit or surety bond as required by the terms of the Franchise, and shall obtain and provide proof of the insurance coverage required by the Franchise. A Provider shall also indemnify the City as set forth in the
218
Franchise.
11-1-802. Oversight.
The City shall have the right to oversee, regulate and inspect periodically the construction, maintenance, and upgrade of the System, and any part thereof, in accordance with the provisions of the Franchise and applicable law. A Provider shall establish and maintain managerial and operational records, standards, procedures and controls to enable a Provider to prove, in reasonable detail, to the satisfaction of the City at all times throughout the Term, that a Provider is in compliance with the Franchise. A Provider shall retain such records for not less than the applicable statute of limitations.
11-1-803. Maintain Records.
A Provider shall at all times maintain:
(a) On file with the City, a full and complete set of plans, records and "as-built" hard copy maps and, to the extent the maps are placed in an electronic format, they shall be made in electronic format compatible with the City's existing GIS system, of all existing and proposed installations and the types of equipment and Systems installed or constructed in the Rights-of-Way, properly identified and described as to the types of equipment and facility by appropriate symbols and marks which shall include annotations of all Rights-of-Ways where work will be undertaken. As used herein, “as-built” maps includes “file construction prints.” Maps shall be drawn to scale. "As-built" maps, including the compatible electronic format, as provided above, shall be submitted within 30 days of completion of work or within 30 days after completion of modification and repairs. “As- built” maps are not required of the Provider who is the incumbent local exchange carrier for the existing System to the extent they do not exist.
(b) Throughout the term of the Franchise, a Provider shall maintain complete and accurate books of account and records of the business, ownership, and operations of a Provider with respect to the System in a manner that allows the City at all times to determine whether a Provider is in compliance with the Franchise. Should the City reasonably determine that the records are not being maintained in such a manner, a Provider shall alter the manner in which the books and/or records are maintained so that a Provider comes into compliance with this Section. All financial books and records which are maintained in accordance with the regulations of the FCC and any governmental entity that regulates utilities in the State of Utah, and generally accepted accounting principles shall be deemed to be acceptable under this Section.
11-1-804. Confidentiality.
If the information required to be submitted is proprietary in nature or must be kept confidential by federal, state or local law, upon proper request by a Provider, such information shall be classified as a Protected Record within the meaning of the Utah Government Records Access and Management Act (“GRAMA”), making it available only to those who must have access to perform their duties on behalf of the City, provided that a Provider notifies the City of, and clearly labels the information which a Provider deems to be confidential, proprietary information. Such notification and labeling shall be the sole responsibility of the Provider.
11-1-805. Provider's Expense.
All reports and records required under this Ordinance shall be furnished at the sole expense of a Provider, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance or a Franchise.
219
11-1-806. Right of Inspection.
For the purpose of verifying the correct amount of the franchise fee, the books and records of the Provider pertaining thereto shall be open to inspection or audit by duly authorized representatives of the City at all reasonable times, upon giving reasonable notice of the intention to inspect or audit the books and records, provided that the City shall not audit the books and records of the Provider more often than annually. The Provider agrees to reimburse the City the reasonable costs of an audit if the audit discloses that the Provider has paid ninety-five percent (95%) or less of the compensation due the City for the period of such audit. In the event the accounting rendered to the City by the Provider herein is found to be incorrect, then payment shall be made on the corrected amount within thirty (30) calendar days of written notice, it being agreed that the City may accept any amount offered by the Provider, but the acceptance thereof by the City shall not be deemed a settlement of such item if the amount is in dispute or is later found to be incorrect.
Chapter 9: Rights of the City
11-1-901. Enforcement and Remedies.
11-1-902. Force Majeure.
11-1-903. Extended Operation and Continuity of Services.
11-1-904. Removal or Abandonment of Franchise Property.
11-1-901. Enforcement and Remedies.
(a) Enforcement - City Designee. The City is responsible for enforcing and administering this Ordinance, and the City or its designee, as appointed by the City Manager is authorized to give any notice required by law or under any Franchise Agreement.
(b) Enforcement Provision. Any Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance shall contain appropriate provisions for enforcement, compensation, and protection of the public, consistent with the other provisions of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to, defining events of default, procedures for accessing the Bond/Security Fund, and rights of termination or revocation.
11-1-902. Force Majeure.
In the event a Provider's performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by this Ordinance or a Franchise is prevented by a cause or event not within a Provider's control, such inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the control of a Provider shall include, without limitation, acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, failure or loss of utilities, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires.
11-1-903. Extended Operation and Continuity of Services.
(a) Continuation After Expiration. Upon either expiration or revocation of a Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance, the City shall have discretion to permit a Provider to continue to operate its System or provide Services for an extended period of time not to exceed six (6) months from the date of such expiration or revocation. A Provider shall continue to operate its System under the terms and conditions of this Ordinance and the Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance.
(b) Continuation by Incumbent Local Exchange Carrier. If the Provider is the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall be permitted to continue to operate its System and provide Services without regard to revocation or expiration, but shall be obligated to negotiate a renewal in good faith.
220
11-1-904. Removal or Abandonment of Franchise Property.
(a) Abandoned System. In the event that (1) the use of any portion of the System is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, and thirty (30) days after no response to written notice from the City to the last known address of Provider; (2) any System has been installed in the Rights-of-Way without complying with the requirements of this Ordinance or Franchise; or (3) the provisions of Section 3.5 are applicable and no Franchise is granted, a Provider, except the Provider who is an incumbent local exchange carrier, shall be deemed to have abandoned such System.
(b) Removal of Abandoned System. The City, upon such terms as it may impose, may give a Provider written permission to abandon, without removing, any System, or portion thereof, directly constructed, operated or maintained under a Franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance, a Provider shall remove within a reasonable time the abandoned System and shall restore, using prudent construction standards, any affected Rights-of-Way to their former state at the time such System was installed, so as not to impair their usefulness. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, a Provider shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation necessarily made by it and shall leave all Rights-of-Way in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles or attachments. The City shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the Rights-of-Way cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this Ordinance and any security fund provided in a Franchise shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by a Provider with the terms and conditions of this Section.
(c) Transfer of Abandoned System to City. Upon abandonment of any System in place, a Provider, if required by the City, shall submit to the City a written instrument, satisfactory in form to the City, transferring to the City the ownership of the abandoned System.
(d) Removal of Above-Ground System. At the expiration of the term for which a Franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided for by this Ordinance, in any such case without renewal, extension or transfer, the City shall have the right to require a Provider to remove, at its expense, all above-ground portions of a System from the Rights-of-Way within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty (180) days. If the Provider is the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall not be required to remove its System, but shall negotiate a renewal in good faith.
(e) Leaving Underground System. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this Ordinance, a Provider may abandon any underground System in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the Rights-of-Way or with the use thereof by any public utility, cable operator or other Person.
Chapter 10: Obligation to Notify
11-1-1001. Publicizing Work.
Before entering onto any private property, a Provider shall make a good faith attempt to contact the property owners in advance, and describe the work to be performed.
Chapter 11: General Provisions
11-1-1101. Conflicts.
11-1-1102. Severability.
11-1-1103. New Developments.
11-1-1104. Notices.
11-1-1105. Exercise of Police Power.
221
11-1-1101. Conflicts.
In the event of a conflict between any provision of this Ordinance and a Franchise entered pursuant to it, the provisions of this Ordinance in effect at the time the Franchise is entered into shall control.
11-1-1102. Severability.
If any provision of this Ordinance is held by any federal, state or local court of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting with any federal or state statute, or is ordered by a court to be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law and all appellate remedies with regard to the validity of the Ordinance provisions in question are exhausted, such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct, and independent part of this Ordinance, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event that such law is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with such law the provision in question shall return to full force and effect and shall again be binding on the City and the Provider, provided that the City shall give the Provider thirty (30) days, or a longer period of time as may be reasonably required for a Provider to comply with such a rejuvenated provision, written notice of the change before requiring compliance with such provision.
11-1-1103. New Developments.
It shall be the policy of the City to liberally amend this Ordinance, upon Application of a Provider, when necessary to enable the Provider to take advantage of any developments in the field of Telecommunications which will afford the Provider an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently, or economically serve itself or the public.
11-1-1104. Notices.
All notices from a Provider to the City required under this Ordinance or pursuant to a Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance shall be directed to the officer as designated by the City Manager. A Provider shall provide in any Application for a Franchise the identity, address and phone number to receive notices from the City. A Provider shall immediately notify the City of any change in its name, address, or telephone number.
11-1-1105. Exercise of Police Power.
To the full extent permitted by applicable law either now or in the future, the City reserves the right to adopt or issue such rules, regulations, orders, or other directives that it finds necessary or appropriate in the lawful exercise of its police powers.
Chapter 12: Federal, State and City Jurisdiction
11-1-1201. Construction.
11-1-1202. Ordinance Applicability.
11-1-1203. Other Applicable Ordinances.
11-1-1204. City Failure to Enforce.
11-1-1205. Construed According to Utah Law.
11-1-1201. Construction.
This Ordinance shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state statutes.
222
11-1-1202. Ordinance Applicability.
This Ordinance shall apply to all Franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of this Ordinance. This Ordinance shall further apply, to the extent permitted by applicable federal or state law to all existing Franchises granted prior to the effective date of this Ordinance and to a Provider providing Services, without a Franchise, prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
11-1-1203. Other Applicable Ordinances.
A Provider's rights are subject to the police powers of the City to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the public. A Provider shall comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the City pursuant to its police powers. In particular, all Providers shall comply with the City zoning and other land use requirements.
11-1-1204. City Failure to Enforce.
A Provider shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance or any Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance by reason of any failure of the City to enforce prompt compliance.
11-1-1205. Construed According to Utah Law.
This Ordinance and any Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the substantive laws of the State of Utah.
Part 2: Cable Television.
11-2-101. Scope of Ordinance.
11-2-102. Legislative Intent.
11-2-103. Definitions.
11-2-104. Unlawful Activity.
11-2-105. Grant of Franchise.
11-2-106. Required Extensions of Service.
11-2-107. Two-Way Capability.
11-2-108. Procedure for Remedying Franchise Violations.
11-2-109. Alternative Remedies.
11-2-110. Franchise Fee.
11-2-111. Application for Franchise.
11-2-112. Application Fee.
11-2-101. Scope of Ordinance.
This Part applies only to the franchising of providers of cable television services.
11-2-102. Legislative Intent.
The City finds that the continuation and development of cable television and communications system has great benefit and impact upon the residents of Bountiful City. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the City further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the City or
223
such persons as the City shall designate. It is the City's intent to insure that City residents receive a high quality cable television service comparable to the best offered in any community in Davis County; that any inconvenience to residents in the development, operation, and maintenance of a cable system or systems be minimized; and that the City is properly compensated for the administration of cable television franchises and the use of the public rights of way.
11-2-103. Definitions.
"Cable Act" means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (Public Law No. 98-549, 47 USC 521 (Supp.)) as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992.
"Cable Communications System", "System", or "Systems", also referred to as "Cable Television System", "Cable System", "CATV System", or "Community Antenna TV System", shall have the meaning specified for "Cable Communications System" in the Cable Act.
"Grantee" means the party to whom the Franchise is granted, its agents, employees, lawful successors, transferees or assignees.
"Grantor" means Bountiful City.
"Gross Revenues" means all cash, credits, property of any kind or nature or other consideration received directly or indirectly by the Grantee, arising from or attributable to operation of the Cable Television System in the City.
11-2-104. Unlawful Activity.
(a) It is unlawful to operate a Cable Communications System within the City without first obtaining from the City a Franchise to do so.
(b) No Cable Communications System shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets of the City without a franchise.
(c) In addition to the criminal and civil remedies provided by Federal and State law, it is a misdemeanor for any person, firm or corporation to create or make use of any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with any part of the System without the express consent of the Grantee. It is a misdemeanor for any person to tamper with, remove, or injure any property, equipment, or part of the System or any means of receiving services provided thereto, without the express consent of the Grantee.
11-2-105. Grant of Franchise.
(a) Subject to the requirements of this ordinance, the City may grant to any Grantee a nonexclusive, revocable Franchise to construct, operate, maintain, and reconstruct a Cable Communications System within part or all of the City. The Franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the services of a Cable Communications System as required by the provisions of this ordinance.
(b) The material provisions of any franchises granted pursuant to this ordinance shall be comparable, in order that one operator not be granted an unfair competitive advantage over another, and to provide all parties equal protection under the law. The Franchising Authority shall not authorize or permit a System to operate within the Franchise area on terms or conditions more favorable or less burdensome to any one operator.
224
11-2-106. Required Extensions of Service.
(a) Grantee is hereby authorized to extend the Cable System as necessary, as desirable, or as required pursuant to the franchise agreement.
(b) No Subscriber shall be refused service arbitrarily.
11-2-107. Two-Way Capability.
(a) The Grantee shall design and construct the system in such a manner as to provide return response capability and so as to permit the introduction of return video and two way data signals as production technology allows and as the demand requires.
(b) Grantee shall assign and allocate to Bountiful an exclusive two-way Electronic Information Handling (EIH) downstream channel, and an EIH upstream channel.
11-2-108. Procedure for Remedying Franchise Violations.
(a) In the event that the City believes that Grantee has violated any provision of the Franchise, the City may make a written demand on Grantee that it remedy such violation. From delivery of such notice the Grantee shall (a) within 14 days, respond to the Franchising Authority, contesting the assertion of noncompliance, or (b) have 30 days to cure such default, or © in the event that, by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the 30-day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the Franchising Authority of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed.
If the Grantee fails to comply or the City believes the Grantee to still be not in compliance, and the alleged violation is of a significant material provision of the franchise, a meeting with the City Manager shall be held to review the alleged violation. If this meeting does not result in a satisfactory resolution, and/or Grantee requests a hearing, then a hearing shall be held, and Grantee shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard upon thirty (30) days written notice to Grantee of the time and the place of the hearing and the allegations of Franchise violations.
(1) Any hearing held will be conducted by the City Council.
(2) The costs incurred by the parties for attorney's fees, expert witness fees and other expenses
shall be borne solely by the party incurring the costs.
(3) All witnesses testifying at any hearing held pursuant to this section shall be sworn witnesses
and shall be subject to direct and cross-examination. However, formal rules of evidence applicable to the trial of civil and criminal proceedings in the trial courts of the State of Utah shall not be applicable to the hearing. The provisions of the Administrative Procedures Act, commencing at Section 63-46b-1, et. seq. U.C.A. 1953, as amended, or any successor legislative enactment, shall not be applicable to any such hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time.
(4) The City Council shall upon conclusion of the hearing prepare findings of fact and conclusions.
The decision shall be made filed and mailed to the Grantee not later than thirty (30) calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing.
(b) If, after the hearing, the City Council determines that a non-compliance occurred or still exists, then the City may impose a remedy including, without limitation:
225
(1) making the correction itself, and charging the cost to the Grantee;
(2) commencing an action at law for monetary damages, or seeking other equitable relief;
(3) requiring the filing of a financial performance instrument by the Grantee to insure future
performance; or
(4) in the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the Franchise, declaring the
Franchise terminated.
(c) If the decision by the City Council is that there are grounds for termination of the Franchise and that the Franchise shall be terminated, the City Council shall adopt a resolution which terminates the Franchise and includes its findings and conclusions. A copy of the resolution shall be mailed to the Grantee.
(d) The Grantee shall not be held in default or non-compliance with the provisions of the Franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating thereto, for such non-compliance or alleged defaults are caused by strikes, acts of God, power outages, or other events reasonably beyond its ability to control.
11-2-109. Alternative Remedies.
No provision of this ordinance shall be deemed to bar the right of the City to seek or obtain judicial relief from a violation of any provision of the Franchise or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated thereunder. Neither the existence of other remedies identified in this ordinance nor the exercise thereof shall be deemed to bar or otherwise limit the right of the City to recover monetary damages for such violation by the Grantee, or judicial enforcement of the Grantee's obligations by means of specific performance, injunction relief or mandate, or any other judicial remedy at law or in equity.
No provision of this ordinance shall be deemed to bar any rights the Grantee may have under law and the right to review of any decision by the City Council by a court of competent jurisdiction.
11-2-110. Franchise Fee.
(a) For the use of the streets and for the purposes of providing revenue with which to defray the costs or regulation arising out of the granting of this Franchise under this ordinance, Grantee shall pay a Franchise Fee.
(b) During the term of the Franchise, Grantee shall pay to the City an amount equal to five percent (5%) per year of the Grantee's annual Gross Revenue received.
(c) The Franchise Fee shall be paid quarterly forty-five (45) days after the end of each quarter. Each payment shall be accompanied by a report from a representative of the Grantee showing the basis for the computation.
(d) No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is, in fact, the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim which the City may have for further or additional sums payable under the provisions of this Section.
(e) Any Franchise Fees which remain unpaid after the dates specified in Section 7-1-135 above shall be delinquent and shall thereafter accrue interest at 18% until paid.
226
11-2-111. Application for Franchise.
(a) No initial cable television franchise shall be issued except upon written application to the City. Such forms shall contain such information as the City Council may prescribe as to the:
(1) Citizenship and character of the applicant.
(2) The financial, technical and other qualifications of the applicant to operate the system.
(3) Complete information as to its principals and ultimate beneficial owners, including, in the case
of corporations, all stockholders both nominal and beneficial owning 1% or more of the issued and outstanding stock, and in the case of incorporated associations, all members and ultimate beneficial owners however designated.
(4) Description in detail of the equipment or facilities proposed to be constructed, installed and
maintained.
(5) A statement or schedule setting forth the number of channels and all of the television or radio
stations proposed to be received, transmitted, conducted, relayed or otherwise conveyed over its system.
(6) Such other information as the City may deem appropriate or necessary.
Such application shall be signed by the applicant or a duly authorized representative.
(b) The City Council, after the last date fixed for the receipt of the application, shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City, a notice of a public hearing, giving the time, date, place of such hearing, and listing the names of the applicants and inviting public examination of the applicants and qualification of said applicants.
(c) A public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the standards of due process in fairness to applicants and the public and in accordance with the FCC rules and regulations and orders and policies pertinent to such hearing. Each applicant shall be notified of the time and location of his application to be considered.
(d) At the option of the City and upon application of the Grantee, any franchise granted under this chapter may be renewable in the same manner as required herein for obtaining an original franchise except those provisions which are by their terms expressly inapplicable. The City Council may, at its option, waive compliance with any or all of the requirements of this section. Any proceedings undertaken by the Franchising Authority that relate to the renewal of the Grantee's Franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of the Cable Act, as amended, unless the procedures and substantive protections set forth therein shall be deemed to be preempted and superseded by the provisions of any subsequent provision of federal or state law.
11-2-112. Application Fee.
Each initial application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable filing fee in the amount of $500.00.
227
Part 3: Pipeline Franchises
11-3-101. Scope of Part 3.
This Part 3 of Title 11 of the Bountiful City Code applies to pipelines that will be located inside the geographical limits of the City of Bountiful without providing direct local services to Bountiful residents or businesses on a general or widespread basis.
11-3-102. Franchise Required.
(a) A Franchise issued by the Bountiful City Council in the form of a Franchise Agreement is required to install any pipeline in a public street or public right of way or upon City-owned land, or to do any excavation or other construction work whatsoever in connection with such a pipeline.
(b) No person or entity shall locate pipelines in a public street or public right of way or upon City-owned land, or do any excavation or other construction work whatsoever, without first entering into a current Franchise agreement with the City. Any excavation, construction or other physical work done prior to the granting of a pipeline Franchise, or done inconsistently with any pipeline Franchise granted, is a class B misdemeanor, and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance which may be abated summarily or by legal action of the City.
11-3-103. Franchise Agreement.
The Bountiful City Council is authorized to enter into a Franchise Agreement with an applicant as it deems in the best interests of the City and its residents, subject to the provisions of the Bountiful City Code and applicable Federal and State law.
(a) If the proposed pipeline is not mandated by applicable Federal or State law, the City Council has the discretion to grant or deny the application as it deems appropriate.
(b) If the proposed pipeline is mandated by applicable Federal or State law, the City Council may in the Franchise Agreement attach such conditions as are necessary to protect the public interest, the citizens of Bountiful, and to comply with the Bountiful City Code and other applicable law.
(c) A Franchise Agreement shall have a term of not less than five years but not greater than fifteen years.
(d) The term "Franchise" means the rights and obligations granted by the City to a Franchisee to lease, construct, maintain, use or operate a pipeline in the public streets and public rights of way within the boundaries of the City, and upon City-owned lands within or beyond those boundaries. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, does not mean or include: (i) any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City required by the ordinances and laws of the City; (ii) any other permit, agreement or authorization required in connection with operations on public streets, public rights of way or public property including, without limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits or other structures, whether owned by the City or a private entity, or for excavating or performing other work in or along the rights of way.
(e) A Franchisee must comply with all provisions of the Franchise Agreement and with all other
228
requirements of the Bountiful City Code, including specifically Title 6 Chapter 9 concerning Excavation in Streets and Public Properties, construction codes, and other applicable Federal, State and Local laws and regulations.
11-3-104. Regulatory Approval Needed.
(a) Prior to any installation or construction pursuant to a Franchise Agreement, the Franchisee shall obtain any and all regulatory approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses required by law from the appropriate federal, state and local authorities, and shall submit to the City upon the written request of the City evidence of all such approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses.
(b) The Franchisee shall have the sole responsibility for diligently obtaining, at its own cost and expense, all permits, licenses or other forms of approval or authorization necessary to construct, maintain, upgrade or repair the pipeline. A Franchisee shall obtain any required permit, license, approval or authorization, including but not limited to excavation permits, pole attachment agreements, etc., prior to the commencement of the activity for which the permit, license, approval or authorization is required.
11-3-105. Nature of Franchise Granted.
(a) A Franchise does not convey title, equitable or legal, in the streets, rights of way or City-owned lands, to which it applies. A Franchise is only the right to occupy rights of way on a non-exclusive basis for the limited purposes and for the limited period stated in the Franchise; the right may not be subdivided, assigned, or subleased, except as may be expressly provided in the Franchise Agreement.
(b) Any pipeline Franchise granted is non-exclusive. Other Franchises may be granted to other entities.
(c) A Franchise and Franchise Agreement are non-transferrable without the express written approval of the Bountiful City Council, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
11-3-106. Compensation to the City.
(a) The City finds that the City should receive fair and reasonable compensation for permitting persons and entities to use the streets, public rights of way and City-owned lands, including lease compensation, reimbursement for actual costs incurred, and payment for staff time spent in administering and in connection with such Franchises and uses.
(b) As fair and reasonable compensation for any Franchise granted, a Franchisee shall pay to the City the following:
(i) Application Fee. In order to offset the cost to the City to review an application for a Franchise and in addition to all other fees, permits or charges, a Franchisee shall pay to the City, at the time of application, $5,000 as a non-refundable application fee.
(ii) Lease Fee. A lease fee shall be set forth in the Franchise Agreement, which shall be compensation for the privilege and advantage of using the ground within the public streets, public rights of way, and City-owned lands. The Franchisee shall pay the Lease Fee annually in advance, due no later than January 15th of each year.
229
(iii) Reimbursement of Costs. The Franchisee shall reimburse to the City all costs actually incurred by the City in connection with the pipeline, the Franchise Agreement, and the ongoing supervision and administration of the pipeline and its construction and installation. This includes payments to third parties for consultation, services rendered, supplies required, and all management costs for the reasonable, direct and actual costs incurred in exercising authority over the public streets, public rights of way and City-owned lands. The Franchisee shall pay such costs within 45 days of being billed.
(iv) Reimbursement of City Staff Time. The Franchisee shall reimburse to the City the full cost of staff time spent in connection with the pipeline, the Franchise Agreement, and the ongoing supervision and administration of the pipeline and its construction and installation. This includes all management costs for the reasonable, direct and actual costs incurred in exercising authority over the public streets, public rights of way and City-owned lands. The Franchisee shall pay such costs within 45 days of being billed.
(c) No acceptance by the City of any fee shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of such fee payment be construed as a release of any claim the City may have for additional sums payable.
11-3-107. Compensation to Other Entities.
The Franchisee shall pay all costs incurred by other entities with existing facilities in the public streets and public rights of way for the removal, relocation, and/or replacement of those facilities in order to accommodate the installation of any pipeline and its appurtenances under a Franchise.
11-3-108. Power to Manage Public Streets and Public Rights of way.
(a) The City asserts full power to manage the public streets, public rights of way and City-owned lands, pursuant to common law and case law, the United States and Utah Constitution, the Utah Code, and the Bountiful City Code.
(b) The City shall direct specifically where and how pipelines are to be located within the public streets, public rights of way and City-owned lands. This includes pipelines and all related appurtenances and support structures and work.
(c) All plans for work to be done within public streets, public rights of way and City-owned lands must be reviewed and approved in advance by the City. No excavation or construction work whatsoever shall be commenced until approval has been granted.
(d) All work within public streets, public rights of way and City-owned lands must be done in compliance with the plans approved by the City.
(e) The City shall have the right to oversee, regulate and inspect the construction, maintenance, and upgrade of the pipeline, and any part thereof. A Franchisee shall establish and maintain managerial and operational records, standards, procedures and controls to enable a Franchisee to prove, in reasonable detail, to the satisfaction of the City at all times, that the Franchisee is in compliance with the Franchise.
(f) The Franchisee shall at all times maintain on file with the City, a full and complete set of plans, records and "as-built" hard copy maps and, to the extent the maps are placed in an electronic format,
230
they shall be made in electronic format compatible with the City's existing GIS system, of all existing and proposed installations and the types of equipment and Pipelines installed or constructed in the public streets, public rights of way and on City-owned lands, properly identified and described as to the types of equipment and facility by appropriate symbols and marks which shall include annotations of all rights of ways where work will be undertaken. As used herein, “as-built” maps includes “file construction prints.” Maps shall be drawn to scale. "As-built" maps, including the compatible electronic format, as provided above, shall be submitted within 30 days of completion of work or within 30 days after completion of modification and repairs. “As- built” maps are not required of the Franchisee who is the incumbent local exchange carrier for the existing pipeline to the extent they do not exist.
11-3-109. Construction Work.
(a) Quality. All work performed by the Franchisee under the Franchise Agreement and the requirements of the Bountiful City Code, including the construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade and removal of any pipeline, shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner using materials of good and durable quality, and shall be performed by qualified and licensed construction and maintenance personnel. All work and materials shall be in conformity with all applicable Federal, State and City law.
(b) Protection of Structures. In connection with the construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of a pipeline, the Franchisee shall, at its own cost and expense, protect any and all existing structures belonging to the City and other entities. A Franchisee shall obtain the prior written consent of the City to alter any water main, power facility, sewerage or drainage system, or any other municipal structure on, over or under the rights of way of the City required because of the presence of the pipeline. Any such alteration shall be made by the City or its designee on a reimbursable basis. A Franchisee shall pay the costs incurred by the City to replace or repair and restore to its prior condition in a manner as may be reasonably specified by the City, any municipal structure or any other public streets or public rights of way of the City involved in the construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the pipeline that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of any work thereon by or on behalf of the Franchisee.
(c) Obstruction. In connection with the construction, maintenance, upgrade, repair or removal of a pipeline, the Franchisee shall not unreasonably obstruct the public streets or public rights of way without the prior consent of the appropriate authorities.
(d) Safety. A Franchisee shall, at its own cost and expense, undertake all necessary and appropriate efforts to prevent accidents at its work sites, including the placing and maintenance of proper guards, fences, barricades, security personnel and suitable and sufficient lighting, and such other requirements prescribed by OSHA and Utah OSHA. A Franchisee shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local requirements.
11-3-110. Insurance.
(a) Prior to the execution of a Franchise, a Franchsiee will deposit with the City an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit or surety bond as required by the terms of the Franchise, and shall obtain and provide proof of the insurance coverage required by the Franchise.
(b) No work shall be permitted in the public streets, the public rights of way or on City-owned lands until a construction completion bond, in a form and by an institution satisfactory to the City, has
231
been provided by the Franchisee. This bond shall be a cash or surety bond in the amount of 100% of the total cost of the installation of the pipeline, the moving of other facilities to accommodate the pipeline, the closure, paving and restoration of the street, and all other costs associated in fulfillment of the requirements of the Franchise Agreement and applicable law, in the manner shown on the approved engineering drawings and in accordance with the City's specifications.
(c) The Franchisee and all work done by the contractors, subcontractors and agents of the Franchisee must be insured as to comprehensive general liability, and give evidence thereof, in an amount reasonably related to the scope of the work to be completed and the risks thereof, as required in the Franchise Agreement. Such amounts shall at a minimum be $2,000,000 / $2,000,000, but may be more as required by the City in the Franchise Agreement. The insurance must indemnify the City against all liability for personal and bodily injury, death, and damage to property arising from activities conducted pursuant to the Franchise. The City, its officials, employees and agents, shall be listed as additional insureds.
11-3-111. Indemnification.
The Franchisee shall indemnify Bountiful City, its officials, employees and agents, from any and all liability whatsoever from activities conducted pursuant to the Franchise.
232
Chapter 4: Wireless Facilities in the Public Right of Way
11-4-101. Scope and Purpose.
11-4-102. Authority.
11-4-103. Applicability.
11-4-104. Definitions.
11-4-105. Orders, Rules, and Regulations.
11-4-106. Master License Agreement Required.
11-4-107. Use of Right of Way for Small Wireless Facilities and Utility Poles.
11-4-108. Design Standards.
11-4-109. Additional Requirements.
11-4-110. Permitting, Application, and Review Process.
11-4-111. Damage and Repair.
11-4-112. Enforcement and Remedies; Abandonment and/or Removal.
11-4-101 Scope and Purpose.
This Chapter 4 of Title 11 of the Bountiful City Code applies to Small Wireless Facilities in the City’s public Right-of-Way. The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate the installation, construction, operation, co-location, modification, maintenance, and removal of Small Wireless Facilities in the City’s public Right-of-Way, balancing the benefit of wireless services with other established goals, objectives and values of the City while promoting and protecting the public health, safety and welfare of the citizenry and the general public.
11-4-102 Authority.
In accordance with Federal and State law, the City may exercise zoning, land use, planning, placement and permitting authority with respect to wireless support structures and utility poles. To the fullest extent allowed under Federal and State law, rules and regulations, the City reserves the right to regulate zoning, land use, planning, placement and permitting related to wireless communication facilities.
11-4-103 Applicability.
All references to Small Wireless Facilities in this Chapter shall refer only to Small Wireless Facilities in the Right-of-Way. No person shall install, construct, modify, or otherwise place any Small Wireless Facility within the public Right-of-Way in violation of the provisions of this Chapter. In the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the City, its citizens, and the general public, no Small Wireless Facilities shall be collocated on any power, traffic or directional poles within the City. The definitions used in this Chapter apply only to this Chapter.
11-4-104 Definitions.
Antenna – Communications equipment that transmits or receives an electromagnetic radio frequency signal used in the provision of a wireless service.
Applicant – A wireless provider who submits an application.
233
Application – A request submitted by a wireless provider to the City for a permit to collocate a Small Wireless Facility in the Right-of-Way or install, modify, or replace a Utility Pole or Wireless Support Structure.
Authority Pole – A Utility Pole owned, managed, or operated by, or on behalf of, the City.
Collocate – To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace a Small Wireless Facility on a Wireless Support Structure or Utility Pole, or, ground-mounted equipment, adjacent to a Wireless Support Structure or Utility Pole.
Decorative pole – An Authority Pole that is specially designed and placed for an aesthetic purpose and on which attachments are prohibited (other than Small Wireless Facilities, informal or directional signs, or temporary holiday or special event attachments).
Design District – An area that is zoned or otherwise designated by the City as an area of historic or other significance for which the City maintains and enforces unique design and standards. The area of 100 South Bountiful Boulevard to 800 South Bountiful Boulevard and Temple View Drive shall be known as the Bountiful Temple Design District.
Gross Revenue – Means the same as gross receipts from telecommunications services as defined in Utah Code Ann. § 10-1-402.
Historic District – A group of buildings, properties, or sites that are listed in the National Register of Historic Places, formally determined eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places by the Keeper of the National Register, or in an historic district or area created under Utah Code Ann. § 10-9a-503.
Master License Agreement – An agreement between a provider and the City that sets forth general terms and conditions pursuant to which the provider may install and operate small wireless facilities in the Right-of-Way.
Micro Wireless Facility – A type of Small Wireless Facility that, not including any antenna, is no larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height on which any exterior antenna is no longer than 11 inches and only provides Wi-Fi service.
Permit – Written authorization required by the City and issued under this Chapter for construction, excavation or other work in, or obstruction of, the public Right-of-Way allowing a wireless provider to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project, subject to the terms of this Chapter and a Master License Agreement.
Right-of-Way – Includes the areas on, below or above all public highways, roadways, streets, roads, sidewalks, alleys, dedicated Rights-of-Way, owned by or dedicated for public use or dedicated to the City. It does not include utility or other easements not located within the above described areas.
Small Wireless Facility – A wireless facility on which each wireless provider’s antenna could fit within an enclosure of no more than six cubit feet in volume, and for which all wireless equipment associated with the wireless facility, whether ground-mounted or pole-mounted, is cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume, not including any electric meter, concealment element,
234
telecommunications demarcation box, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, vertical cable run for the connection of power or other service, wireless provider antenna, or coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular collocation, unless the cable is a wireline backhaul facility. If more than one Small Wireless Facility is collocated on a structure, the facilities together shall collectively not exceed the total size dimensions described herein.
Substantial Modification – A proposed modification or replacement to an existing Wireless Support Structure that will substantially change the physical dimensions of the wireless support structure under the substantial change standard established in 47 C.F.R. Sec. 1.40001(7) or a proposed modification in excess of the site dimensions specified in 47 C.F.R. Part 1, Appendix C, Sec. III.B.
Utility Pole – A pole or similar structure that is in a Right-of-Way and is or may be used for: wireline communications, electric distribution, lighting, or the collocation of a Small Wireless Facility. Utility pole does not include traffic control signs, street signs, a Wireless Support Structure, a structure that supports electric transmission lines, or electric power poles owned by the City.
Wireless Facility – Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communication between user equipment and a communications network, including equipment associated with wireless communications regardless of the technological configuration, a radio transceiver, an antenna, a coaxial or fiber-optic cable, a regular or backup power supply, or comparable equipment. A Wireless Facility does not include the structure or an improvement on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or a coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is: (i) between wireless structures or utility poles; (ii) not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna; or (iii) a wireline backhaul facility.
Wireless Provider – A wireless infrastructure provider or wireless service provider.
Wireless Service – Any service using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a wireless facility. “Wireless Service” includes the use of Wi-Fi.
Wireless Support Structure – An existing or proposed structure that is in the Right-of-Way and designed to support or capable of supporting a wireless facility, including a monopole, tower, either guyed or self-supporting, billboard or building. A Wireless Support Structure does not include: a structure designed solely for the collocation of a Small Wireless Facility, utility pole, City owned structure that supports electric lines used for the provision of municipality electric service, or structure owned by the City that uses electric lines that are used for the provision of electrical service.
11-4-105 Orders, Rules and Regulations.
In addition to the requirements set forth in this Chapter, the City may adopt orders, rules and regulations which are reasonably necessary to accomplish the purposes of and are consistent with this Chapter.
235
11-4-106 Master License Agreement Required
(a) A wireless provider may not install, repair, maintain, remove and replace wireless facilities in the Right-of-Way without first entering into a master license agreement with the City.
(b) The City is empowered and authorized to grant nonexclusive master license agreements on a nondiscriminatory basis, governing the installation, operation, use and maintenance of wireless facilities in the City’s rights of way that are consistent with the provisions of this Chapter.
(c) The City may negotiate additional or different terms with the different wireless providers, in the exercise of City’s reasonable discretion and pursuant to the City’s police powers and proprietary rights in the Rights-of-Way.
(d) The City shall grant a master license agreement to a wireless provider pursuant to ordinance authorizing the negotiation and execution of a master license agreement. Acceptance of the master license shall occur by the wireless provider executing the authorized master license agreement within 30 days of recordation of the authorizing ordinance. Any amendment or extension thereof will also require City council approval.
(e) The term of a master license agreement may be renewed if the wireless provider is in compliance with the master license agreement and all applicable laws, rules, and regulations, including this Chapter. At the expiration of the term of the master license agreement, the wireless provider shall remove its wireless facilities from the Right-of-Way.
(f) If a wireless provider has telecommunications systems that may be used for multiple purposes, such as a wireline backhaul facility or video services system, then such provider shall obtain a franchise or other relevant agreement from the City for each permitted purpose.
(g) Before offering or providing any wireless services pursuant to the master license agreement, a wireless provider shall obtain all other regulatory approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses for the offering or providing of such services from the appropriate Federal, State, and local authorities, if required, and shall submit to the City evidence of the same. If such regulatory approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses cannot be obtained until after a permit is issued from the City, provider shall inform the City in writing and such regulatory approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses may be waived until after issuance of the permit from the City. If nay portion is herein is waived, provider shall still be required to provide such proof of regulatory approvals, permits, authorizations, or licenses after a permit is issued by the City.
(f) The grant of a master license agreement does not excuse the wireless provider from obtaining (i) any permit or other authorization required to engage in or carry on any business within the City as required by the laws, rules, and regulations of the City, (ii) any other permit, agreement or authorization required in connection with the use of property or facilities owned by third parties, or (iii) any other permit or authorization required in connection with excavating or performing other work in or along the Right-of-Way.
(g) Any wireless provider acting without a master license agreement on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter shall request issuance of a master license agreement from the City within 90 days of the effective date of this Ordinance. If such request is made, the wireless
236
provider may continue to provide services during the course of negotiations. If a timely request is not made, or if a master license agreement is not granted, the wireless provider shall remove its equipment from the Right-of-Way within 30 days of notice from the City.
(h) A master license agreement shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in the Right-of-Way. A master license agreement is the right to non-exclusively occupy the Right-of-Way for the limited purposes and time period stated in the agreement.
(i) A master license agreement granted pursuant to this Chapter shall contain appropriate provisions for enforcement, compensation, and protection of the public, consistent with the other provisions of this Chapter, including, but not limited to, defining events of default, procedures for accessing the bond/security fund, and rights of termination or revocation.
(j) In the event a wireless provider continues to operate all or any of its wireless facilities after the terms of the master license has expired, such wireless provider shall continue to comply with all applicable provisions of this Chapter and the master license agreement, including, without limitation, all compensation provisions; provided, that any such continued operations shall in no way be construed as a renewal or other extension of the master license agreement, nor as a limitation on the remedies available to the City as a result of such continued operation after the term, including, but not limited to, damages and restitution.
11-4-107 Use by Right-of-Way for Small Wireless Facilities and Utility Poles
(a) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter and the issuance of a permit, a Wireless Provider may:
(1) Collocate a Small Wireless Facility;
(2) Install, operate, modify, maintain or replace:
(a) a Utility Pole associated with the Wireless Provider’s collection of Small Wireless Facilities;
(b) Equipment required for a Wireless Provider’s Collocation of Small Wireless Facilities; or
(c) Authority Pole with the wireless provider’s collection of Small Wireless Facilities.
(3) Except, an Applicant may not install a new Utility Pole in a Right-of-Way without the City’s discretionary, nondiscriminatory, and written consent, if the Right-of-Way is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is:
(a) not more than 60 feet wide, as depicted in the official plat records;
(b) adjacent to single-family residential lots, other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by master plan, zoning or deed restrictions.
237
(b) Small Wireless Facilities and new, modified, and replacement Utility Poles, Authority Poles and Wireless Support Structures in the Right-of-Way shall be allowed in any zoning district after staff review and approval in accordance with the standards set forth in this Chapter.
(c) A Small Wireless Facility, Utility Pole or Authority Pole may not:
(1) obstruct or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a Right-of-Way;
(2) obstruct, damage, or interfere with another utility facility in a Right-of-Way or a utility's use of the utility's facility in a Right-of-Way or the clear view area of any public or private driveway or drive approach.
(d) Construction and maintenance by the Wireless Provider shall comply with all applicable legal obligations for the protection of underground and overhead utility facilities.
11-4-108 Design Standards.
(a) Integrated Design. The design and location of a Small Wireless Facility, Utility Pole, and/or Wireless Support Structure shall comply with all standards adopted by the City. Small Wireless Facilities shall be architecturally integrated into the Wireless Support Structure and shall be installed in a manner that prioritizes and minimizes the visual impact. Small Wireless Facilities should not be readily noticed. Exposed cabling is prohibited, except for Collocations on existing structures where internal cable routing is not feasible (e.g., on a wooden pole). To the extent reasonably feasible from an engineering, construction and design perspective, the application shall consider the surrounding colors, materials, and architectural features to ensure that the design of the new facility is compatible with the surrounding area and the goals of the City.
(b) Height Limitations. A new or modified Utility Pole or Authority Pole that has a collocated Small Wireless Facility may not exceed 50 feet above ground level. An antenna of a Small Wireless Facility that is attaching to an existing Utility Pole may not extend more than 10 feet above the top of a Utility Pole.
(c) Decorative Poles. If necessary to collocate a Small Wireless Facility, a Wireless Provider may replace a decorative pole, if the replacement pole reasonably conforms to the design aesthetic of the displaced decorative pole.
(d) Historic and Design Districts.
(1) A wireless provider shall participate in a pre-application meeting with the City’s Planning Staff and obtain design approval from the City before collocating a new Small Wireless Facility or installing a new Utility Pole in an area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a Historic District or a Design District. The pre-application meeting shall be included in any time frames set forth for review of the application by the City.
(2) All Small Wireless Facilities in Historic or Design Districts shall, to the extent possible, use design techniques including, but not limited to the use of materials, colors, textures, screening, undergrounding, or other design options that will blend the Small Wireless Facilities to the surrounding natural setting and built environment. Design, materials and colors of Small Wireless Facilities shall be compatible with the surrounding environment.
238
Designs shall be compatible with structures and vegetation located in the Right-of-Way and on adjacent parcels.
(3) Should the Director determine that such design meets the intent of this Code and the community is better served thereby, the design may include the use of man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, buildings, and similar alternative design mounting structures that are compatible with the natural setting and surrounding structures, and camouflage or conceals the presence of Antennas or Poles so as to make them architecturally compatible with the surrounding area pursuant to this Chapter.
(4) All visible exterior surfaces on all Small Wireless Facilities shall be constructed out of or finished with non-reflective materials.
(5) Subject to the permit process set forth in this Chapter, the City may require a reasonable, technically feasible, nondiscriminatory, or technologically neutral design or concealment measure in an historic district or design district, unless the facility is excluded from evaluation for effects on historic properties under 47 C.F.R. Sec. 1.1307(a)(4).
(6) No above ground wireless facilities or poles shall be installed in the Bountiful Temple Design District.
(e) Aesthetics. Small Wireless Facilities shall not be lighted or marked unless required by an applicable governmental authority. Signs located at the Small Wireless Facilities shall be limited to ownership and contact information, FCC antenna registration number (if required) and any other information as required by an applicable governmental authority. Commercial advertising is strictly prohibited.
(f) Undergounding. All new fiber backhaul lines, electrical distribution lines, wires, cables, or other facilities serving Small Wireless Facilities must be located underground, however antennas or other facilities required to remain above ground in order to be functional are permitted as approved by the City.
11-4-109 Additional Requirements.
(a) Insurance and bonding: A wireless provider will be responsible for carrying and maintaining insurance and bonds as may be required in the master license agreement and in connection with obtaining a permit.
(b) Indemnity: A wireless provider shall indemnify, save harmless, and defend City, its officers and employees, from and against all losses, claims, counterclaims, demands, actions, damages, costs, charges, and causes of action of every kind or character, including attorneys’ fees, arising out of or in connection with such provider’s wireless facilities or use of the Right-of-Way, unless and to the extent caused by the City’s negligence.
239
(c) Electrical Service: A wireless provider will be solely responsible for establishing electrical power services for to each of its wireless facilities and for the payment of all electrical utility charges to the City.
(d) Inspections: All wireless facilities and wireless provider-owned structures shall be maintained by the wireless provided in a clean and good condition, free of graffiti, and rusting, excessive dirt, and peeling paint. The City shall have the authority to conduct inspections of the wireless facilities and structures at any time to determine whether such facilities and structures comply with the requirements of this Chapter. The City shall notify provider in writing of any failed inspections and provide 30 days to provider to remedy any failed inspection. If provider fails to remedy any failed inspection, the City may remedy any defect and provider shall pay to the City the actual costs incurred by the City along with any administrative penalties set forth by the City.
(e) Compliance with law: All Small Wireless Facilities must at all times comply with all applicable federal, state, and local building codes and safety codes and regulations. All Small Wireless Facilities and structures shall be constructed and installed to manufacturer’s specifications.
(f) Hazardous Materials. Provider shall not possess, use, generate, release, discharge, store, dispose of, or transport any hazardous materials on, under, in, above, to, or from any Right-of-Way except in compliance with all applicable environmental laws and pre-approved by City. Wireless provider shall promptly reimburse City for any fines or penalties levied against c because of wireless provider’s failure to comply with environmental laws.
(g) Provider shall follow all City Ordinances regarding insurance, bonding, and any other requirement applicable to other entities utilizing the the Right-of-Way.
(h) Additional requirements: Wireless facilities will be subject to any additional requirements set forth in the applicable master license agreement and permit.
11-4-110 Permitting, Application, and Review Process.
(a) All Applicants shall be required to obtain a permit to Collocate a Small Wireless Facility in a Right-of-Way or to install a new, modified, or replacement Utility Pole, Authority Pole or Wireless Support Structure associated with a Small Wireless Facility in a Right-of-Way.
(b) City staff is authorized and empowered to create any necessary forms, rules, regulations and requirements consistent with this Chapter that are necessary to assist the City in the permitting, application and review process.
(b) All Applications shall contain the following:
(1) Application form signed by the Applicant or authorized representative;
(2) Zoning and construction drawings;
(3) Application fee;
(4) An industry-standard pole load analysis indicating that the structure on which the wireless facilities will be mounted will safely support the load. If a small wireless facility
240
cannot be safely installed on the respective structure, applicant shall either replace the structure with a compliant structure of the same type, or propose a new location;
(5) A photograph of each proposed location showing the condition of the location before construction and installation;
(6) Proof or evidence of insurance as required by applicable City Ordinance or the master license agreement or any other agreement with the City; and
(7) An affidavit that the installation or collocation of the Small Wireless Facility shall be completed within 270 days after the day on which the City issues the permit.
(c) Application Fees. The application fee for the co-location of a Small Wireless Facility on an existing or replacement Utility Pole shall be $100 for each Small Wireless Facility on the same application. The application fee to install, modify or replace a Utility Pole associated with a Small Wireless Facility shall be $250 per application.
(d) Procedure for Review of Applications
(1) Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of an application for Review for the collocation of Small Wireless Facility or new, modified or replacement Utility Pole or Authority Pole, the City shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the Applicant in writing.
(2) If the City determines the application is incomplete, the City shall specifically identify the missing information in the written notification. The processing deadline shall be tolled from the day on which the City sends the Applicant the written notice to the day on which the City receives the Applicant’s missing information or for a mutually agreeable period of time as identified in a written agreement between the Applicant and the City.
(3) Expiration of Application. An Application for a Small Wireless Facility expires if the City notifies the Wireless Provider that the Wireless Provider’s Application is incomplete, in accordance with Subsection (2) and the Wireless Provider fails to respond within 90 days after the day on which the City notifies the wireless provider.
(e) Decision. The City shall approve or deny an Application for the Collocation of a Small Wireless Facility, within 60 days after the day on which the City receives the complete Application and for a new, modified, or replacement Utility Pole, within 105 days after the day on which the City receives the complete Application. If the City fails to approve or deny the Application within the applicable time period the Application is deemed approved.
(f) Denial of Application.
(1) The City may deny an Application to collocate a Small Wireless Facility or to install, modify, or replace a Utility Pole, only if the action requested in the Application:
(a) materially interferes with the safe operation of traffic control equipment;
(b) materially interferes with a sight line or a clear view area for transportation or pedestrians;
241
(c) materially interferes with compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. Sec. 12101 et seq., or a similar federal or state standard regarding pedestrian access or movement;
(d) fails to comply with the requirements set forth in this Code;
(e) creates a public health or safety hazard; or
(f) obstructs or hinders the usual travel or public safety of the Right-of-Way.
(g) If the City denies an application, the City shall document the basis for the denial, including any specific law on which the denial is based and send written notification informing the Applicant of the denial, including the basis for the denial.
(h) Resubmission of Application. Within 30 days after the day on which the City denies an Application, the Applicant may, without paying an additional application fee cure any deficiency the City identifies in the Applicant's Application and resubmit the Application. The City shall approve or deny a revised Application within 30 days after the day on which the City receives the revised Application.
(1) Review of a revised Application is limited to the deficiencies documented as the basis for denial unless the Applicant has changed another portion of the Application.
(i) Consolidated Applications. If an Applicant seeks to Collocate multiple Small Wireless Facilities within the City, the City shall allow the Applicant, at the Applicant’s discretion, to file a consolidated Application for the Collocation of up to 25 Small Wireless Facilities, if all of the Small Wireless Facilities in the consolidated Application are substantially the same type and proposed for collocation on substantially the same types of structures, or install, modify, or replace multiple Utility Poles within the City, the City shall allow the Applicant, at the Applicant’s discretion, to file a consolidated Application for the installation, modification, or replacement of up to 25 Utility Poles.
(1) A consolidated Application may not combine Applications solely for collocation of Small Wireless Facilities on existing Utility Poles with Applications for the installation, modification, or replacement of a Utility Pole.
(2) If the City denies the application for one or more Utility Poles, or one or more Small Wireless Facilities, in a consolidated application, the City may not use the denial as a basis to delay the application process of any other Utility Pole or Small Wireless Facility in the same consolidated Application.
(3) An applicant may not file within a 30-day period more than one consolidated application or multiple applications that collectively seek permits for a combined total of more than 25 Small Wireless Facilities and Utility Poles.
242
(j) Exceptions to Permitting. Except as otherwise provided herein or in a master license agreement, applications for permits are not required for routine maintenance of the Small Wireless Facility or support structures for the Small Wireless Facility unless it interferes with pedestrian or vehicular traffic or affects the health, safety or welfare of the City.
11-4-111 Damage and Repair
If a Wireless Provider's activity causes damage to a pole or Right-of-Way, the Wireless Provider shall repair the pole or Right-of-Way to substantially the same condition as before the damage. If a Wireless Provider fails to make a repair required by the City within a reasonable time after written notice, the City may make the required repair; and charge the Wireless Provider the reasonable, documented, actual cost for the repair. If the damage causes an urgent safety hazard, the City may immediately make the necessary repair and charge the Wireless Provider the reasonable, documented, cost for the repair.
11-4-112 Enforcement and Remedies; Abandonment and/or Removal
(a) Enforcement: The City is responsible for enforcing and administering this Chapter. The City or its designee is authorized to give any notice required by law or under any master license agreement or permit. Failure of City to require performance of any term in this Chapter or the waiver by either party of breach hereof shall not prevent subsequent enforcement of that term and shall not be deeded a waiver of any subsequent breach.
(b) Abandonment and/or Removal of wireless facilities:
(1) In the event (a) the use of a wireless facility is discontinued for a continuous period of 12 months, (b) the term of the applicable master license agreement has expired, or (c) any wireless facility or structure has been installed in the Rights-of-Way without complying with the requirements of this Chapter, and the respective wireless facilities have not been removed by the wireless provider within 30 days of any such event, such wireless provider shall be deemed to have abandoned such wireless facility.
(2) If any wireless facility is deemed abandoned or installed without complying with the requirements of this Chapter, the wireless provider shall remove its wireless facilities and structures within 60 days of the City’s notice of such abandonment and shall repair and restore the Right-of-Way to a similar or better condition than at the time of the installation. Failure to do so may result in the City’s removal of the facilities and structures at the wireless provider’s cost. The City shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the Right-of-Way, wireless facilities, and structures prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this Chapter and any security required of a wireless provider shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by a provider with the terms and conditions of this Chapter.
(c) Transfer and/or Acknowledgment of Abandoned System: Upon abandonment of any system, a provider, if required by the City, shall submit to the City a written instrument, in a form satisfactory to the City, transferring to the City the ownership of the abandoned system or, as the City may request, acknowledging abandonment of the system.
243
Title 12
Revenue and Taxation
Chapter 1: Sales and Use Tax Ordinance
Chapter 2: Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax
Chapter 3: Telecommunications Service Tax.
Chapter 4: RAP Tax
Chapter 1: Sales and Use Tax Ordinance
12-1-101. Title.
12-1-102. Sales and Use Tax.
12-1-103. Penalties.
12-1-101. Title.
This ordinance shall be known as the "Sales and Use Tax Ordinance of the City of Bountiful.
12-1-102. Sales and Use Tax.
(a) (1) There is levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax upon every retail sale of tangible personal property, services and meals made within the municipality at the rate of one percent.
(2) An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in this municipality of tangible personal property from any retailer on or after the operative date of this ordinance at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property.
(3) For the purpose of this ordinance all retail sales shall be presumed to have been consummated at the place of business delivered by the retailer of his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be as determined under the rules and regulations prescribed by and adopted by the State Tax Commission. Public utilities as defined by Title 54, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, shall not be obligated to determined the place or places within any county or municipality where public utilities services are rendered, but the place of sale or the sales tax revenue by the State Tax Commission pursuant to an appropriate formula and other rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by it.
(b) (1) Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of the Sales and Use Tax Act, all of the provisions of Chapter 12, Title 59, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, and in force and affect on the effective date of this ordinance, insofar as they relate to sales taxes, excepting Sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof, are hereby adopted and made a part of the ordinance as thought fully set forth herein.
(2) Wherever, and to the extent that in Chapter 12 of Title 59, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, the State of Utah is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this municipality shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in subparagraph (b) shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the municipality for the word "State" when the word is used as part of the title of the State Tax Commission, or of the Constitution of the State of Utah, nor shall the name of the municipality be
244
substituted for that of the State in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the municipality or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Tax Commission in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of the ordinance.
(3) If an annual license has been issued to a retailer under Section 59-12-106 of the said Utah Code Annotated, 1953, an additional license shall not be required by reason of the section.
(4) There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or changed by which the tax is measured:
(A) The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of Utah upon a retailer or consumer;
(B) The gross receipts from the sale of or the cost of storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property upon which a sales or use tax has become due by reason of the sale transaction to any other municipality and any county in the State of Utah, under the sales or use tax ordinance enacted by that county or municipality in accordance with the Sales and Use Tax Act.
12-1-103. Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Chapter 2: Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax
12-2-101. Purpose.
12-2-102. Definitions.
12-2-103. Tax Imposed.
12-2-104. Exemptions from the Tax.
12-2-105. No Effect upon Existing Agreements.
12-2-106. Tax Collection Contract with the State Tax Commission.
12-2-107. Adoption of Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 1, and Amendments.
12-2-108. No Additional License Required.
12-2-101. Purpose.
It is the intent of the City of Bountiful to provide both a stable revenue source and create a more competitive environment for the energy industry by repealing its previous utilities franchise tax ordinance and adopting this municipal energy tax pursuant to and in conformity with the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax Act (§10-1-301 et seq of the Utah Code).
12-2-102. Definitions.
The City of Bountiful incorporates by reference those definitions contained in §10-1-303 of the Utah Code. In addition, the following definitions are adopted:
“Consumer” means a person who acquires taxable energy for any use that is subject to the Municipal Energy Sales and use Tax.
“Sale” means any transfer of title, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner, of taxable energy for a consideration. It includes: (1) installment and credit sales; (2) any closed transaction
245
constituting a sale; and (3) any transaction under which a right to acquire, use or consume taxable energy is granted under a lease or contract and the transfer would be taxable if any outright sale were made.
“Storage” means any keeping or retention of taxable energy in the City of Bountiful for any purpose except sale in the regular course of business.
“Use” means the exercise of any right or power over taxable energy incident to the ownership or the leasing of the taxable energy. “Use” does not include the sale, display, demonstration or trial of the taxable energy in the regular course of business and held for resale.
12-2-103. Tax Imposed.
(a) There is hereby imposed on every sale or use of taxable energy within the City of Bountiful a tax equaling 6% of the delivered value of taxable energy to the consumer. This tax shall be known as the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax.
(b) The tax shall be calculated on the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer.
(c) The tax shall be in addition to any sales or use tax on taxable energy imposed by the City of Bountiful authorized by Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 2 of the Utah Code Annotated, The Local Sales and Use Tax Act.
12-2-104. Exemptions from the Tax.
(a) No exemptions are granted from the Municipal Energy Sales and Use tax except as expressly provided in Utah Code Ann. §10-1-305(2)(b); notwithstanding an exemption granted by §59-1-104 of the Utah Code.
(b) The exemptions provided in §10-1-305(2)(b) of the Utah Code are hereby adopted as exemptions from the Bountiful Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax.
(c) The sale, storage, use or other consumption of taxable energy is exempt from the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax levied herein, provided: (1) the delivered value of the taxable energy has been subject to a municipal energy sales or use tax levied by another municipality with the States authorized by Title 59, Title 12, Part 3 of the Utah Code; and (2) the City of Bountiful is paid the difference between the tax paid to the other municipality and the tax that would otherwise be due under this ordinance, if the tax due under this ordinance exceeds the tax paid to the other municipality.
12-2-105. No Effect upon Existing Franchises.
(a) This chapter shall not alter any existing franchise agreements between the City of Bountiful and energy suppliers.
(b) There is a credit against the tax due from any consumer in the amount of a contractual franchisee fee paid if: (1) the energy supplier pays the contractual franchisee fee to the City of Bountiful pursuant to a franchise agreement in effect on July 1, 1997; (2) the contractual franchise fee is passed through by energy supplier to a consumer as a separately itemized charge; and (3) the energy supplier has accepted the franchise.
12-2-106. Tax Collection Contract with the State Tax Commission.
(a) On or before the effective date of this ordinance, the City of Bountiful shall contract with the State Tax Commission to perform all functions incident to the administration and collection of the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax, in accordance with this ordinance. The Mayor is hereby authorized to enter into agreements with the State tax Commission that may be necessary to the continued administration and operation of this Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax Ordinance.
246
(b) An energy supplier shall pay the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax revenues collected from consumers directly to the City of Bountiful monthly if: (1) the City of Bountiful is the energy supplier; or (2) (i) the energy supplier estimates that the municipal energy sales and use tax collected annually from its Utah consumers equals $1,000,000 ore more, and (ii) the energy supplier collects the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax.
(c) An energy supplier paying the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax directly to the City of Bountiful may deduct any contractual franchise fees collected by the energy supplier qualifying as a credit and remit the net tax less any amount the energy supplier retains as authorized by §10-1-307(4) Utah Code.
12-2-107. Adoption of Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 1, and Amendments.
(a) The provisions of Part 1, Chapter 12, Title 59 of the Utah Code relating to sales and use taxes are hereby adopted, except the following:
(1) any provisions which are inconsistent with this ordinance or with the provisions of Title 10, Chapter 1, Part 3 of the Utah Code;
(2) Sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119; and
(3) the amount of sales and use taxes stated therein.
(4) whenever the term “State” or “taxing authority” is used, the “City of Bountiful” shall be substituted, unless the context intends otherwise.
(b) Any amendments made to Part 1, Chapter 12, Title 59 of the Utah Code, which would be applicable to the City of Bountiful for the purposes of the carrying out of this ordinance are hereby incorporated into this ordinance by reference.
12-2-108. No Additional License Required.
No additional license to collect or report the Municipal Energy Sales and Use tax levied by this ordinance is required, provided the energy supplier collecting the tax has a license issued under §59-12-106 of the Utah Code.
Chapter 3: Telecommunications Service Tax.
12-3-101. Definitions.
12-3-102. Levy of Tax.
12-3-103. Rate of Tax Levy.
12-3-104. Rate limitation and exemption therefrom.
12-3-105. Effective date of tax levy.
12-3-106. Changes in Rate or Repeal of the Tax.
12-3-107. Interlocal Agreement for collection of the tax.
12-3-108. Repeal of inconsistent taxes and fees.
12-3-101. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance:
(1) “Commission” means the State Tax Commission.
247
(2) (a) Subject to Subsections (2) (b) and (c), "customer" means the person who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications provider to pay for telecommunications service received under the contract.
(b) For purposes of this ordinance, "customer" means:
(i) the person who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications provider to pay for telecommunications service received under the contract; or
(ii) if the end user is not the person described in Subsection (2) (b) (i), the end user of telecommunications service.
(c) "Customer" does not include a reseller:
(i) of telecommunications service; or
(ii) for mobile telecommunications service, of a serving carrier under an agreement to serve the customer outside the telecommunications provider's licensed service area.
(3) (a) “End user" means the person who uses a telecommunications service.
(b) For purposes of telecommunications service provided to a person who is not an individual, "end user" means the individual who uses the telecommunications service on behalf of the person who is provided the telecommunications service.
(4) “Gross Receipts attributed to the municipality” means those gross receipts from a transaction for telecommunications services that is located within the municipality for the purposes of sales and use taxes under Utah Code Title 59, Chapter 12, Sales and Use Tax Act and determined in accordance with Utah Code section 59-12-207.
(5) “Gross receipts from telecommunications service” means the revenue that a
telecommunications provider receives for telecommunications service rendered except for amounts collected or paid as:
(a) a tax, fee, or charge:
(i) imposed by a governmental entity;
(ii) separately identified as a tax, fee, or charge in the transaction with the customer for the telecommunications service; and
(iii) imposed only on a telecommunications provider;
(b) sales and use taxes collected by the telecommunications provider from a customer under Title 59, Chapter 12, Sales and Use Tax Act; or
(c) interest, a fee, or a charge that is charged by a telecommunications provider on a customer for failure to pay for telecommunications service when payment is due.
(6) "Mobile telecommunications service" is as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 U.S.C. Sec. 124.
248
(7) "Municipality" means the City of Bountiful, Utah.
(8) "Place of primary use":
(a) for telecommunications service other than mobile telecommunications service, means the street address representative of where the customer's use of the telecommunications service primarily occurs, which shall be:
(i) the residential street address of the customer; or
(ii) the primary business street address of the customer; or
(b) for mobile telecommunications service, is as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 U.S.C. Sec. 124.
(9) Notwithstanding where a call is billed or paid, "service address" means:
(a) if the location described in this Subsection (9) (a) is known, the location of the telecommunications equipment:
(i) to which a call is charged; and
(ii) from which the call originates or terminates;
(b) if the location described in Subsection (9) (a) is not known but the location described in this Subsection (8) (b) is known, the location of the origination point of the signal of the telecommunications service first identified by:
(i) the telecommunications system of the telecommunications provider; or
(ii) if the system used to transport the signal is not a system of the telecommunications provider, information received by the telecommunications provider from its service provider; or
(c) if the locations described in Subsection (9) (a) or (b) are not known, the location of a customer's place of primary use.
(8) (a) Subject to Subsections (9) (b) and (9) (c), "telecommunications provider" means a person that:
(i) owns, controls, operates, or manages a telecommunications service; or
(ii) engages in an activity described in Subsection (9) (a) (i) for the shared use with or resale to any person of the telecommunications service.
(b) A person described in Subsection (9) (a) is a telecommunications provider whether or not the Public Service Commission of Utah regulates:
(i) that person; or
(ii) the telecommunications service that the person owns, controls, operates, or manages.
249
(c) "Telecommunications provider" does not include an aggregator as defined in Utah Code Section 54- 8b-2.
(10) "Telecommunications service" means:
(a) telephone service, as defined in Utah Code Section 59-12-102, other than mobile telecommunications service, that originates and terminates within the boundaries of this state; and
(b) mobile telecommunications service, as defined in Utah Code Section 59-12-102:
(i) that originates and terminates within the boundaries of one state; and
(ii) only to the extent permitted by the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 U.S.C. Sec. 116 et seq.
12-3-102. Levy of Tax.
There is hereby levied a municipal telecommunications license tax on the gross receipts from telecommunications service attributed to this municipality.
12-3-103. Rate of Tax Levy.
The rate of the tax levy shall be four percent of the telecommunication provider’s gross receipts from telecommunications service that are attributed to the municipality subject to the following: If the location of a transaction is determined to be other than this municipality then the rate imposed on the gross receipts for telecommunications services shall be the lower of (1) the rate imposed by the taxing jurisdiction in which the transaction is located or (2) the rate for non- mobile telecommunication services shall be the rate imposed by the municipality in which the customers service address is located; or for mobile telecommunications service, the rate imposed by the municipality of the customer’s primary place of use.
12-3-104. Rate limitation and exemption therefrom.
This rate of this levy shall not exceed 4% of the telecommunication provider’s gross receipts from telecommunication service attributed to the municipality unless a higher rate is approved by a majority vote of the voters in this municipality that vote in:
(a) a municipal general election;
(b) a regular general election; or
(c) a local special election.
12-3-105. Effective date of tax levy.
This tax shall be levied beginning the earlier of July 1, 2004 or the first day of any calendar quarter after a 75 day period beginning on the date the Commission received notice pursuant to Utah Code Section10-1-403 that this municipality has enacted this ordinance.
12-3-106. Changes in Rate or Repeal of the Tax.
This ordinance is subject to the requirements of Utah Code Section 10-1-403. If the tax rate is changed or the tax is repealed, then the appropriate notice shall be given as provided in Utah Code Section 10-1-403.
250
12-3-107. Interlocal Agreement for collection of the tax.
On or before the effective date of the ordinance, the municipality shall enter into the uniform interlocal agreement with the Commission as described in Utah Code Section 10-1-405 for the collection, enforcement, and administration of this municipal telecommunications license tax.
12-3-108. Repeal of inconsistent taxes and fees.
Any tax or fee previously enacted by this municipality under authority of Utah Code Section 10-1-203 or Utah Code Title 11, Chapter 26, Local Taxation of Utilities Limitation is hereby repealed. Nothing in this ordinance shall be interpreted to repeal any municipal ordinance or fee which provides that the municipality may recover from a telecommunications provider the management costs of the municipality caused by the activities of the telecommunications provider in the rights-of-way of the municipality, if the fee is imposed in accordance with Utah Code Section 72-7-102 and is not related to the municipality’s loss of use of a highway as a result of the activities of the telecommunications provider in a right of way, or increased deterioration of a highway as a result of the activities of the telecommunications provider in a right-of -way nor does this ordinance limit the municipalities right to charge fees or taxes on persons that are not subject to the municipal telecommunications license tax under this ordinance and locate telecommunications facilities, as defined in Utah Code Section 72-7-108, in this municipality.
Chapter 4: RAP Tax.
12-4-101. Purpose.
12-4-102. Compliance.
12-4-103. Recreational, Arts and Parks (RAP) Tax.
12-4-104. Collection.
12-4-105. Use of Funds.
12-4-106. Distribution of Funds.
12-4-107. Effective Date.
12-4-101. Purpose.
(a) Bountiful City submitted an opinion to the residents of the City at the municipal general election held on November 6, 2007, providing each voter an opportunity to express an opinion on the imposition of a local sales and use tax of one-tenth of one percent (0.10%) on certain qualifying transactions within the City to fund a performing arts center and other recreational and cultural facilities and organizations within the community. A majority of the City's registered voters voting on the opinion question voted in favor of imposing the RAP Tax. The purpose of this Chapter is to impose the RAP Tax as approved by Bountiful voters and to provide for the collection and distribution of the revenues generated by the RAP Tax.
(b) Bountiful City submitted an opinion question to the residents of the City at the general election held on November 4, 2014, providing each voter an opportunity to express an opinion on whether to continue the imposition of a local sales and use tax on one-tenth of one percent (0.10%) on certain qualifying transactions within the City to fund parks improvements and other recreational and cultural facilities and organizations. A majority of the City's registered voters voting on the ballot proposition voted in favor of continuing the imposition of the RAP Tax. The purpose of this Ordinance is to impose and continue the RAP Tax as approved by Bountiful voters and to provide for the collection and distribution of the revenues generated by the RAP Tax.
12-4-102. Compliance.
251
It is the intent of the City to comply will all applicable provisions and restrictions set forth in Utah Code Ann. §§ 59-12-1401, et seq., and other relevant provisions, regarding local option sales and use tax to fund recreational and zoological facilities and botanical, cultural and zoological organizations.
12-4-103. Recreation, Arts and Parks (RAP) Tax.
(a) There is hereby levied a local option sales and use tax on qualifying taxable transactions within Bountiful City at the rate of one-tenth of one percent (0.10%). This tax shall be known as the Recreation, Arts and Parks (RAP) Tax. The RAP Tax may be levied for a period of eight (8) years and may be reauthorized at the end of the eight-year period in accordance with applicable provisions of Utah Code Ann. § 59-12-1402, as amended.
(b) There is hereby levied a local option sales and use tax on qualifying taxable transactions within Bountiful City at the rate of one-tenth of one percent (0.10%). This tax shall be known as the Recreation, Arts and Parks (RAP) Tax. The RAP Tax shall be levied for a period of ten (10) years commencing April 1, 2016, and may be reauthorized at the end of the ten-year period in accordance with applicable provisions of Utah Code Ann. § 59-12-1402.
12-4-104. Collection.
The RAP Tax shall be administered, collected and enforced in accordance with the procedures set forth in Title 59, Chapter 12, Parts 1 and 2, of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended, regarding Tax Collection and Local Sales and Use Tax Act (excluding Subsections 59-12-205(2) through (7)), and Title 59, Chapter 1, of the same, as amended, regarding General Taxation Policies.
12-4-105. Use of Funds.
The monies generated from the RAP Tax shall be used for financing parks, recreational and cultural facilities within the City or within the geographic area of entities that are parties to an interlocal agreement with the City providing for recreational or cultural facilities; for operating expenses of cultural organizations within the City or within the geographic area of entities that are parties to an interlocal agreement with the City providing for the support of cultural organizations; and for any other eligible facilities or organizations provided by law.
12-4-106. Distribution of Funds.
The City may enter into an interlocal agreement with other qualifying entities and distribute the revenues generated by the RAP Tax to participant in the interlocal agreement as provided by law. Any funds generated by the RAP Tax and not distributed by interlocal agreement may be used for qualifying facilities and organizations approved by the City Council.
12-4-107. Effective Date.
(a) Except as otherwise provided by law for billing cycle transactions and catalogue sales, the enactment and imposition of the RAP Tax shall take effect on the first day of the calendar quarter following a ninety (90) day waiting period beginning on the date the Utah State Tax Commission receives notice from the City regarding its creation of the RAP Tax in accordance with Utah Code Ann. § 59-12-1402(5)(b), as amended. Pursuant to such provisions, the Bountiful City RAP Tax shall take effect on April 1, 2008.
252
(b) The enactment and imposition of the RAP Tax approved in this Ordinance and by the voters of Bountiful City on November 4, 2014, shall take effect on April 1, 2016, and be in effect for a period of ten years.
253
Title 13
Bountiful Traffic Code
Chapter 1: Traffic Code.
Chapter 2: Parades.
Chapter 1: Traffic Code
13-1-101. Bountiful Traffic Code.
13-1-102. Reserved.
13-1-103. Parking Limitations.
13-1-104. Parking Heavy Equipment in Residential Zone.
13-1-105. Funeral Processions.
13-1-106. Tracked Vehicles Prohibited.
13-1-107. Cutting Through Corners.
13-1-108. Driving on New Pavement.
13-1-109. Standing Passenger.
13-1-110. Skateboards and Sleds.
13-1-111. Interfering with Driving.
13-1-112. Negligent Collision.
13-1-113. Unsafe Activity by Driver.
13-1-114. Improper Lookout.
13-1-115. False Information Concerning Accident.
13-1-116. School Traffic Regulations.
13-1-117. Noisy Vehicle.
13-1-118. Parking Unregistered Vehicles.
13-1-119. Obstructions to Traffic.
13-1-120. Off-Street Driving Prohibited.
13-1-121. Procedures for Impounded Vehicles.
13-1-122. Adoption of State Code Provisions.
13-1-101. Bountiful Traffic Code.
The provisions of this Title shall be known as the "Bountiful Traffic Code."
13-1-102. Reserved.
13-1-103. Parking Limitations.
(a) It is unlawful for any person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle to park or knowingly allow to be parked any vehicle or trailer on any street:
(1) between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. during the months of November, December, January, February and March;
(2) when it is actually snowing, or within twelve hours thereafter. Due to the unique nature of the downtown area, this prohibition shall not apply to Main Street between 500 South and 400 North;
(3) for a period longer than 24 consecutive hours; or
254
(4) for a period longer than that allowed by appropriate signs, markings or parking meters giving notice of such parking time limitation.
(b) In any area in which parking upon a public street is divided into marked parking spaces, it is unlawful to park a vehicle other than within a single marked space.
(c) It is unlawful to park or place a motor vehicle, vehicle, trailer, object, structure, sign or other thing, except vegetation, utility poles and facilities, fire hydrants, or mailboxes between the curb line and the sidewalk. Any such thing parked thereon may be summarily removed by the City.
(d) (1) It is unlawful to park in any parking lot or on other property (not including public streets) owned by the City any car, truck, motorcycle, motor home, trailer, boat or other vehicle of any description for the purpose of advertising or of selling that vehicle.
(2) It is unlawful to park in any private parking lot or on other private property any car, truck, motorcycle, motor home, trailer, boat or other vehicle of any description for the purpose of advertising or of selling that vehicle, without the consent of the owner.
(e) It is unlawful to park in violation of marked parking restrictions, including but not limited to red fire lanes.
(f) It is unlawful to park commercial trucks, trailers, tractors or other vehicles greater than 20,000 pounds in weight in any areas of the City which are zoned as residential, except when making actual deliveries or doing work at the site where parked.
(g) Any vehicle parked in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and may be removed summarily by the City by towing, and may be prosecuted criminally and/or civilly. The owner of any towed vehicle shall have the right of a post-towing hearing as provided in Section 13-1-121 of this Code.
(h) In any area in which parking upon a public street is divided into marked parking spaces, it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle other than within a single marked space.
(i) Unless a greater amount is ordered by the court, fines for parking violations paid within seven days shall be as follows: (a) $12.00 for overnight, snow, overtime and improper parking; (b) $17.00 for prohibited, double or fire zone parking; and (c) $107.00 or as set by state law for handicap parking. Parking tickets paid after seven days shall be increased $20.00, or as a court may order.
13-1-104. Parking Heavy Equipment in Residential Zone.
It is unlawful to park or allow to stand, or any owner thereof to knowingly allow to be parked or to stand, any motor vehicle having a total gross weight of 50,000 pounds, whether loaded or unloaded, or having a total length in excess of 24 feet from the most forward point of the vehicle or its load to the most rear point of said vehicle or its load, upon the street in a residential zone for a period longer than 24 hours. The length or weight of a trailer connected or attached to or in tandem with shall be combined with the weight or length or the motor vehicle to compute the total gross weight or length of such vehicle.
13-1-105. Funeral Processions.
The driver of each motor vehicle participating in a funeral procession shall display illuminated headlights thereon and must obey all traffic regulations and traffic control devices, unless at the time the individual automobiles in such procession are otherwise directed by a police officer.
255
13-1-106. Tracked Vehicles Prohibited.
(a) It is unlawful to drive, or permit to be driven, any tracked vehicle on a public street or sidewalk.
(b) Any person driving, or permitting the driving, a tracked vehicle on a public street or sidewalk is liable for the cost of repair to the street or sidewalk.
13-1-107. Cutting Through Corners.
It is unlawful to drive a motor vehicle through any private driveway, lot or similar area, whether vacant or not, where any residence, business establishment, manufactory, retail store, drug store, cafe, confectionery, drive-in, market, oil station, or any other kind of business or trade is maintained or carried on, for the purpose and with the intent of avoiding obedience to any traffic regulation or for the purpose and with intent of harassing and annoying the owner thereof or his patrons.
13-1-108. Driving on New Pavement.
It is unlawful to drive, ride or cause to be driven or ridden any animal, ride, drive or propel, or cause to be ridden, driven or propelled, any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted area on any public street, across or around which pavement there is a barrier, or at, over or near which there is a person or a sign warning person not to drive over or across such pavement or freshly painted area or a sign stating that the street is closed.
13-1-109. Standing Passenger.
It is unlawful to operate any vehicle while any person is standing on a seat or on the floor within such vehicle.
13-1-110. Skateboards, low profile motorized vehicles (pocket bikes) and Sleds.
(a) No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, sled, toy wagon, scooter or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing such roadway on a crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.
(b) It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to knowingly drive or operate such vehicle upon a city street while any sled, sleigh, skateboard, wagon or similar device is towed, attached to or connected with such vehicle.
(c) It is unlawful to skateboard on streets, sidewalks and all other public places on Main Street between 400 North and 500 South.
(d) (1) It is unlawful for any person to operate a low profile motorized vehicle upon any street, sidewalk or other public property within Bountiful City. It is unlawful for an adult, parent, or guardian to allow or permit a minor to operate a low profile vehicle on public property within Bountiful City.
(2) As used in this Section a "low profile motorized vehicle” means any motorized vehicle that: (a) is not regulated by the State of Utah or by any other provisions of the City Code; (b) is not otherwise expressly permitted upon a highway or sidewalk; and (c) is less than thirty-six (36) inches in height when in its normal operating position, not including any flag, antenna, or other device attached or modifications made thereto. This definition includes, but is not limited to, "pocket" or miniature motorcycles.
256
13-1-111. Interfering with Driving.
No person shall engage in any activity or do any act which interferes with the safe operation of any vehicle.
13-1-112. Negligent Collision.
It is unlawful to operate a vehicle with such lack of due care or in such negligent manner as to cause or permit it to collide with any vehicle, person or object.
13-1-113. Unsafe Activity by Driver.
No driver shall engage in any activity that interferes with the safe control of his vehicle while same is in motion.
13-1-114. Improper Lookout.
It is unlawful to drive a vehicle on the roadway without keeping a reasonable and proper lookout for other traffic, objects, fixtures or property on the road or adjacent to it.
13-1-115. False Information Concerning Accident.
It is unlawful to knowingly and wilfully give to a peace officer investigating an accident false information concerning the identity of any person who has been involved in the accident or has committed the act investigated or to knowingly and wilfully mislead such officer concerning the identity of such person.
13-1-116. School Traffic Regulations.
(a) School Speed Limit. It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle upon school property at a speed greater than 10 miles per hour.
(b) The following signs or traffic markings shall have these meanings:
(1) Red curbs mean no stopping, standing or parking is permitted at any time.
(2) Yellow curbs or signs with the words "Restricted Zone", mean no stopping, standing or parking is permitted except as stated on the signs or markings giving notice thereof. This provision shall not apply on Sundays and legal holidays.
(c) School Parking.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle except within parking stalls as are designated by lines.
(2) It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in a "Restricted Zone" except as permitted on signs or markings giving notice thereof.
(3) It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in red curb or fire zones upon school property.
(4) It is unlawful for any person to leave any vehicle upon school property which constitutes a hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic.
257
(5) Any vehicle stopped, standing or parked in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is a nuisance.
(d) Abatement of nuisance. Such nuisances as prescribed herein may be summarily abated by removing, by means of towing or otherwise.
(e) All traffic laws in the Bountiful Traffic Code and not inconsistent with the foregoing sections, apply to school property.
(f) Violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor.
13-1-117. Noisy Vehicle.
(a) At certain levels noise is detrimental to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety and welfare of the citizens of Bountiful. This Section is enacted to protect, preserve, and promote the health, welfare, peace and quiet of the citizens of Bountiful through the reduction, prohibition and regulation of noise. The intent of this Section is to establish and provide for sound levels that will eliminate unnecessary and excessive traffic noise and establish noise standards and sound levels that will promote a comfortable enjoyment of life and property and prevent sound levels which are physically harmful and detrimental to the individuals of the community.
(b) The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Section.
(1) " 'A' Weighted Sound Pressure Level" means the sound pressure level as measured with the sound level meter using the 'A' weighing network. The standard unit notation is dB(A).
(2) "dB(A) level" means the total sound level of all noises as measured by a sound level meter using the 'A' weighing network.
(3) "Decibel" means a logarithmic unit of amplitude which denotes the ratio of two (2) quantities.
(4) "Gross Vehicle Weight Rating" (also designated as GVWR) means the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum load weight of a single motor vehicle. In cases where trailers and tractors are separable, the gross combination rating (GCWR) which is the value specified by the manufacturer, the recommended maximum loaded weight of the combination vehicle, shall be used.
(5) "Motor Vehicle" means any vehicle which is propelled or drawn on land by a motor, such as, but no limited to: Passenger cars, trucks, truck trailers, semi-trailers, go-carts, snowmobiles and motorcycles.
(6) "Sound pressure level" means 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of 20 micropascals. The sound pressure level is denoted as SPL and is expressed in decibels.
(7) "Sound level meter" means an instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time average, output meter, and weighing networks used to measure sound pressure levels.
258
(c) It is unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated, a motor vehicle, at any time and in such a manner that the sound level emitted by the motor vehicle exceeds the following noise limits for the category of vehicles designated in this subsection:
(1) Motor Vehicles GVWR, 10,000 lbs. or more. Any motor vehicle with a manufacture GVWR rating of 10,000 lbs or more, shall not emit a sound pressure level to exceed 88dB(A), when the emitted sound is measured by a sound level meter at a distance of 25 feet (7.5m) from the near side of the nearest land being monitored with the sound level meter at a height of at least 4 feet (1.2m).
(2) Motor Vehicles - GVWR 10,000 lbs. or less. Any motor vehicle with a manufacture GVWR rating of 10,000 lbs or less, shall not emit a sound pressure level to exceed 80dB(A), when the emitted sound is measured by a sound level meter at a distance of 25 feet (7.5m) from the near side of the nearest land being monitored, and at a height of at least 4 feet (1.2m).
(d) No person shall operate or cause to be operated, any motor vehicle not equipped with a muffler or sound dissipating device in good working order and in constant operation.
(e) The provisions of this Section shall no apply to noise resulting from any authorized police, fire or emergency vehicles or equipment.
13-1-118. Parking Unregistered Vehicles.
It is unlawful to park, or for an owner to knowingly permit to be parked, upon a street or upon public property a vehicle which is not currently registered in accordance with State law.
13-1-119. Obstructions to Traffic.
(a) It is unlawful to annoy or obstruct the free travel of any pedestrian or vehicle lawfully upon a public street.
(b) A person may obstruct the flow of vehicular traffic upon the public street, other than a state highway within the city, pursuant to permission given by the governing body under this section. The application for permission shall be made in writing to the City manager and shall state the purpose for which the obstruction is requested and the duration thereof. The application shall include the written consent or protest of each property owner, or each resident, if the property owner does not reside on the property., of each parcel of property, having frontage upon the street being blockaded, within 300 feet of the blockades, or the activity. The City Manager shall, within 10 days, recommend to the governing body whether the request should be issued or denied. The governing body shall, upon consideration of the application and the consent or protest of the adjacent property owners or residents, approve or disapprove of the proposed blockage or activity. The applicant shall comply with the regulations or directives of the city Manager or Police Chief concerning the blockage. Upon the applicant's wilful refusal to follow such regulations or directives, the Chief of Police or his officers shall abate the obstruction and report the incident to the governing body. The barricades shall be so arranged and maintained so as to allow access by vehicular and pedestrian traffic to residences within the barricaded area.
13-1-120. Off-Street Driving Prohibited.
It is unlawful to drive a motor vehicle on public or government property except upon street and parking lots. This prohibition shall not apply to authorized vehicles.
259
13-1-121. Procedures for Impounded Vehicles.
(a) Post-storage hearings for impounded vehicles. As to any vehicle impounded pursuant to this code by or at the request of the City, its agents or employees, a person who has a legal entitlement to possession of the vehicle has a right to a post-seizure administrative hearing to determine whether there was probable cause to impound the vehicle if such person files a written demand, on forms so provided for such a hearing, with the City within ten (10) days after such person has learned such vehicle has been impounded or within ten (10) days after the mailing of the date set in the Notice of Stored Vehicle, whichever occurs first. The Notice of Stored Vehicle shall be sent in the main to the legal and registered owner or their agent and to the garage where the vehicle is stored within forty-eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, after impounding and storage of the vehicle.
(b) Conduct of hearing. A hearing shall be conducted before a hearing officer designated by the City manager within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of a written demand therefor from the person seeking the hearing unless such person waives the right to a speedy hearing. Saturdays, Sundays, and City holidays are to be excluded from the calculation of the 48-hour period. The hearing officer shall be someone other than the person who directed the impounding and storage of the vehicle. The sole issue before the hearing officer shall be whether there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question.
"Probable cause to impound" shall mean such a state of facts as would lead a person of ordinary care and prudence to believe that there was sufficient breach of local, state or federal law to grant legal authority for the removal of the vehicle.
The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal manner and shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence. The Police Department shall carry the burden of establishing that there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall prepare a written decision. A copy of such decision shall be provided to the person demanding the hearing and the registered owner of the vehicle (if not the person requesting the hearing). The hearing officer's decision in no way affects any criminal proceeding in connection with the impound in question and that any criminal charges involved in such proceeding may only be challenged in the appropriate court. The decision of the hearing officer is final. Failure of the registered or legal owner, or their agent to request or attend a scheduled post-seizure hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such hearing.
(c) Decisions of the hearing officers and their effect. The hearing officer shall only determine that as to the vehicle in issue either (a) there was probable cause to impound the vehicle or (b) there was no such probable cause, in the event that the hearing officer determines that there was no probable cause, the hearing officer shall prepare and date a Certificate of No Probable Cause, copies of which shall be given to the possessor of the vehicle and the Police Department. Upon receipt of the possessor's copy of such certificate, the garage having custody of the vehicle shall release the vehicle to its possessor. Upon a finding of no probable cause, towing and storage fees shall be paid by the City. If the possessor fails to present such certificate to the garage having custody of the vehicle within twenty-four (24) hours of its receipt, excluding such days when the garage is not open for business, the possessor shall assume liability for all subsequent storage charges. Such certificate shall advise the possessor of such requirement.
13-1-122. Adoption of State Code.
The following provisions of the Utah Code are adopted as ordinances of the City. Violations of these provisions shall be of the same classification as provided under State law, provided, however, that the maximum penalty shall not be greater than that permitted by law for a class B misdemeanor.
(a) The Motor Vehicle Act (Chapter 1a of Title 41), as follows:
- Part 1 Section 41-1a-102;
260
- Part 2 Sections 41-1a-201, 41-1a-205(4), 41-1a-214;
- Part 4 Sections 41-1a-401(1), 41-1a-403, 41-1a-404, 41-1a-414;
- Part 7 Section 41-1a-703;
- Part 11 Section 41-1a-1101; and
- Part 13 in its entirety.
(b) The Uniform Drivers License Act (Chapter 3 of Title 53). [Amended 94-2]
(c) Traffic Rules and Regulations (Chapter 6a of Title 41) in its entirety.
(d) Driving by Minors (Chapter 8 of Title 41) in its entirety.
(e) Motor Vehicle Financial Responsibility (Chapter 12a of Title 41) as follows:
- Sections 41-12a-103, 41-12a-301(1) and (5), 41-12a-302, 41-12a-502, and 41-12a-603.
(f) Off-Highway Vehicles (Chapter 22 of Title 41) in its entirety.
(g) Protection of Highways Act (Chapter 7 of Title 72) in its entirety.
Chapter 2: Parades
13-2-101. Purpose of Provisions
13-2-102. Definitions
13-2-103. Permit - Required
13-2-104. Permit - Exceptions
13-2-105. Permit - Application
13-2-106. Permit - Issuance Conditions
13-2-107. Permit - Additional Conditions
13-2-108. Permit - Contents
13-2-109. Appeal Procedure
13-2-110. Permit - Revocation Conditions
13-2-111. Permittee Duties
13-2-112. Public Conduct Restrictions During Parade
13-2-113. Reserved
13-2-114. Regulations for Public Property Adjacent to Parade Routes
13-2-101. Purpose of Provisions
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the requirement that a permit be first issued for the holding, managing, and conducting of a parade on public streets or places, providing for the contents of an application for a parade permit, provisions relating to the issuance of such permit and revocation thereof, and providing for restrictions during parade activities and regulations for the use of public property adjacent to the parade route.
13-2-102. Definitions
As used in this chapter:
"Funeral Procession" means a single direct movement from a mortuary, church, or other public gathering place to the place of burial of a human body, under direction or supervision of a funeral director.
261
"Parade" means a march or procession of any kind.
13-2-103. Permit - Required
It is unlawful to hold, manage, conduct, aid, participate in, form, start or carry on any parade in or upon any public street, park, or other public place in the City unless and until a permit to conduct such parade has been obtained in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
13-2-104. Exceptions
This chapter shall not apply to any of the following:
(a) Funeral processions;
(b) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions;
(c) Students participating in education activities, provided that:
(1) Such activity is authorized by the school district and is under the immediate direction and supervision of the school authorities authorized by the school district to approve and supervise such activity.
(2) If such student activity will result in blockage or closure of a street or public right-of-way, a permit under this chapter shall be required.
13-2-105. Permit - Application
(a) Application for permits under this chapter must be filed with the Chief of Police not less than twenty (20) business days in advance of the proposed parade.
(b) The application shall be in writing, and shall give the following information:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the person requesting the permit; if the parade is proposed to be conducted for on behalf of or by any organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and the authorized head of such organization shall be stated;
(2) The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be directly in charge of and responsible for the parade;
(3) The date, time, and location and/or route of the proposed parade;
(4) The approximate number of person who will participate in the parade, the number and kinds of vehicles, equipment or animals which will be used.
(5) Plans for the assembly and dispersal of the parade, including times and locations thereof;
(6) Any additional information which the Chief of Police shall find reasonably necessary to make a determination of the findings required by Section 13-2-106, or its successor.
262
13-2-106. Permit - Issuance Conditions
The Chief of Police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may be otherwise obtained, he/she finds that:
(a) The conduct of such parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic;
(b) The concentrations of persons, animals and vehicles will not unduly interfere with proper fire, police, ambulance or other life-safety protection or service to areas where the parade will take place or areas contiguous thereto;
(c) The conduct of such parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to person or property; and
(d) Such parade is not to be held for the primary purpose of advertising the goods, wares, or merchandise of a particular business establishment or vendor.
13-2-107. Permit - Additional Conditions
(a) The Chief of Police shall have authority to impose such conditions as are necessary to insure that all of the findings mentioned in Section 13-2-106, above, or its successor, shall exist during the continuation of the parade.
(b) In granting or denying the permit, the Chief of Police shall not consider the content, message, or First Amendment expression of the parade proposed, except that obscene materials and materials harmful to minors, as those terms are defined in Section 76-10-1201 et seq. Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, or their successors and applicable City ordinances, may be restricted.
13-2-108. Permits - Contents
Conditions imposed on the issuance of any permit as provided for in Section 13-2-107 above, or its successor, shall be set forth in the permit.
13-2-109. Appeal Procedure
The applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial or qualification of a permit to the Bountiful City Administrative Law Judge. The notice of appeal shall be filed within ten days after the denial or qualification. The City Council shall act on such appeals within fourteen (14) business days. In considering the appeal, the City Council shall consider the reasonableness of the grounds for denial for qualification.
13-2-110. Permit - Revocation Conditions
(a) If, while the parade is in progress, the City representative at the event, as designated by the Chief of Police, determines that the conditions of the permit are not being complied with, the City representative shall inform the permittee's designated representative as provided in Subsection (b) of Section 13-2-111, or its successor, and, as appropriate, spectators or participants of the noncompliance.
(b) In the event the noncompliance is not promptly remedied and the City representative or police determine that such noncompliance jeopardizes public safety and welfare elements set forth in Section 13-2-106, or its successor, the City may revoke the permit. After a reasonable time for dispersal, any person continuing with the parade conducted under the revoked permit shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
263
13-2-111. Permittee Duties
(a) A permittee hereunder shall comply with all terms and conditions of such permit, and with all applicable laws and ordinances.
(b) The written permit obtained pursuant to this chapter shall be carried by the person heading or leading the activity for which the permit was issued.
13-2-112. Public Conduct Restrictions During Parade
(a) It is unlawful for any person unreasonably to obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade or with any person, vehicle or animal participating in the parade.
(b) The Chief of Police or his/her designated representative shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or highway or part thereof constituting part of the route of a parade. The Chief of Police, traffic engineer or other designated city officer shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof.
13-2-113. Reserved.
13-2-114. Regulations for Public Property Adjacent to Parade Routes.
The following apply to public property adjoining parade routes and staging areas for parades and it is unlawful and a Class B misdemeanor for any person to violate these provisions:
(a) Prior to 7:00 a.m. on the day of a parade starting on or after 4:00 p.m., and prior to 6:00 a.m. on the day of a parade starting prior to 4:00 p.m., no person shall actually claim or attempt to claim, reserve, occupy or otherwise control public property either in person or by the placement of any object, such as, but not limited to, ropes, chairs, blankets, banners or vehicles, or barriers of any kind.
(b) No person shall place, erect, use or employ any tent or other enclosed shelters, including vehicles and trailers, on public property along a parade route or staging areas at any time.
(c) No person shall obstruct public sidewalks, paved portions of streets, or occupy any unsafe position or occupy a position which may cause damage to public or private property.
(d) From three hours before the start of a parade and continuing until the conclusion of the parade, no person shall park a motor vehicle, trailer or tent trailer on the streets designated as the parade route. Only motor vehicles and trailers which are participating in the parade are allowed to be in the areas designated as staging areas or along the parade route. Any vehicle, motor vehicle, trailer or tent trailer parked in violation of this section is a public nuisance and may be towed from the prohibited area at the owners's expense.
(e) As part of the permit process, the Chief of Police may authorize the permit holder to reserve places for the observation of the parade and to erect and control seating on such reserved public property.
(f) From and after twenty-four (24) hours prior to the parade and continuing until the conclusion of the parade, all dogs, except seeing-eye dogs, police dogs and dogs which are actually part of the parade, shall be prohibited on public property along the parade route and staging areas whether or not such dogs are leashed. This subsection shall not prohibit owners of dogs who live adjacent to the parade route from taking their leashed dogs on walks to and from their leashed dogs on walks to and from their property using the most direct route away from the parade route.
264
Title 14
Bountiful Land Use Ordinance
[Title 14 is maintained by the Planning and Zoning Department.]


Selected Excerpts from Utah State Code
10-9a-511. Nonconforming uses and noncomplying structures.
(1) (a) Except as provided in this section, a nonconforming use or noncomplying structure may be
continued by the present or a future property owner.
(b) A nonconforming use may be extended through the same building, provided no structural alteration
of the building is proposed or made for the purpose of the extension.
(c) For purposes of this Subsection (1), the addition of a solar energy device to a building is not a
structural alteration.
(2) The legislative body may provide for:
(a) the establishment, restoration, reconstruction, extension, alteration, expansion, or substitution of
nonconforming uses upon the terms and conditions set forth in the land use ordinance;
(b) the termination of all nonconforming uses, except billboards, by providing a formula establishing a
reasonable time period during which the owner can recover or amortize the amount of his investment in
the nonconforming use, if any; and
(c) the termination of a nonconforming use due to its abandonment.
(3) (a) A municipality may not prohibit the reconstruction or restoration of a noncomplying structure
or terminate the nonconforming use of a structure that is involuntarily destroyed in whole or in part due to
fire or other calamity unless the structure or use has been abandoned.
(b) A municipality may prohibit the reconstruction or restoration of a noncomplying structure or
terminate the nonconforming use of a structure if:
(i) the structure is allowed to deteriorate to a condition that the structure is rendered uninhabitable and
is not repaired or restored within six months after written notice to the property owner that the structure is
uninhabitable and that the noncomplying structure or nonconforming use will be lost if the structure is not
repaired or restored within six months; or
(ii) the property owner has voluntarily demolished a majority of the noncomplying structure or the
building that houses the nonconforming use.
(4) (a) Unless the municipality establishes, by ordinance, a uniform presumption of legal existence for
nonconforming uses, the property owner shall have the burden of establishing the legal existence of a
noncomplying structure or nonconforming use.
(b) Any party claiming that a nonconforming use has been abandoned shall have the burden of
establishing the abandonment.
(c) Abandonment may be presumed to have occurred if:
(i) a majority of the primary structure associated with the nonconforming use has been voluntarily
demolished without prior written agreement with the municipality regarding an extension of the
nonconforming use;
(ii) the use has been discontinued for a minimum of one year; or
(iii) the primary structure associated with the nonconforming use remains vacant for a period of one
year.
(d) The property owner may rebut the presumption of abandonment under Subsection (4)(c), and shall
have the burden of establishing that any claimed abandonment under Subsection (4)(c) has not in fact
occurred.
(5) A municipality may terminate the nonconforming status of a school district or charter school use or
structure when the property associated with the school district or charter school use or structure ceases to
be used for school district or charter school purposes for a period established by ordinance.
Amended by Chapter 171, 2007 General Session
2 - 25
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2008-10.doc
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
PART 4 - NONCONFORMING USES AND NON-COMPLYING SITES/BUILDINGS
14-2-401 DEFINITIONS
14-2-402 CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING USE AND NONCOMPLYING
STRUCTURES
14-2-403 EXPANSION OF NONCONFORMING USE AND NONCOMPLYING
STRUCTURE
14-2-404 ABANDONMENT OF NONCONFORMING USE
14-2-405 RESTORATION AFTER INVOLUNTARY DESTRUCTION
14-2-406 NO RESTORATION AFTER DETERIORATION OR VOLUNTARY
DESTRUCTION
14-2-107 BURDEN OF PROOF
14-2-108 SCHOOLS
14-2-401 DEFINITIONS
A. "Noncomplying structure" means a structure that:
(1) legally existed before its current land use designation; and
(2) because of one or more subsequent land use ordinance changes, does not
conform to the setback, height restrictions, or other regulations, excluding those
regulations which govern the use of land.
B. "Nonconforming use" means a use of land that:
(1) legally existed before its current land use designation;
(b) has been maintained continuously since the time the land use ordinance
governing the land changed; and
(c) because of one or more subsequent land use ordinance changes, does
not conform to the regulations that now govern the use of the land.
14-2-402 CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING USE AND NONCOMPLYING
STRUCTURES
Except as provided in this section, a nonconforming use or noncomplying structure may be
continued by the present or a future property owner.
14-2-403 EXPANSION OF NONCONFORMING USE AND NONCOMPLYING
STRUCTURE
A nonconforming use may not be expanded, except that it may be extended through the same
building, provided no structural alteration of the building is proposed or made for the purpose of
2 - 26
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2008-10.doc
the extension. For purposes of this subsection, the addition of a solar energy device to a
building is not a structural alteration.
14-2-404 ABANDONMENT OF NONCONFORMING USE
Land loses its nonconforming use status if the termination of a nonconforming use is
abandoned. Abandonment automatically occurs if the nonconforming use of the land ceases for
any reason for a period of one year or longer.
14-2-405 RESTORATION AFTER INVOLUNTARY DESTRUCTION
Except as provided in subsection B below, a noncomplying structure or nonconforming use of a
structure may be reconstructed or restored after an involuntarily destruction in whole or in part
due to fire or other calamity, unless the structure or use has been abandoned.
14-2-406 NO RESTORATION AFTER DETERIORATION OR VOLUNTARY
DESTRUCTION
Reconstruction or restoration of a noncomplying structure is prohibited, or the nonconforming
use of a structure is terminated, if:
A. The structure is allowed to deteriorate to a condition that the structure is rendered
uninhabitable and is not repaired or restored within six months after written notice to the
property owner that the structure is uninhabitable and that the noncomplying structure or
nonconforming use will be lost if the structure is not repaired or restored within six
months; or
B. The property owner has voluntarily demolished a majority of the noncomplying structure
or the building that houses the nonconforming use.
14-2-107 BURDEN OF PROOF
A. The property owner shall have the burden of establishing the legal existence of a
noncomplying structure or nonconforming use.
B. Any party claiming that a nonconforming use has been abandoned shall have the burden
of establishing the abandonment.
(1) Abandonment may be presumed to have occurred if:
(a) A majority of the primary structure associated with the nonconforming use
has been voluntarily demolished without prior written agreement with the
municipality regarding an extension of the nonconforming use;
(b) The use has been discontinued for a minimum of one year; or
(c) The primary structure associated with the nonconforming use remains
vacant for a period of one year.
2 - 27
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2008-10.doc
(2) The property owner may rebut the presumption of abandonment, and shall have
the burden of establishing that any claimed abandonment has not in fact
occurred.
14-2-108 SCHOOLS
The nonconforming status of a school district or charter school use or structure is terminated
when the property associated with the school district or charter school use or structure ceases
to be used for school district or charter school purposes for a period of one year or longer.
Bountiful City Land Use Code
Table of Contents
Compiled January 28, 2020
Chapter Heading
CH 1 General Provisions
CH 2 Administration and Procedures
CH 3 Definitions
CH 4 (R) Single Family Residential Zone
CH 5 (RM) Residential Multiple Family Zone
CH 6 (C) Commercial Zone
CH 7 (DN) Downtown Zone
CH 8 (PO) Professional Office Zone
CH 9 (H) Hospital Zone
CH 10 (MXD) Mixed Use Zone
CH 11 (PF) Public Facilities Zone
CH 12 (MWP) Mountain Development Watershed Protection Zone
CH 13 (PDO) Planned Development Overlay Zone
CH 14 Supplementary Development Standards
CH 15 Design Standards for Non-Single Family Development
CH 16 Landscaping and Fencing
CH 17 Temporary, Seasonal, and Home Occupation Uses
CH 18 Motor Vehicle Parking and Access Standards
CH 19 Sign Regulations
CH 20 Subdivision
CH 21 Group Homes and Other Facilities
CH 22 Chickens in Single Family Residential Zones
1 - 1
Chapter 1 General Provisions Ord 2020.01
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
14-1-101 TITLE
14-1-102 DECLARATION OF PURPOSE
14-1-103 APPLICATIONS
14-1-104 LICENSES TO CONFORM
14-1-105 BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED
10-1-106 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY AND USE COMPLIANCE
14-1-107 CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO CONFORM TO PLANS
14-1-108 EXEMPTION OF STATE AND FEDERAL PROPERTY
14-1-109 ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT
14-1-110 INSPECTION
14-1-111 PENALTIES
14-1-112 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS
14-1-113 FINAL DECISIONS AND APPEALS
14-1-114 SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF ORDINANCE
14-1-101 TITLE
These zoning, land use, development, subdivision, and sign ordinances, etc., shall be known
and may be cited as “Land Use Code” or “Zoning Code” of the City of Bountiful.
14-1-102 DECLARATION OF PURPOSE
This Title and the regulations and restrictions contained herein are adopted and enacted for the
following purpose:
1. To promote the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the present and
future inhabitants of the community.
2. To encourage and facilitate the orderly growth and development of the community and to
implement the goals and policies of the General Plan.
3. To provide adequate open space for light and air; to prevent overcrowding of the land.
4. To secure economy in municipal expenditures and to encourage adequate provisions for
transportation, water sewage, schools, parks and other public facilities.
5. To increase the security of home life and to preserve and create a more favorable
environment for the citizens and visitors of the community.
6. To ensure safety from fire and other dangers.
7. To place compatible uses together in the community.
8. To enhance the economic, historical, and cultural well being of the inhabitants of the
community.
1 - 2
Chapter 1 General Provisions Ord 2020.01
9. To promote the development of a more wholesome, serviceable and attractive
community resulting from an orderly, planned use of resources.
10. To establish proper zoning regulations, to ensure the suitability of the land for particular
uses, and to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the community, as
determined by the City Council.
11. To further the purpose of this Title and to promote the objectives and qualities of the
respective zones.
14-1-103 APPLICATIONS
A. An application is complete when the appropriate City-provided form has been completely
filled out, signed by the appropriate applicant, fees have been paid, and all supplemental
information required in this Title (such as maps, reports, etc.) are submitted to the
Planning Director, and the Planning Director has determined that the application is
complete.
B. If it is determined that the application is not complete, the applicant shall be notified in
writing, specifying the deficiencies of the application, including any additional information
which must be supplied and advising the applicant that no further action will be taken by
the city on the application until the deficiencies are corrected.
C. If the applicant fails to correct the specified deficiencies within thirty (30) days of the
notification of deficiency, or within the timeline specifically set forth in other chapters of
this Title, the application for development approval shall be deemed withdrawn and will
be returned to the applicant. Application fees shall not be refunded.
D. The Planning Director, or any body acting pursuant to this Title, may upon written
request and for good cause shown, and without any notice or hearing, grant in writing
extensions of any time limit imposed on an applicant or permittee by this Title, unless
specifically stated otherwise in this Title.
14-1-104 LICENSES TO CONFORM
All departments, officials and employees of the City of Bountiful which are vested with duty or
authority to issue permits and licenses shall conform to the provisions of this Code and shall
issue no permit or license for a use or building where the same would be in conflict with the
provisions of this Code. Any permit or license issued in violation of this Code is voidable at
the option of the City.
14-1-105 BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED
A. No building or structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, altered or moved, nor shall
the use of the land be changed, except after the issuance of a permit for the same by the
Engineering and Building Department and approved by the Planning Department, unless
excluded by the currently adopted version of the International Building Code and as
provided in this Title. Furthermore, no building lot or parcel of ground shall be filled,
excavated, or otherwise structurally altered without an excavation permit from the
Engineering and Building Department. Activities that do not require a building permit are
not exempt from the provisions of this Title.
1 - 3
Chapter 1 General Provisions Ord 2020.01
B. Permits shall not be granted for the construction or alteration of any building or structure,
or for moving of a building onto a lot, or for the change of the use in any land, building, or
structure, if such construction, alteration, moving or change in use would be a violation of
any of the provisions of this Code. No sewer service line, water service line or electrical
utilities shall be installed to serve such premises if such use will be in violation of this
Code.
C. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale
showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and setbacks of
existing buildings, proposed buildings and existing buildings on adjacent property or
such other information as may be deemed necessary by the Building Official, City
Engineer, or the Planning Director for the enforcement of this Code.
14-1-106 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY AND USE COMPLIANCE
A. Certificate Required. It is unlawful to use or occupy, or to permit the use or occupancy of
any building or premises prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the premises
and/or building by the City. It is unlawful to occupy, or to allow to be occupied, any
building which has a greater intensity of use or different occupancy than specifically
provided for in the Certificate of Occupancy as permitted by this Title.
B. Issuance of Certificate. A Certificate of Occupancy or a final occupancy approval,
hereinafter referred to as "Certificate" shall be issued by the Engineering and Building
Department of the City at the time a building is completed and final inspection
conducted. A new Certificate shall be required any time the occupancy of the building
changes to a more intensive use.
C. Penalty for Violations. Failure to obtain a Certificate of Occupancy for occupying, or
allowing to be occupied, any structure regulated by the International Building Code or
the International Residential Code, or for changing the intensity of use beyond that
approved by the Certificate of Occupancy issued under this Code is a Class "C"
misdemeanor for each such offense.
D. Nuisance. The occupancy of any building for which a Certificate of Occupancy has not
been issued is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated as such. It shall
also be a nuisance for any building to be occupied with greater intensity than authorized
herein, or for any other occupancy than is authorized in the certificate or required under
this Title.
E. Illegal Use. The occupancy or use of any property or structure for a purpose not
permitted by this Title shall be deemed an illegal use and may be prosecuted to the
extent allowed by law.
F. Illegal Change of Use. Any person, individual, corporation, or other party that changes
the use of a structure or property to a use not permitted by current City ordinances,
without first obtaining required re-zoning, variance or other use approvals from the City,
is guilty of a class C misdemeanor.
G. False Representation. Any person, individual, corporation, or other party that, for
purpose of selling or leasing real property, represents either orally or in writing that a
1 - 4
Chapter 1 General Provisions Ord 2020.01
property or structure has a lawful use when in fact that use is unlawful under current City
ordinances, is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. This includes real estate agents and
any other persons engaged in the marketing of a property.
H. Zoning Disclosure Required. Any seller, lessor, or any person representing a seller or
lessor of real property, shall disclose in a prominent location on any listing or other
promotional material (not including signs), the zoning designation of the subject property
given on the current official zoning map of the City. This disclosure shall include both the
zone map classification and the zone name, i.e., R-4, Single Family Residential.
14-1-107 CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO CONFORM TO PLANS
A. A building permit or Certificate of Occupancy issued on the basis of plans and
specifications approved by the City in accordance with the terms of this Title and
adopted building codes authorizes only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth
in the approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement or construction.
Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized in said plans and
specifications may be deemed a violation of this Code.
B. At the time of footing and foundation inspection, the building permit applicant or his
agent shall provide the City Building inspector a signed and stamped surveyor’s
certificate stating that the foundation location and elevation conforms to the approved
plans.
14-1-108 EXEMPTION OF STATE AND FEDERAL PROPERTY
Unless otherwise provided by law, nothing contained in this Title may be construed as giving the
Planning Commission or the City Council jurisdiction over properties owned by the State of Utah
or the United States Government, unless specifically granted by those entities.
14-1-109 ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT
Any building or structure erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved, or
maintained contrary to the provisions of this Code, and any land, building, or premises used
contrary to the provisions of this Title is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance.
The City Attorney may immediately commence action or proceedings for the abatement and
removal and enjoinments thereof in the manner provided by law. The City Attorney may take
such other steps and may apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as
will abate and remove such building or structure, and restrain and enjoin any person, firm or
corporation from setting up, erecting, building, maintaining or using any such building or
structure or using property contrary to the provisions of this Title. The remedies provided for
herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive.
14-1-110 INSPECTION
The Chief Building Inspector, Planning Director, and City Engineer, or their authorized
representatives, are hereby authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected, all buildings and
structures in the course of construction, modification, or repair, and to inspect land uses to
determine compliance with the provisions of this Title. Said persons are authorized to enter
upon private property at reasonable times and/or after reasonable notice has been given to the
property owner or occupant.
1 - 5
Chapter 1 General Provisions Ord 2020.01
14-1-111 PENALTIES
Any person, partnership, corporation, or other body, whether acting as principal agent,
employee, or otherwise, who violates or causes the violation of any of the provisions of this Title,
or fails or refuses to do some act required under this Title, shall be guilty of a Class C
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine or by imprisonment not to
exceed the limit set forth in State law. Such person, firm, or corporation shall be deemed to be
guilty of a separate offense each and every day during which any portion of any violation of this
Title is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, firm, or corporation, and shall be
punishable as herein provided.
14-1-112 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS
In cases where regulations within this Code conflict, the most restrictive of the conflicting
regulations shall supersede the less restrictive.
14-1-113 FINAL DECISIONS AND APPEALS
A. A “final decision” is “rendered” when a vote is taken on the merits of the proposal by the
Administrative Committee, Planning Commission, or City Council, or when an
administrative decision is issued in written form by the Planning Director or other City
official.
B. Any person, organization, corporation or governmental unit shall have the right to appeal
as set forth in the Administration and Procedures chapter of this Title.
C. An appeal body may affirm, reverse, or alter any determination, or may postpone a
determination until further study can be conducted. This may include referring the
matter back to the original decision making body for additional review.
14-1-114 SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF ORDINANCE
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses and phrases of this Title are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph or section of this Title shall be declared invalid by the final judgment of decree of any
court of competent jurisdiction, or deleted through amendment or repeal, such invalidation, or
deletion shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and
sections of this Title.
2 - 1
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
INDEX
PART 1 - DECISION MAKING BODIES AND OFFICIALS
PART 2 - ZONE ESTABLISHMENT
PART 3 - ARCHITECTURAL AND SITE PLAN APPROVAL
PART 4 - NONCONFORMING USES AND NON-COMPLYING SITES/BUILDINGS
PART 5 - CONDITIONAL USES
2 - 2
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
PART 1 - DECISION MAKING BODIES AND OFFICIALS
14-2-101 PURPOSE
14-2-102 CITY COUNCIL
14-2-103 PLANNING COMMISSION
14-2-104 ADMINISTRATIVE COMMITTEE
14-2-105 OTHER COMMITTEES
14-2-106 LAND USE ADMINISTRATION
14-2-107 ADA AND FFHA ACCOMMODATIONS
14-2-108 APPEALS
14-2-109 APPEAL AUTHORITY
14-2-110 PROPERTY IN GOOD STANDING
14-2-111 APPROVAL/REVIEW BODIES
14-2-101 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the authority of decision making bodies and officials
responsible for administering the provisions of the Bountiful Land Use Code.
14-2-102 CITY COUNCIL
A. Powers Not Enumerated in this Title. The Bountiful City Council has powers and duties
which are not set forth in this Title or Chapter, and those stated here are not an
exclusive or an exhaustive list. For other powers and duties, see the Bountiful City Code
and the Utah Code.
B. Powers and Duties Related to this Title. In administering this Title, the City Council shall
have the powers and duties set forth below. Each of such powers and duties shall be
exercised pursuant to the procedural and other applicable provisions of the Utah Code
and of this Title.
1. Adopt, modify, or reject a General Plan or any amendment thereto;
2. Adopt, modify, or reject amendments to the text of the Land Use Code and to the
zoning map;
3. Hear and decide appeals from Planning Commission decisions as provided in
this Title;
4. Establish a fee schedule for applications required by provisions of this Title; and
5. Perform any other power or duty set forth in this Land Use Code or in State law.
C. Restriction on Eminent Domain for Trail Use. Eminent Domain may not be used for trails.
2 - 3
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
14-2-103 PLANNING COMMISSION
A. Established. A Planning Commission, consisting of seven (7) members is hereby
established to exercise the powers and duties specified herein.
B. Appointment and Terms of Office.
1. Planning Commission members shall be residents of Bountiful City and shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.
2. The terms of Planning Commission members shall be staggered. Each member
of the Planning Commission shall serve for a term of four (4) years and until a
successor is appointed, provided that members may be appointed for terms
shorter than three (3) years when necessary to provide staggered terms.
3. Terms of Planning Commission members shall begin on July 1st of each year.
4. Planning Commission members may be reappointed for successive terms.
5. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, may remove any
member of the Planning Commission at any time with or without cause.
6. A vacancy occurring on the Planning Commission by reason of death,
resignation, removal, disqualification or any other reason shall be promptly filled
by a replacement appointed in the same manner as the original appointment for
the remainder of the unexpired term of the replaced member.
7. The Mayor may appoint one person from the City Council as a full member of the
Planning Commission.
C. Organization and Procedure. The Planning Commission shall be organized and exercise
its powers and duties as follows:
1. Members of the Planning Commission shall select one (1) of its members as
chair to oversee the proceedings and activities of the Planning Commission.
a. The chairperson shall serve for a term of one (1) year.
b. Members of the Planning Commission shall select one (1) of its members
as vice-chair to act in the absence of the chair. The chair and vice-chair
may be re-elected for successive terms.
2. The Planning Commission may adopt policies and procedures, consistent with
the provisions of this Title and applicable law, to govern the conduct of its
meetings, the processing of applications, and for any other purposes considered
necessary for the functioning of the Planning Commission. All such policies and
procedures shall be submitted to the City Council for review and approval.
3. The Planning Commission shall meet on a regular basis, as determined by a vote
of the Commission members, and at such other times as the Commission
2 - 4
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
members may determine. All meetings shall be properly noticed as required by
law, and held in accordance with the open meetings law set forth in Utah Code
Ann. ' 52-4-1, et seq., as amended. At the beginning of each calendar year the
Bountiful City Planning Department shall create and post in its office a schedule
of Planning Commission meetings and application deadlines.
4. No official business shall be conducted by the Planning Commission unless a
quorum of its members is present. Four (4) members of the Planning
Commission shall constitute a quorum. Any action taken shall require a minimum
of four (4) yes votes from members of the Planning Commission, unless
otherwise prescribed by law.
5. Any person desiring to appear before the Planning Commission shall complete
an application and submit all required materials and fees to the Planning
Department. An application that does not include all of the required signatures,
materials, fees, or other necessary information shall be deemed incomplete and
returned to the applicant.
6. After an applicant has submitted a completed application to the Planning
Department, the item shall be placed on the next available Planning Commission
agenda, unless the applicant and the Commission Chair agree to postpone
placing the item on the agenda or agree to continue the item to a subsequent
meeting.
7. An applicant may request that an item be postponed or continued a maximum of
one (1) meeting (i.e. once) or for forty five (45) days from the date of application,
whichever is longer. If the matter is not heard within this deadline, the application
is deemed to have expired or been withdrawn, and must be resubmitted if the
applicant desires the Commission to act on the item. This shall not apply to
completed applications that have been placed on an agenda, reviewed and
discussed by the Planning Commission, and then continued for reasons
determined by the Commission.
8. The Planning Commission shall not reconsider a previous action or change a
recorded vote, and once an action is taken, the matter shall not be considered
again for twelve (12) months from the date of decision.
9. Decisions of the Planning Commission shall take effect on the date of the
meeting or hearing where the decision is made, unless a different date is
designated in the Commission's rules or at the time the decision is made. The
approval of written findings shall relate back to the date of decision.
10. The Planning Commission shall keep written minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vote upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact,
and keep records of all its official actions. The Planning Commission may, but is
not required to, have its proceedings transcribed by a secretary, a court reporter,
a tape recorder, or other recording device.
a. The Planning Commission shall report, either verbally or in writing, its
official acts and recommendations to the City Council. Any member of the
2 - 5
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
Planning Commission may also make a concurring or dissenting report or
recommendation to the City Council.
b. The minutes of all meetings of the Planning Commission shall be
prepared and filed in the office of the Planning Director, under the
direction of the City Recorder. All such records are public records and
shall be available for public review and access in accordance with the
Government Records and Access Management Act, Utah Code Ann., 63-
2-101, et seq., as amended.
D. Powers and Duties. The Planning Commission shall have all the powers and duties,
explicit or implied, given planning commissions by Utah State law and the Bountiful City
Land Use Code, including but not limited to the following. Each of such powers and
duties shall be exercised pursuant to the procedural and other provisions of this Title and
of State law.
1. Prepare and recommend a general plan and amendments to the general plan to
the City Council;
2. Recommend land use ordinances and maps, and/or amendments to the Land
Use Code and maps, to the City Council;
3. Administer applicable provisions of this Title and of State law;
4. Recommend approval or denial of subdivision applications;
5. Advise the City Council on matters requested by the City Council;
6. Hear and decide the approval or denial of conditional use permits;
7. Hear and decide variances from this title;
8. Hear and/or decide any other matter that the City Council designates;
9. Exercise any other powers that are necessary to enable the Planning
Commission to perform its function or that are delegated to it by the City Council;
and
10. Perform any other power or duty set forth in this Land Use Code or in State law
relating to Planning Commissions.
E. Appeals. Any person adversely affected by a final decision of the Planning Commission
may appeal that decision as set forth in Section 14-2-108 of this Title. Any
recommendation of the Planning Commission to another approval body is not a final
decision and therefore cannot be appealed.
F. Examinations and Surveys. The Planning Commission and its authorized agents may
enter upon any land at reasonable times to make examinations and surveys as
necessary to enable it to perform its function to promote City planning, development, and
enforcement of the provisions of this Title.
2 - 6
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
14-2-104 ADMINISTRATIVE COMMITTEE
A. Established. In order to provide for just and fair treatment in the administration of this
Title, and to ensure that items of a routine nature are processed expeditiously and in a
public forum, an Administrative Committee consisting of three (3) members is hereby
established to exercise the powers and duties specified herein.
B. Appointment and Terms of Office.
1. The Planning Director and City Engineer, or their designees, shall each serve as
members of the Board. The third member and an alternate shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.
a. An appointed member of the Administrative Committee shall serve a term
of two (2) years and until a successor is appointed. Terms shall
commence July 1st of every odd year.
b. An appointed Administrative Committee member may be reappointed for
successive terms.
c. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, may remove
an appointed member of the Administrative Committee at any time with or
without cause.
d. A vacancy occurring on the Administrative Committee by reason of death,
resignation, removal, disqualification or any other reason shall be
promptly filled by a replacement appointed in the same manner as the
original appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term of the
replaced member.
2. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, may approve an
alternate to the Administrative Committee.
C. Organization and Procedure. The Administrative Committee shall be organized and
exercise its powers and duties as follows:
1. The Planning Director shall oversee the proceedings and activities of the
Administrative Committee, and shall act as the Committee Chair.
2. The Planning Director or acting Chair may vote.
3. The Administrative Committee shall not meet in the absence of the Planning
Director, City Engineer, or their designees, and no official business shall be
conducted by the Administrative Committee unless a quorum of its members is
present.
4. The Administrative Committee may adopt policies and procedures, consistent
with the provisions of this Title and applicable law, to govern the conduct of its
meetings, the processing of applications, and for any other purposes considered
necessary for the functioning of the Committee.
2 - 7
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
5. The Administrative Committee shall meet as necessary to consider matters
within its jurisdiction. All meetings shall be properly noticed as required by law,
and held in accordance with the open meetings law set forth in Utah Code Ann.
'52-4-1, et seq., as amended.
6. Public comment shall be allowed on all items brought before the Administrative
Committee. If an item brought before the Administrative Committee requires a
public hearing and/or public notice, the noticing requirement shall be an on-site
posting in a prominent location of the meeting date, location, and time, at least
ten (10) days prior to the meeting, unless otherwise required by State Law. This
noticing requirement shall supersede all other noticing provisions of this Title.
7. Decisions of the Administrative Committee shall take effect on the date of the
meeting or hearing where the decision is made, unless a different time is
designated in the Board's rules or at the time the decision is made.
8. The Administrative Committee shall keep written minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote upon each matter, and keep records of its examinations and
other official actions.
a. The Administrative Committee shall provide a copy of each agenda and
the outcome of each item to the City Council and Planning Commission.
b. The minutes of all meetings of the Administrative Committee shall be
prepared and filed in the office of the Planning Director, under the
direction of the City Recorder. All such records are public records and
shall be available for public review and access in accordance with the
Government Records and Access Management Act, Utah Code Ann., 63-
2-101, et seq., as amended.
D. Powers and Duties. The Administrative Committee shall have the power and duty to
review and decide those matters designated by the City Council and/or Planning
Commission. The Administrative Committee Chairman may assign any item designated
for Administrative Committee review to the Planning Commission, in which case any
power or review authority granted to the Administrative Committee shall also be afforded
to the Planning Commission. Each of such powers and duties shall be exercised
pursuant to the procedural rules and other provisions of this Title and of State law. Items
specifically designated to the Administrative Committee are as follows:
1. Conditional use permits for home occupation licenses and for commercial
business operations that do not require a new and/or amended site plan.
2. Variances from the terms of this Title, as designated by Code.
3. The expansion or modification of a non-complying single-family dwelling or
structure where the non-complying aspect is continued.
4. Lot-line adjustments.
5. Any other matter designated by the City Council or Planning Commission.
2 - 8
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
6. Beer License violations short of suspension or revocation.
E. Appeals. Any person adversely affected by a final decision of the Administrative
Committee may appeal that decision as set forth in Section 14-2-108 of this Title. Any
recommendation of the Administrative Committee to another approval body is not a final
decision and therefore cannot be appealed.
14-2-105 OTHER COMMITTEES
The Mayor and/or Planning Director may organize other, non-binding committees as necessary
to facilitate planning objectives.
14-2-106 LAND USE ADMINISTRATION
A. Appointment. The Planning Director shall be responsible for administering and enforcing
this Title.
B. Interpretation. When necessary, the Planning Director shall interpret the provisions of
this Title, subject to general and specific policies established by the Planning
Commission and City Council. These interpretive decisions may be appealed as set forth
in Section 14-2-108 of the Bountiful City Land Use Code.
C. Administrative Duties. The Planning Director shall accomplish or cause to be
accomplished all administrative actions required by this Title, including the giving of
notice, holding of hearings, preparation of staff reports, and receiving and processing of
appeals.
14-2-107 ADA AND FFHA ACCOMMODATIONS
None of the requirements of this Title shall be interpreted to limit any reasonable
accommodation necessary to allow the establishment or occupancy of a residential facility for
persons with a disability.
A. Application. Any person or entity wanting a reasonable accommodation shall make
application therefore to the Bountiful City Planning Director and shall articulate in writing
the nature of the requested accommodation and the basis for the request.
B. Decision. The Bountiful City Planning Director shall render a decision on each
application for a reasonable accommodation. The decision shall be based on evidence
of record. The Planning Director may approve a reasonable accommodation request, in
whole or in part, if he/she finds all of the following:
1. That the requested accommodation will not undermine the legitimate purposes of
existing zoning regulations notwithstanding the benefit that the accommodation
would provide to a person with a disability; and
2. That, but for the accommodation, one or more persons with a disability likely will
be denied an equal opportunity to enjoy housing of their choice; and
2 - 9
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
3. That the accommodation is the minimum amount necessary to provide one or
more persons with a disability an equal opportunity to enjoy housing of their
choice.
C. Appeal. The decision of the Planning Director on the request for reasonable
accommodation may be appealed in the manner set forth in 14-2-108 of the Bountiful
City Land Use Code.
14-2-108 APPEALS
A. An applicant, board or officer of the City, or any person adversely affected by a Land
Use Authority’s decision administering or interpreting a land use ordinance, code or
ruling on a request for a variance may, within fourteen calendar days of the written
decision, appeal that decision to the Appeal Authority. No other appeals may be made to
the Appeal Authority.
B. The appeal must be in writing and specifically allege that there is an error in an order,
requirement, decision or determination by the Land Use Authority. The appellant shall
state every theory of relief that it can raise in District Court.
C. The Appeal Authority shall hold a public meeting within forty-five days after an appeal
has been filed, unless a longer period has been agreed to in writing by the parties
involved. A decision of the Appeal Authority takes effect when the written decision is
issued, unless the Appeal Authority otherwise states.
D. The Appeal Authority shall hold a de novo hearing. The requirements of State law and
City ordinances shall be applied.
E. A decision of the Appeal Authority is subject to a petition for review in the District Court
as provided by State law.
14-2-109 APPEAL AUTHORITY
A. The Appeal Authority for Bountiful City shall consist of an administrative law judge. The
Appeal Authority shall hear and decide appeals from:
1. Decisions on variance requests from the terms of the Land Use Code, and
2. Decisions interpreting and applying land use codes.
B. The City Council may designate separate appeal authorities to hear each of the two
types of appeals described above.
C. The administrative law judge shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council, and shall serve for two years. An alternate judge may also
be appointed by the same process. The City Council may remove an administrative law
judge for cause and after a public hearing if the judge so requests.
D. The Appeal Authority shall act in a quasi-judicial manner and its decisions on issues
within its jurisdiction are final.
2 - 10
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
14-2-110 PROPERTY IN GOOD STANDING
Any land use authority may postpone deliberation of any application or approval until such time
that any unlawful nonconformity or unlawful noncompliance associated with the subject
property, structure, site, or entity is remedied. Furthermore, any land use authority may deny
any application or approval if it is found that the subject property, structure, site, or entity is in
violation of any provision of the City Code.
2 - 11
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
14-2-111 APPROVAL/REVIEW BODIES
Item Subcategory
Approval/Review Bodies
Staff AC PC CC
Conditional Use Permit
Home Occupation Licenses &
Commercial Business
Operation
No Final No No
Accessory Dwelling Units No Final No No
All Others No No Final No
Subdivision All No No Recommend Final
Re-Zone All No No Recommend Final
Land Use Code Text
Amendment
All No No Recommend Final
Combine Lots/Lot Line
Adjustment
All No Final No No
Land Use Code/Map
Interpretation
All
Planning
Director
No No No
General Plan All No No Recommend Final
Site Plan
Residential SFD Final No Appeal No
Res SFD 200+ feet from street No Final No No
All other Residential No No Recommend Final
Res. SFD Accessory Structure Final No No No
All other Res. Accessory
Structure
Final No No No
Non-Residential No No Recommend Final
Non-Residential Accessory
Structure
Final No No No
All Non-SFD Residential
Amend
No No Recommend Final
All Non-Residential Amend No No Recommend Final
Expansion of Non-Complying
Site or Structure
Residential SFD
As
Designated
All Others No No
All Others No
As
Designated
All Others No
Expansion of Non-Conforming
Use
All No
As
Designated
All Others No
2 - 12
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
14-2-111 APPROVAL/REVIEW BODIES (CONTINUED)
Item Subcategory
Approval/Review Bodies
Staff AC PC CC
Easement Release All No No No Final
Variance
Slopes > 30% No Final No No
Cuts and Fills (includes
retaining walls) > 10 feet
No Final No No
Setbacks No No Final No
All others No No Final No
Drive Approach
Residential SFD Final No No No
All Non-SFD (without site plan
review)
Final No No No
All Non-SFD (with site plan
review)
No No Recommend Final
Interior Remodel All Final No No No
Retaining Wall All Final No No No
Signs
Commercial Pole/Monument –
New Developments
No No Recommend Final
All Others Final No No No
Utility Connections All Final No No No
Vacate/Abandon Public
Property
All No No Recommend Final
Improve Public Property All No No Recommend Final
ADA and FFHA
Accommodations
All
Planning
Director
No No No
Staff = The Planning, Engineering, and/or Building Department employees as assigned.
AC = Administrative Committee; As currently composed.
PC = Planning Commission; As currently composed.
CC = City Council; As currently composed.
2 - 13
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
PART 2 - ZONE ESTABLISHMENT
14-2-201 ZONE ESTABLISHMENT
14-2-202 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
14-2-203 LOCATION OF ZONE BOUNDARIES
14-2-204 NEWLY ANNEXED TERRITORIES
14-2-205 AMENDMENTS TO THE LAND USE CODE AND MAP
14-2-206 VARIANCES
14-2-207 ESTABLISHMENT OF USES NOT SPECIFIED
14-2-208 CLARIFICATION OF ZONING
14-2-209 CLARIFICATION OF AMBIGUITY
14-2-201 ZONE ESTABLISHMENT
In order to accomplish the purpose of this Code, Bountiful City is hereby divided into zones as
follows:
R Single Family Residential Zone
RM Multiple Family Residential Zone
C Commercial Zone
DN Downtown Zone
PO Professional Office Zone
H Hospital Zone
MXD Mixed Use Zone
PF Public Facilities Zone
MWP Mountain Development and Watershed Protection Zone
14-2-202 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
A. The location and boundaries of all zoning districts as contained herein, including
subsequent amendments, are shown on the map entitled BOUNTIFUL CITY ZONING
MAP. The territory within the City shall be subject to the land use restrictions set forth for
such zoning districts, as shown upon the maps.
B. Amendments to the boundaries of a specific zoning district shown on the BOUNTIFUL
CITY ZONING MAP shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions set forth in
this Title.
C. The Planning Director shall update the zoning district map as soon as possible after
amendments are adopted by the City Council. Upon entering any such amendment on
the map or maps, the Planning Director shall change the date of the map or maps to
indicate the latest revision. New prints of the updated map may then be issued.
2 - 14
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
14-2-203 LOCATION OF ZONE BOUNDARIES
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of various zones, the following rules
shall apply:
A. Where the boundaries on the zone map approximate street lines, the centerline of said
street shall be construed to be the zone boundary.
B. Where the boundaries approximate lot lines, said lot lines shall be construed to be the
zone boundary, unless otherwise indicated.
C. Where the boundaries approximate rivers or streams, the centerline of said, river or
stream, shall be construed to be the zone boundary.
D. In the absence of any street, lot line, river, or stream, the zone boundary shall be
determined by the legal description contained in the ordinance adopting the zoning
classification for the subject property.
E. Absent any of the above indicators, the zone boundary shall be determined by the use of
the scale of measurement shown on the zoning map.
F. In all instances, the Planning Director shall interpret the zoning map.
14-2-204 NEWLY ANNEXED TERRITORIES
A. Territories which the City annexes shall be assigned a zoning designation by the City
Council at the time the annexation ordinance is adopted. The Planning Director shall
recommend a zone designation for the area to the City Council.
B. In order to ensure due process and to protect the right of the citizens of the City,
property shall be zoned as indicated in the most recently adopted version of the General
Plan unless it can be demonstrated to the City Council that some other zoning
designation is appropriate. No official of the City shall utilize zoning designation
commitments as a means of bargaining for the annexation of property into the City.
14-2-205 AMENDMENTS TO THE LAND USE CODE AND MAP
A. This Title, including the official zoning map, may be amended by the City Council after
the Planning Commission has reviewed the proposed amendments and made an official
recommendation to the Council.
B. For the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable, and desirable
development within the City, it is declared to be the public policy that amendments
should not be made to the Bountiful City Land Use Code or Zoning Map except to
promote the objectives and purpose of this Title, the Bountiful City General Plan, or to
correct manifest errors.
C. Any person or organization seeking an amendment to the Land Use Code or any
property owner or authorized agent of any property owner seeking an amendment to the
2 - 15
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
Zoning Map shall submit to the Bountiful City Planning Department a completed
application containing the following information:
1. Designation of the specific zone change or Land Use Code text amendment
desired.
2. The reason and justification for such zone change or Land Use Code text
amendment, and a statement setting forth the manner in which a proposed
amendment or Zone would further promote the objectives and purposes of this
Ordinance.
3. A complete and accurate legal description of the area proposed to be rezoned, or
a draft of the proposed Land Use Code text amendment.
4. An accurate plat, drawn to scale with appropriate dimensions, showing all areas
to be included within the proposed rezoning, designating the present zoning of
the property subject to the petition, and properties immediately adjacent thereto.
5. A list of all property owners within a radius of five hundred (500) feet of the
boundaries of the property to be rezoned, as currently shown in the records of
the Davis County Recorder, on self-adhesive labels ready for mailing to all
names on the list.
6. A filing fee for a zone change or text amendment, as set by the City Council, paid
at the time of application. This fee is non-refundable. An application initiated by
the City shall be exempt from paying the required filing fee. The purpose of this
fee is to offset the cost of legal publications, notification of property owners, and
the staff time involved in researching the appropriateness of said request and its
effect on the general welfare of the City.
D. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Planning Director shall forward a copy of all
material to the Planning Commission for consideration at the next regularly scheduled
meeting that satisfies all of the noticing requirements.
E. The Planning Commission and/or City Council shall not hear a petition to rezone a
parcel of land, or portion of a parcel of land, that was considered for rezone within the
previous twelve (12) months, except that the City Council may reconsider a previous
action to deny a request sooner than the expiration of the twelve (12) month period, if:
1. At least one (1) City Council member, who voted with the prevailing majority on
the earlier City Council action, moves to have the City Council reconsider the
matter and a quorum of the City Council approves the reconsideration; and
2. The appropriate notices are published and a public hearing held, as required by
law. Referral to and reconsideration of the rezone by the Planning Commission
shall be at the discretion of the City Council.
F. Once an item has been properly noticed and placed on an agenda, the Planning
Commission shall consider the request and shall approve, disapprove or continue the
petition for future consideration. After taking final action on such petition, the Planning
2 - 16
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
Commission shall certify its recommendation to the City Council as approval or
disapproval of the proposed amendment. Before recommending a text amendment to
this Code or a change to the Zoning Map, it must be found that such amendment is
necessary, is in the interest of the public, and is in harmony with the objectives and
purposes of this Code. Failure on the part of the Planning Commission to make
recommendation to the City Council within thirty (30) days after hearing the petition shall
be deemed to constitute approval of such proposed amendment or change which shall
then be passed on to the City Council for appropriate action.
G. The City Council shall determine if a public hearing should be scheduled to consider the
Zone Map amendment or Land Use Code text amendment. Concurrence by the City
Council with an unfavorable recommendation of the Planning Commission shall
constitute a denial of the application, and no public hearing shall be held. If the
recommendation is favorable or if the City Council determines the proposed amendment
to be desirable despite an unfavorable recommendation, a public hearing shall be held.
H. The public noticing requirement for a zone map amendment or Land Use Code text
amendment shall be as required by State Law. In addition, the following shall apply for a
zone map amendment:
1. Notice shall be sent to all property owners within five hundred (500) feet radius of
the subject property at least fourteen (14) days prior to the first scheduled public
hearing.
2. A sign shall be posted on the site or adjacent to the closest section of public
right-of-way, at least ten (10) days in advance of the scheduled meeting.
I. After the public hearing, the City Council may adopt, amend and adopt, or reject the
zone change or Land Use Code text amendment.
J. Resubmission of any application for the same amendment shall not be allowed for a
period of one (1) year from the date of final decision or from the date when the
application was withdrawn.
14-2-206 VARIANCES
A. Variances from the terms of this Code may be granted by the Planning Commission or
the Administrative Committee, according to the provisions of this Title and State Law. An
application for a variance shall be filed with the Planning Department. Said application
shall contain the following:
1. A description of the requested variance, together with a description of that Land
Use Code provision for which relief is being requested and why such provision
causes undue hardship or need for variance.
2. An accurate plot plan, where appropriate, indicating the manner in which the
variance will be applied and its effect on adjacent properties.
3. A filing fee as set by the City Council.
2 - 17
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
4. If required, mailing addresses of all of the property owners within three hundred
(300) feet of the subject property, as per current County records, printed on self
adhesive labels.
B. Any request for variance shall be heard and decided by the Planning Commission unless
the item falls within a category designated for Administrative Committee review. When
considering the request, the Planning Commission or Administrative Committee shall
hold a public hearing to review the request and other concerns and take appropriate
action upon the request.
C. The noticing requirement for a variance heard by the Planning Commission shall be as
follows:
1. Notice sent to all property owners within a three hundred (300) feet radius of the
subject property fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing date.
2. Posted with notification signage on the subject property by the City and shall be
posted by the City at least ten (10) days in advance of the scheduled meeting.
D. The noticing requirement for a variance request heard by the Administrative Committee
shall be the same as required for any public hearing held by the Administrative
Committee, as set forth in 14-2-104.
E. The Planning Commission or Administrative Committee, after hearing necessary
testimony, information and citizen input, shall then make a finding conforming to this Title
and Section 10-9a-702 of the Utah State Code, which is as follows:
10-9a-702 Variances.
(1) Any person or entity desiring a waiver or modification of the requirements of
a land use ordinance as applied to a parcel of property that he owns, leases, or
in which he holds some other beneficial interest may apply to the applicable
appeal authority for a variance from the terms of the ordinance.
(2) (a) The appeal authority may grant a variance only if:
(i) literal enforcement of the ordinance would cause an unreasonable
hardship for the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general
purpose of the land use ordinances;
(ii) there are special circumstances attached to the property that do not
generally apply to other properties in the same zone;
(iii) granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a substantial
property right possessed by other property in the same zone;
(iv) the variance will not substantially affect the general plan and will not
be contrary to the public interest; and
(v) the spirit of the land use ordinance is observed and substantial justice
done.
(b) (i) In determining whether or not enforcement of the land use ordinance
would cause unreasonable hardship under Subsection (2)(a), the appeal
authority may not find an unreasonable hardship unless the alleged
hardship:
2 - 18
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
(A) is located on or associated with the property for which the
variance is sought; and
(B) comes from circumstances peculiar to the property, not from
conditions that are general to the neighborhood.
(ii) In determining whether or not enforcement of the land use ordinance
would cause unreasonable hardship under Subsection (2)(a), the appeal
authority may not find an unreasonable hardship if the hardship is selfimposed
or economic.
(c) In determining whether or not there are special circumstances attached to the
property under Subsection (2)(a), the appeal authority may find that special
circumstances exist only if the special circumstances:
(i) relate to the hardship complained of; and
(ii) deprive the property of privileges granted to other properties in the
same zone.
(3) The applicant shall bear the burden of proving that all of the conditions
justifying a variance have been met.
(4) Variances run with the land.
(5) The appeal authority may not grant a use variance.
(6) In granting a variance, the appeal authority may impose additional
requirements on the applicant that will:
(a) mitigate any harmful affects of the variance; or
(b) serve the purpose of the standard or requirement that is waived or
modified.
F. In granting a variance, the Planning Commission or Administrative Committee may
impose such reasonable conditions as will ensure that the use of the property to which
the variance applies will be as compatible as practicable with the surrounding properties
14-2-207 ESTABLISHMENT OF USES NOT SPECIFIED
When a use is not specifically contained in the list of permitted or conditional uses in a particular
zone, it is considered a non-permitted use and therefore is not allowed. The City Council may
amend the Land Use Code to allow additional uses through the Land Use Code text
amendment process set forth in 14-2-205.
14-2-208 CLARIFICATION OF ZONING
Any property which, for any reason, is not clearly zoned on the City's official Zoning Map, or is
determined not to be subject to the requirements of a zone classification as provided by this
Code, is hereby declared to be in the Mountain Development and Watershed Protection (MWP)
Zone, and shall be subject to the requirements of that Zone.
14-2-209 CLARIFICATION OF AMBIGUITY
If ambiguity arises concerning appropriate classification of a particular use within the meaning
and intent of this Code, or with respect to matters of height, yard requirements, area
requirements, zone boundaries, or any other provision of this Title as set forth herein and as
they may pertain to unforeseen circumstances, including technological changes and processing
of materials, the Planning Director shall ascertain all pertinent facts and shall make a decision in
writing as appropriate. The decision of the Planning Director may be appealed in the manner
2 - 19
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
provided for appeals of decisions of the Planning Director in administering the Land Use
Ordinance, as set forth in 14-2-108 of the Bountiful City Land Use Code.
2 - 20
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
PART 3 - ARCHITECTURAL AND SITE PLAN APPROVAL
14-2-301 PURPOSE
14-2-302 APPROVAL REQUIRED
14-2-303 APPLICATION
14-2-304 ACCOMPANYING MAPS AND DRAWINGS REQUIRED
14-2-305 REVIEW AND APPROVAL
14-2-306 CONSIDERATIONS IN REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS
14-2-307 INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS
14-2-301 PURPOSE
The purpose of the architectural and site plan review and approval process is:
A. To determine compliance with this Code;
B. To promote the orderly and safe development of land in the City;
C. To implement the policies and goals established in the Bountiful City General Plan; and
D. To promote the orderly layout of buildings, landscaping, walkways, lighting, and other
site improvements.
14-2-302 APPROVAL REQUIRED
A. The following uses shall require site plan approval from the Planning Commission and
the City Council:
1. Any industrial use.
2. Any commercial use.
3. Any institutional use.
4. Any multiple-family use, including apartments, condominiums, and two family
units (duplexes).
5. Any combination of residential and non-residential uses, except for home
occupations.
6. Any other non single-family residential use.
B. The Bountiful City Planning and Engineering Departments are the bodies designated to
review and approve single-family residential site plans.
2 - 21
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
14-2-303 APPLICATION
The property owner or an authorized agent shall submit a completed application, including all
required materials and fees, to the Planning Department. An application that does not include all
of the required signatures, materials, fees, or other necessary information shall be deemed
incomplete and returned to the applicant.
14-2-304 ACCOMPANYING MAPS AND DRAWINGS REQUIRED
All maps, drawings, and illustrations shall conform to Chapter 15 - Design Standards for Non-
Single Family Development, and to all other provisions of this title, and shall be prepared and
drawn to a standard scale large enough to show details clearly with dimensions thereof. Said
maps and drawings shall be stamped by a Registered Architect, Engineer, Landscape Architect,
or Land Surveyor in accordance with the laws of the State of Utah and the provisions of this
Title. The following shall be included:
A. For Preliminary Review:
1. A vicinity map showing site orientation and location in relation to streets and
arterial roads.
2. Statement of building use, occupancy, area tabulations, parking, and landscaping
tabulations.
3. The location of all proposed and existing structures on the subject property and
within fifty (50) feet on immediately adjoining properties to show that light and air
are preserved, and to show that the development will not be detrimental to the
orderly and harmonious development of the City.
4. Location and types of landscaping and/or fencing and screening within yards and
setback areas, including proposed sprinkling and irrigation systems.
5. Location of existing and proposed utilities (i.e., power, water, sewer, gas,
telephone, storm drains) and other public infrastructure improvements (i.e., curb,
gutter, sidewalk, streets) together with existing easements and rights-of-way.
6. Design of ingress and egress to provide a functional on-site traffic flow and to
prevent interference with traffic on adjacent streets.
7. Off-street parking and loading facilities in compliance with the off-street parking
and loading standards as set forth in Chapter 18 of this Code, including
provisions for pedestrians and the disabled.
8. Existing and proposed contours and spot elevations.
9. Preliminary drainage plan.
10. Preliminary building elevations and sections.
2 - 22
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
11. Architectural drawings, sketches, or perspective drawings of the exterior
elevations of proposed buildings, structures, signs, including types, textures, and
colors of materials to be used.
12. Other pertinent building features.
B. For Final Review:
1. Detailed development of all items required for Preliminary Review.
2. Modifications required by conditions of the Planning Commission for Preliminary
Approval and further optional modifications by owner/developer.
3. Landscape plan including plant materials list and details of installation prepared
by a landscape architect or licensed landscape installer.
C. For Building Permit:
1. All final construction documents including detailed development of all items
required for Preliminary and Final Review.
2. Documentation showing compliance with County Flood Control requirements.
3. Surface and subsurface drainage, including catch basins, piping and detention
basins.
4. Landscaping and sprinkler plans and details of installation prepared by a
landscape architect or licensed landscape installer.
14-2-305 REVIEW AND APPROVAL
A. The Planning Commission shall determine if the proposed architectural and site
development plans submitted are consistent with this Chapter and with the purpose and
objectives of this Code. Upon a finding that the application meets the intent of this
Chapter, the Planning Commission shall recommend to the City Council to approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the architectural and site development plans as
submitted. The Planning Commission recommendation shall expire within six months
from the time of recommendation.
B. The final decision by the City Council shall expire within one year of the final decision. If
an entire project is not to be built simultaneously, a phasing plan must be approved at
the time of final approval, and construction commenced within one year of the approved
phasing dates. One extension of up to six months may be approved by the City Council.
14-2-306 CONSIDERATIONS IN REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS
The Planning Commission shall consider the following matters, and others when applicable, in
their review of architectural and site development plans, and may refer the plans to one or more
expert consultants if the Planning Commission deems it necessary.
2 - 23
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
A. Considerations relating to traffic safety and traffic congestion:
1. The effect of the site development on traffic conditions on abutting streets.
2. The layout of the site with respect to locations and dimensions of vehicular and
pedestrian entrances, exits, drives, and walkways.
3. The arrangement and adequacy of off-street parking areas and other vehicular
facilities.
4. The location, arrangement, and dimensions of truck loading and unloading
facilities.
5. The transportation patterns within the boundaries of the development, and the
impact on transportation patterns within the general vicinity of the development.
6. The design, construction, and durability of all site plan elements.
B. Considerations relating to signs:
1. That all signs are compatible with the architectural design of the buildings and
are in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 19 of this Title.
2. That directional and/or informational signs are in compliance with the provisions
of Chapter 19 this Code and are in locations and of such dimensions so as to not
cause poor visibility for traffic.
C. Considerations relating to landscaping and other site improvements:
1. That the location, height, and materials of walls, fences, hedges, and screen
plantings concealing storage areas, utility installations, or other unsightly
development are harmonious with adjacent development.
2. That the planting of ground cover or other surfacing is designed to prevent dust
and erosion.
3. That the design keeps the destruction of existing healthy trees to a minimum.
4. That the design, construction, and durability of all site plan elements meets the
standards set forth in this Title.
D. Considerations relating to buildings and site layout:
1. That the general building silhouette and mass, including location on the site,
elevations, and relation to natural plant coverage, is in appropriate and
harmonious relationship to the character of the neighborhood.
2. That the exterior design is appropriate and harmonious in relation to adjoining
structures in height, bulk, area openings, breaks in facade facing the street (or
streets), line and pitch of roofs, and arrangement of structures on the parcel.
2 - 24
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
E. Considerations relating to drainage:
1. The effect of the site development plan on the adequacy of the storm and surface
water drainage facilities.
14-2-307 INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS
Landscaping, sprinkling systems, walls, fences and/or screening structures, walks, parking
areas, and other on-site improvements shall be installed in accordance with approved final site
plan prior to issuance of any occupancy permit. If the installation of any of these improvements
cannot be completed due to weather or other circumstances beyond the control of the owner or
developer, a Conditional Certificate of Occupancy may be issued if a Performance Security and
Deferral Agreement are signed by the developer or owner which shall guarantee completion of
all unfinished improvements. Such agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the City
Attorney.
The Performance Security and Deferral Agreement shall consist of:
A. A signed statement by the owner or developer that such improvements will be completed
by the earliest possible date to be determined by mutual agreement between the owner
or developer, the Planning Director and/or City Engineer. An extension beyond this date
may be granted if the owner or developer contacts the City fourteen (14) days prior to
the original completion date, the Planning Director and/or City Engineer agree to such an
extension, and the agreement is so amended.
B. A performance security, in favor of Bountiful City and in an amount equal to one hundred
twenty-five percent (125%) of the estimated cost of installation of the unfinished
improvements, is received in the form of either a security bond by a surety company duly
authorized to do business in the State of Utah, or a letter of credit by a bank or savings
and loan institution, or a cash deposit. The performance security shall be refunded upon
inspection and acceptance of the improvements by the City of Bountiful.
C. A signed agreement by the owner or developer that the bond will be forfeited to the City
in the event the improvements are not installed by the agreed date, including a
statement the City will have the right to take legal action to compel the completion of
such improvements.
2 - 25
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
PART 4 - NONCONFORMING USES AND NON-COMPLYING SITES/BUILDINGS
14-2-401 DEFINITIONS
14-2-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS
14-2-403 ABANDONMENT OF NONCONFORMING USE
14-2-404 CHANGE OF STATUS
14-2-405 TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USES AND NONCOMPLYING
STRUCTURES
14-2-406 DETERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING STATUS
14-2-407 SCHOOLS
14-2-401 DEFINITIONS
See Chapter 3 of this Title for the following definitions:
“NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURE” (also “NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE”)
“NONCONFORMING LOT”
“NONCONFORMING SIGN”
“NONCONFORMING USE”
“NONCONFORMITY”
“OTHER NONCONFORMITY “
14-2-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Continuation. A nonconformity in any zone may be continued as provided so long as no
additions or enlargements are made thereto and no structural alterations are made
therein, except as provided in this Chapter or as may be required by law. If any nonconformity
is removed from the property on which it was located, it shall not be replaced
unless it conforms to the current provisions of this Title.
B. Maintenance and Repair. Repairs and structural alterations may be made to any
nonconformity within the existing footprint thereof provided that the degree of
nonconformity is not increased.
C. Expansion and Enlargement. Any expansion of a nonconformity that increases the
degree of nonconformance is prohibited except as provided in this Title or as may be
required by law. For purposes of this Section, the addition of a solar energy device to a
building is not an expansion.
D. Relocation. Only noncomplying structures may be relocated. If a noncomplying structure
is relocated within the City, it shall be located in a manner which fully conforms to the
applicable requirements of this Title.
E. Restoration. A noncomplying structure or a nonconforming sign damaged by fire, wind,
tornado, earthquake, or other natural disaster or calamity may be restored as it existed
2 - 26
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
previously and its use may be continued so long as restoration is complete within one (1)
year.
14-2-403 ABANDONMENT OF NONCONFORMING USE
A. Abandonment of a nonconforming use shall be presumed to have occurred if:
1. A majority of the primary structure associated with the nonconforming use has
been voluntarily demolished without prior written agreement with the City
regarding an extension of the nonconforming use; or
2. The use has been discontinued for a minimum of one (1) year; or
3. The primary structure associated with the nonconforming use remains vacant for
a period of one (1) year; or
4. The property is subdivided or otherwise diminished, whether through metes and
bounds deed exchange, subdivision plat, or any other means.
B. Burden of Proof. Any party claiming that a nonconforming use has been abandoned
shall have the burden of establishing the abandonment.
C. Rebutting Presumption of Abandonment - Burden of Proof. The property owner may
rebut the presumption of abandonment and shall have the burden of establishing that
any claimed abandonment has not in fact occurred.
14-2-404 CHANGE OF STATUS
A. Any nonconformity shall not be changed except in conformance with the provisions of
this Title.
B. Whenever any nonconforming use is changed to a less intensive nonconforming use,
such use shall not be changed back to a more intensive nonconforming use.
C. Whenever any nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, the nonconforming
use status is immediately abandoned and it is unlawful to revert back to that
nonconforming use.
14-2-405 TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USES AND NONCOMPLYING
STRUCTURES
A. Illegal Use. An illegal nonconforming use shall be terminated immediately without regard
to this Section.
B. Reconstruction or restoration of a noncomplying structure is prohibited, or the
nonconforming use of a structure is terminated, if:
1. The structure is allowed to deteriorate to a condition that the structure is
rendered uninhabitable and is not repaired or restored within six (6) months after
written notice to the property owner from the Building Official or the Planning
2 - 27
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
Director that the structure is uninhabitable and that the noncomplying structure or
nonconforming use will be lost if the structure is not repaired or restored within
six (6) months; or
2. The property owner or his/her agent has voluntarily demolished a majority of the
noncomplying structure; or
3. The property owner or his/her agent has voluntarily demolished a majority of the
structure that contains the nonconforming use.
14-2-406 DETERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING STATUS
Burden of Proof. In all cases, the property owner shall have the burden of proving by a
preponderance of evidence that a lot, structure, use or other circumstance which does not
conform to the provisions of this Title was legally established.
A. A preponderance of evidence is evidence which is more credible and convincing than
evidence offered in opposition to it.
B. Evidence offered to prove a lot, structure, use, or other circumstance was legally
established may include, but is not limited to:
a. The date when the circumstance was created;
b. Copies of applicable zoning, building, or other code provisions in effect at
the time of creation;
c. Documents showing the nonconforming circumstance was authorized,
such as building permits, letters, and meeting minutes of governmental
bodies where the circumstance was discussed and/or authorized;
d. Property inspection reports which indicate the degree that the
nonconforming circumstance complies with applicable codes in effect at
the time of creation; and
e. Affidavits of persons with personal knowledge of the circumstances of
creation.
C. If a previously existing land use code is applied to a claimed nonconforming
circumstance, and no provision of such code would have allowed such circumstance, it
shall be prima facie evidence that the nonconforming circumstance was not legally
established.
D. If when established, a lot, structure, use, or other circumstance did not conform to the
provisions of applicable land use code provisions, the fact that it has been occupied,
used, or existed for a considerable period of time shall not be a factor in determining
whether the circumstance should be deemed legally established.
E. Abatement or Compliance. If a property owner is unable to demonstrate that a
nonconformity was legally established, it shall be deemed illegal and shall be abated or
2 - 28
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
brought into conformance with applicable provisions of this Title. Abatement or
compliance shall be achieved within thirty (30) days, unless the work which must be
undertaken to achieve compliance cannot be accomplished in that time period. In such
case the owner of the property shall enter into a legally binding agreement wherein the
owner agrees to a schedule to achieve conformity as soon as reasonably practicable, so
long as compliance is achieved within six (6) months.
14-2-407 SCHOOLS
The nonconforming status of a school district or charter school use or structure is terminated
when the property associated with the school district or charter school use or structure ceases
to be used for school district or charter school purposes for a period of one (1) year or longer.
2 - 29
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
PART 5 - CONDITIONAL USES
14-2-501 PURPOSE OF CONDITIONAL USE PROVISIONS
14-2-502 PERMIT REQUIRED
14-2-503 APPLICATION
14-2-504 FEE
14-2-505 PUBLIC COMMENT AND NOTICE
14-2-506 DETERMINATION
14-2-507 INSPECTION
14-2-508 REVOCATION
14-2-509 TIME LIMIT
14-2-510 RE-APPLICATION AFTER DENIAL OR REVOCATION
14-2-511 CONTINUING EFFECT
14-2-501 PURPOSE OF CONDITIONAL USE PROVISIONS
Certain uses which necessitate special conditions in order to make them compatible with
permitted uses within a zone designation, are classified as conditional uses and require
approval of a Conditional Use Permit.
14-2-502 PERMIT REQUIRED
A Conditional Use Permit shall be required for any use listed as a conditional use in any zoning
designation and/or as set forth elsewhere in this Title. A Conditional Use Permit may be revoked
upon failure of the original applicant or any successor, owner, or occupant to comply with
conditions precedent to the original approval of the permit, or as otherwise provided in the
Bountiful City Code.
14-2-503 APPLICATION
A. Conditional Use Permit application shall be filed with the Planning Department as
provided in this Title. Conditional uses shall be heard and decided by the Planning
Commission or the Administrative Committee as set forth in this Title.
B. Applications for Conditional Use Permits shall be accompanied by: maps, drawings,
statements, reports, studies, or other documents, as required by the approval body
and/or City staff. If applicable, the applicant shall also provide mailing addresses of all of
the property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property, per current
County records, printed on self-adhesive labels.
14-2-504 FEE
The applications for any Conditional Use Permit shall be accompanied by an appropriate fee set
by the City Council.
2 - 30
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
14-2-505 PUBLIC COMMENT AND NOTICE
A. Any request for a conditional use permit shall be heard and decided by the Planning
Commission unless the item falls within a category designated for Administrative
Committee review. When considering the request, the Planning Commission or
Administrative Committee shall hold a public hearing to review the request and other
concerns, and then take appropriate action upon the request.
B. The noticing requirement for a Conditional Use Permit heard by the Planning
Commission shall be as follows:
1. Sent to all property owners within a three hundred (300) feet radius around the
subject property at least fourteen (14) days prior to the meeting.
2. Posted with notification signage on the subject property by the applicant/agent.
The signage shall be provided to the applicant/agent by the City and shall be
posted by the applicant/agent ten (10) days in advance of the scheduled
meeting.
C. The noticing requirement for a conditional use permit request heard by the
Administrative Committee shall be the same as required for any public hearing held by
the Administrative Committee, as set forth in 14-2-104.
14-2-506 DETERMINATION
A. A conditional use permit shall be approved if reasonable conditions are proposed, or can
be imposed, to mitigate the reasonably anticipated detrimental effects of the proposed
use in accordance with the applicable standards.
B. If the reasonably anticipated detrimental effects of a proposed conditional use cannot be
substantially mitigated by the proposal, or if the imposition of reasonable conditions to
achieve compliance with applicable standards is not possible, the conditional use permit
request may be denied.
C. Standards applicable to conditional uses include all the requirements of this Title, and
consideration of the following:
1. The location of the proposed use in relationship to other existing uses in the
general vicinity.
2. The effects of the proposed use and/or accompanying improvements on existing
developments in the general vicinity;
3. The appropriate buffering of uses and buildings, proper parking and traffic
circulation, and the use of building materials and landscaping which are in
harmony with the area.
D. The applicant, at his or her cost, shall provide any report and/or study relating to utilities,
traffic impact, school impact, soil and water impact, existing conditions, line-of-sight and
2 - 31
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
building massing, and any other information requested by the City in order to render a
proper decision.
14-2-507 INSPECTION
Following the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit, the Planning Department shall approve an
application for a building permit upon compliance of construction plans meeting such conditions
and requirements as established by the Planning Commission. Representatives of the Planning
Department shall inspect the project to insure that all required improvements meet the
conditions of the Conditional Use Permit and this Code before a certificate of occupancy is
issued by the Engineering Department and before an application for permanent power for the
property may be approved by the Bountiful City Power Department.
14-2-508 REVOCATION
A. Upon receiving a written complaint alleging a violation or failure to comply with any
condition prescribed in a Conditional Use Permit, the Planning Department shall
investigate the complaint. If the complaint has merit, and attempts to remedy the
complaint fail, the Planning Department:
1. May place the complaint on the agenda of a regularly scheduled meeting of the
approving body, provided that the permittee shall have at least fourteen (14) days
notice of the meeting.
B. Permittee shall be given written notice by personal service or by certified mail of the
exact nature of the complaint and the date and time of the hearing before the Land Use
Authority. An informal hearing may be conducted to determine the current status of the
Conditional Use Permit prior to any public hearing, without notification to surrounding
owners.
C. The Land Use Authority, after hearing the evidence presented regarding the complaint,
may continue the hearing from time to time, may modify or rescind any condition or
requirement of the Conditional Use Permit as it deems necessary, or may take no action
and dismiss the complaint.
D. If, after review at the informal hearing the Land Use Authority finds that evidence of
failure to comply with the provisions of the Conditional Use Permit is substantial enough
to consider revocation; it shall schedule a formal hearing for purposes of considering
revocation of the Conditional Use Permit. The notice for the revocation hearing shall be
the same noticing procedure used for considering a new petition.
E. The Land Use Authority, after hearing final evidence and testimony on the status of the
Conditional Use Permit, may revoke the Conditional Use Permit or modify the conditions
as deemed necessary.
F. Any permittee aggrieved by an order may appeal such decision as set forth in 14-2-108.
2 - 32
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
14-2-509 TIME LIMIT
A. A temporary Conditional Use Permit for a use which is incidental or directly related to an
intended permanent use or is intended to become a permanent use may be issued by
the Administrative Committee for a period of six (6) months. This permit may be renewed
by the Planning Department for a total of three (3) successive six (6) month periods
allowing a total of two (2) years for the temporary Conditional Use Permit. Where
hardship or unusual circumstances exist, the Administrative Committee may extend the
temporary permit for one (1) additional year. These extensions shall be granted in two
(2) separate six (6) month increments. A temporary Conditional Use Permit shall not be
issued for a use which is not incidental to or directly related to an intended permanent
use on the property.
1. Mobile offices, homes or trailers which are used for business purposes shall only
be allowed for a six (6) month time period as authorized by the Administrative
Committee. The Administrative Committee may extend the time period for the
temporary structure up to one (1) additional year providing that the Planning
Commission and City Council have granted final site plan approval and
construction has commenced.
2. Temporary structures shall be removed from the property upon occupancy of the
permanent structure. Any pre-manufactured structure which meets all building
code regulations and which is part of the approved site plan, and any
construction trailer which is removed at the end of construction, shall be exempt
from this regulation.
B. Bountiful City does not issue temporary Conditional Use Occupancy Permits, and any
document purporting to be a temporary conditional use occupancy permit is void.
C. Unless there is substantial action under a Conditional Use Permit within a maximum
period of one (1) year of its issuance, the Conditional Use Permit shall expire. The
Bountiful City Planning Director may grant a maximum extension of six (6) months, when
deemed in the public interest. Substantial action under this section shall mean:
1. For new construction or a remodel, at least twenty five percent (25%) of the
proposed construction has been completed
2. For a use located in an existing or completed structure, at least twenty five
percent (25%) of the approved area is continuously occupied and utilized for the
conditional use.
14-2-510 RE-APPLICATION AFTER DENIAL OR REVOCATION
It is unlawful to apply or reapply for a Conditional Use Permit within one (1) year of the date of
denial or revocation of a Conditional Use Permit regarding any parcel of property or any portion
thereof.
2 - 33
Chapter 2 Administration and Procedures Ord 2020.01.docx
14-2-511 CONTINUING EFFECT
A. A Conditional Use Permit applies to a specific parcel of property, or portion of a parcel of
property, and may not be transferred to another parcel of property.
B. A Conditional Use Permit for the operation of a business does not run with the land
unless the approving body specifies otherwise. A Conditional Use Permit for the
construction of improvements to a property will run with the land unless the Planning
Commission sets conditions that limit it to a specific individual and/or for a finite period of
time. If any aspect of the conditional use becomes a legal nonconforming element due to
a later amendment to this Ordinance, the provisions of Part 4 of this Chapter relating to
nonconformities shall apply.
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 1
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
14-3-101 PURPOSE
14-3-102 DEFINITIONS
14-3-101 PURPOSE
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions shall be used in the
interpretation and construction of this Code. Words used in the present tense include the future;
the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular; the word building shall
include the word structure; the words used or occupied shall include arranged, designed,
constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased, or intended to be used; the word shall is
mandatory and not directory and the word may is permissive; the word person includes a firm,
association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual;
the word lot includes the words plot or parcel. Words which are not included herein, but are
defined in the International Building Code, shall have the meaning as defined within said
International Building Code.
14-3-102 DEFINITIONS
1. ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle left on public property or private
property in such an inoperative, dismantled, wrecked, or neglected condition that
the owner’s intention to relinquish all further rights or interests in it may be
reasonably concluded. A reasonable conclusion that any motor vehicle is
“abandoned” includes, but is not limited to, consideration of the amount of time
the motor vehicle has been resting in the same place; the state of the motor
vehicle’s mechanical condition; the state of the motor vehicle’s registration and
licensing; information provided by the owner of the motor vehicle; and,
information provided by surrounding property owners.
2. ABANDONED SIGN: A sign, sign frame, sign pole, or any part of a sign
structure which remains on a property which has been vacant or which remains
unused for a period of time in excess of 45 days, or which carries no message.
3. ACCESSORY USE or STRUCTURE: A use or structure that:
a. is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with a principal
building or use;
b. is subordinate to and serves a principal building or use;
c. is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or
principal use served;
d. contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants,
business, or industry in the principal building or principal use served; and
e. is located on the same lot as the principal building or principal use served.
4. ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (see also “ACCESSORY IN-LAW
APARTMENT”): A self-contained dwelling unit within an owner occupied singlefamily
residence or located on an owner occupied property that is either
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 2
incorporated within the single-family residence or in a detached building which
maintains complete independent living facilities for one or more persons,
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation
including a separate kitchen and/or laundry facilities.
5. ADULT DAYCARE FACILITY: Any building or structure furnishing care,
supervision, and guidance for three (3) or more adults unaccompanied by
guardians for periods of less than twenty four (24) hours per day.
6. ADVERTISING OR BUSINESS SIGN: A sign which directs attention to a
business use, product, commodity, or service.
7. AGENT OF OWNER: Any person with written authority to act for the property
owner.
8. A-FRAME SIGN: A freestanding, temporary, and/or movable device constructed
of two (2) separate panels and/or sign faces hinged at the top.
9. AISLE SPACE: The area located between or behind off-street parking stalls
where traffic circulation and access to the parking stalls is provided.
10. ALTERATION: Any change, addition, or modification in construction, or type of
occupancy of a building or structure, or any change in the structural members of
a building or structure, such as walls, partitions, columns, beams, girders, or
exits.
11. ALTERATION (Sign): Changing or rearranging any structural part or design of a
sign, whether by extending on a side, by increasing in area or height, or in
moving from one location or position to another, including sign face, enclosure,
lighting, coloring, copy (except on reader board or changeable copy signs), or
graphics.
12. AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine or device whether mechanically or
electronically operated, for the purpose of amusement or skill and for the play of
which a fee is charged. The term does not include ride machines designed
primarily for the amusement of children, or vending machines in which are not
incorporated features of chance or skill.
13. ANIMATED SIGN: A sign which
a. involves actual motion or rotation of any part of the sign itself by
mechanical, electrical, or artificial means, or
b. is designed to be moved or is moved by the wind or other natural means,
or
c. displays motion or the appearance of motion, animation, motion-picture
type movement, movement of still images across a screen, flashing or
intermittent lighting, color changes, copy changes, changing lighting
intensity, or messages through a sequence of progressive changes in
lighting; or
d. contains an electronic message center, reader board or panel.
14. ANIMATION: Simulated movement of shapes, text and other illustrations.
15. APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms designated and intended for living and
sleeping purposes and used as a dwelling unit.
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 3
16. APPEAL OF A FINAL DECISION: A written request made to the appropriate
appeal authority, including all required fees, forms, signatures, and exhibits,
submitted within the statutory appeal period.
17. APPEAL PERIOD: The statutory time frame in which an appeal of a final
decision shall be submitted, commencing at the moment the successful vote to
approve or deny a land use petition is made by the land use authority.
18. ARCADE: Any business catering, though not exclusively, to minors, maintaining
four or more amusement devices.
19. AREA: The aggregate of the maximum horizontal cross section within given
boundaries.
20. ARTS AND CRAFTS SHOW: The display and sale of painting, sculpture,
handcrafts, and similar objects.
21. ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: Commonly referred to as "residential care",
"assistive living" or "personal care community". A residential facility with common
area in which services are available to residents who may still live independently
within the facility itself. Help is generally offered in day-to-day tasks such as
taking medicine, bathing, dressing, using the bathroom, getting to appointments,
or preparing meals. A variety of services and amenities such as dining room
service, group outings, and recreational and social programs are usually
available.
22. AUTOMOBILE BODY OR FENDER SHOP: A facility for major automobile body,
frame or fender repairs, or rebuilding for automobiles and small trucks not
exceeding one and one-half (1 1/2) tons capacity.
23. AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY OR AUTOMATIC CAR WASH: A facility for automatic
or self-service washing and cleaning of automobiles and small trucks not
exceeding one and one-half (1 1/2) tons capacity.
24. AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE: A structure or portion thereof other than a
private garage, used for general repair of automobiles and small trucks not
exceeding one and one-half (1 1/2) tons in capacity including major and minor
repairs such as rebuilding and reconditioning of engines, transmission service,
starter motor and generator service, muffler shop, but not including body and
fender work or painting.
25. AUTOMOBILE REPAIR: General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines,
motor vehicles or trailers, transmission service, starter motor or generator
service, muffler shop, but not including body or fender work or painting.
26. AUTOMOBILE SERVICE CENTER: A place where automobiles are serviced
and repair work accomplished such as wheel alignment, tune up, brake service,
shock absorber replacement, etc., but not including body and fender work,
painting, or upholstery.
27. AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A place where gasoline, or any other motor
fuel or lubricating oil or greases for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to
the public and deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles and where
services performed may include tube and tire repair, battery charging, storage of
merchandise, lubricating of automobiles, replacement of spark plugs, lights, fans
and other small parts, but not including automobile repair such as body and
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 4
fender work, engine rebuilding and overhaul, transmission and differential
repairs, or welding of any kind, or vehicle or trailer sales or rental. This definition
shall include self-service, mini-market, and live-in service as accessory uses.
28. AUTOMOBILE TIRE SERVICE CENTER: A place which sells, repairs, and
services automobile tires including such services as wheel balancing and
alignment, brake service, shock absorber replacement and other incidental tire
and wheel services, but not including recapping or major automobile repairs.
29. AUTOMOBILE OR TRUCK PAINT SHOP: A facility for painting of automobiles,
trucks, trailers, boats, or other travel or recreation vehicles or units.
30. AUTOMOBILE OR TRAILER SALES AREA: An open area used for display,
sale, or rental of new or used motor vehicles or trailers in operable condition
where no repair work is done.
31. AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: The dismantling or wrecking of used motor
vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked
vehicles or their parts. The presence on any lot or parcel of land of two (2) or
more motor vehicles, which, for a period exceeding thirty (30) days, have not
been capable of operating under their own power and from which parts have
been or are to be removed for reuse or sale, shall constitute prima-facie evidence
of an automobile wrecking yard.
32. AVERAGE GRADE: (See “GRADE PLANE”)
33. AVERAGE SLOPE: The words "average slope" shall mean and be determined
by the use of the following formula:
S = .00229 (I) (L)
A
S = Average slope of the entire subdivision or lot, as the case may be, before
development or construction.
A = Total area in the subdivision or lot, in acres.
L = Sum of the length of all contour lines, in feet.
I = Contour interval in feet.
34. AWNING: A roof-like structure constructed of fabric, metal, or other material that
extends outward with supports extending back to the building, providing a
functional protective shield.
35. AWNING OR CANOPY SIGN: A sign painted on, printed on, or otherwise
attached to the surface of an awning (see also “ELECTRIC AWNING SIGN”).
36. BACKLIGHTING: Illumination positioned inside or behind a sign face such as
behind raised letters and awnings or inside sign cabinets, the lighting source of
which is not itself visible to the observer.
37. BANNER: A sign made of fabric or any non-rigid material with no enclosing
framework.
38. BASEMENT: Any floor level below the first story in a building, except that a floor
level in a building have only one floor level shall be classified as a basement
unless such floor level qualifies as a first story as defined herein.
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 5
39. BEACON: Any light with one or more beams directed into the sky or directed at
one or more points not on the same parcel of land as the light source; also, any
light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
40. BED AND BREAKFAST INN: (see also “HOTEL”)
41. BEDROOM: A room in a dwelling unit designed, marketed and likely to function
primarily for sleeping purposes, separable from other rooms by a door.
42. BEGINNING OF CONSTRUCTION: The time of first excavation for construction.
43. BILLBOARD, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING, and/or OFF-PREMISES SIGN: Any
sign which advertises or directs attention to a business, commodity, or service,
that is conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than on the premises upon which
the sign is located.
44. BLADE SIGN: (see also “GROUND SIGN”)
45. BLOCK FACE: All property fronting upon one side of a street between
intersecting and intercepting streets, or between the street and the railroad rightof-
way, waterway, terminus of a dead end street, City Boundary, public park or
other natural boundary. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary
of the block face of the side of the street which it intercepts.
46. BOARDER: A person living in a rented room in a boarding house. The boarding
house operator or member of his or her immediate family who resides on the
premises with the operator, shall not be considered to be a boarder.
47. BOARDING HOUSE: A building or a portion thereof where, for compensation,
rooms are rented together with meals for not more than fifteen (15) boarders who
generally do not directly utilize kitchen facilities. The operator of a boarding
house must reside on the premises of the boarding house. The work shall include
compensation in money, services, or other things of value. A boarding house
does not include a residential facility for disabled persons or a residential facility
for the elderly. A boarding house does not include a nonresidential facility, such
as a rehabilitation/treatment facility, where the primary purpose of the facility is to
deliver rehabilitation, treatment, counseling, medical, protective, or other similar
services to the occupants.
48. BUFFER AREA: A landscaped area intended to separate and partially obstruct
the view of two adjacent land uses or properties from one another.
49. BUFFERING DEVICE: A specific application of a wall, fence, landscaping, or
any other permitted device to mitigate the impact of another structure or use.
50. BUILDABLE AREA, (BUILDING ENVELOPE): The portion of a lot remaining
after required yards have been provided, except that in the Residential Foothill
Zone (R-F) land with an average grade or slope exceeding thirty percent (30%)
shall not be considered buildable area.
51. BUILDABLE LAND, (USABLE LAND): Any portion of a property that is not
encumbered by physical constraints, such as a flood plain, geologic fault,
escarpment, or similar feature. In the Residential Foothill Zone (R-F) this
definition shall also include a portion of a property that is less than thirty percent
(30%) slope.
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 6
52. BUILDING:
a. A permanently located structure for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of
any person, animal, article, or chattel. When any portion thereof is
completely separated from every other portion thereof by a division wall
or fire wall, without openings, each such portion shall be a separate
building. The term building shall not include any form of vehicle, even
though immobilized. Where this Chapter requires, or where special
authority granted pursuant to this Chapter requires, that a use shall be
entirely enclosed within a building, this definition shall be qualified by
adding and enclosed on all sides.
b. The act of altering an existing structure or existing terrain. It includes
excavating, modifying, or in any way altering unimproved ground for any
purposes.
53. BUILDING, ATTACHED: A building or buildings connected by any two of the
following: a common wall, a continuous wall, a continuous foundation, or a
continuous roof line. Walls or fences, patios, porches, terraces or other roofed
accessory uses open on at least two (2) sides shall not constitute an attached
building.
54. BUILDING DIRECTORY SIGN: A pedestrian scale sign which displays the
tenant names within a multi-tenant project.
55. BUILDING FACE, (FACADE): The vertical portion of any exterior wall of a
building including windows, doors, parapet, and mansard, but not including a flat
or pitched roof. In a multi-tenant building this shall be defined only as the portion
of the exterior wall that directly corresponds to the unit for which the sign is
intended.
56. BUILDING FOOTPRINT: The portion of a parcel covered by a building or
structure at the surface level, measured on a horizontal plane.
57. BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the grade plane to the
highest point of the roof. (See Figures 3-1 and 3-2 at the end of this Chapter)
58. BUILDING LINE: A line parallel to the front lot line and at a distance therefrom
equal to the required depth of front yard for the zone in which the lot is located
and extending across the whole width of the lot.
59. BUILDING MARKER or HISTORICAL MARKER: Any marker indicating the name
of a building and its construction date, which may or may not include incidental
information about its construction or history, and which is embedded or otherwise
permanently affixed to the building. Such a marker shall not be defined as a sign.
60. BUILDING, PRINCIPAL OR MAIN: The principal building on a lot or building site
designed or used to accommodate the primary use to which the premises are
devoted. Where a permissible use involves more than one structure designed or
used for the primary purpose, as in the case of apartment groups, each such
permitted building on one lot as defined by this Code shall be construed as
constituting a principal building.
61. BUILDING, PUBLIC: A public building is a building owned and operated, or
owned and intended to be operated by the city, a public agency of the United
States of America, the state of Utah, or any of its political subdivisions. The use
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 7
of a public building, with immunity, is nontransferable and terminates if the
structure is devoted to a use other than as a public building with immunity. A
public building referred to as with immunity under the provisions of this Title
includes:
a. Properties owned by the state of Utah or the United States government
which are outside of the jurisdiction of the city zoning authority as
provided under Title 10, Chapter 9a, Section 304, Utah Code Annotated,
1953, as amended; and
b. The ownership or use of a building which is immune from the city zoning
authority under the supremacy clause of the United States Constitution.
62. CANDELA: A measure for luminous intensity established by The International
System of Units.
63. CANOPY: A roofed structure constructed of fabric or other material placed so as
to extend outward from the building providing a protective shield for doors,
windows, and other openings supported by the building and support extending to
the ground directly under the canopy.
64. CARPORT: A covered automobile parking space enclosed on not more than two
sides by walls or doors. For the purposes of this Code, a carport shall be subject
to all the regulations prescribed for a private garage.
65. CENTER LINE OF STREET: That line designated as Center Line in any street in
the City by the records of the City Engineer.
66. CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign with information or content which can be
changed or rearranged by manual or electric, electro-mechanical, or electronic
means. A sign, or portion thereof, on which the message changes more than one
(1) time each twenty four (24) hours shall be considered an animated sign and
not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this Code.
67. CHURCH: A building or buildings maintained and controlled by a dulyrecognized
religious organization where persons regularly assemble for worship.
68. CITY COUNCIL: The duly elected City Council of Bountiful City.
69. CLEARANCE (of a sign): The smallest vertical distance between the grade of
the adjacent street, highway, sidewalk or street curb and the lowest point on any
sign, including framework and embellishments, extending over that grade.
70. CLINIC, DENTAL OR MEDICAL: A building in which a group of dentists,
physicians, and allied professional assistants are associated for the conduct of
their professions. The clinic may include a dental and/or medical laboratory,
operating rooms, and a pharmacy, but it shall not include in-patient care.
71. COLLECTOR STREET: An existing or proposed street which is at least sixty (60)
feet wide and which is of considerable continuity, and which serves or is intended
to serve as the principal traffic way between large separated areas or districts,
and which is the means of access to the major street system.
72. COMMERCIAL MESSAGE: Any sign wording, logo, or other representation that,
directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product,
service, or other commercial activity.
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 8
73. COMMERCIAL SATELLITE ANTENNA: The outdoor portion of equipment used
for receiving satellite signals which appears and is commonly known as a "dish"
and which exceeds three (3) feet in diameter.
74. COMMERCIAL STORAGE FACILITY: A building or facility having one or more
tenants used strictly for the storage of personal and/or commercial items. Said
facility may not include sanitation facilities or culinary water. No repair, business,
service, or commerce may be conducted on or from the premises.
75. CONDITIONAL USE: A use of land for which a Conditional Use Permit is
required pursuant to this Code.
76. CONDOMINIUM: A residential structure consisting of two (2) or more units, each
under individual ownership, subject to Section 57-8-1, Utah Code Annotate,
1953, as amended.
77. CONSTRUCTION: On-site erection, fabrication, installation, alteration,
reconstruction, demolition, or removal of any structure, facility, or addition
thereto, including all related activities, such as clearing of land, earth moving,
excavation, fill, paving, drainage, and landscaping. Also includes the placement,
installation, or relocation onto a property of any structure fabricated off-site.
78. CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A temporary sign identifying an architect, contractor,
subcontractor, and/or material supplier participating in construction on the
property on which the sign is located.
79. CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY (CCRC): A residential facility
that provides different levels of care ranging from independent living units to
skilled nursing care in an affiliated nursing home, based on the residents' needs.
The objective is to allow residents the maximum amount of independence as
they age while meeting their changing housing, social, and medical needs.
Residents may move from one setting to another, but continue to remain part of
the overall development.
80. CONTRACTOR'S LOT: A fenced, landscaped, illuminated open area used to
store, repair, or rebuild heavy duty construction equipment and construction
material.
81. COPY: The graphic content of a sign surface in either permanent or removable
letter, pictographic, symbolic, or alphabetic form.
82. CORNER BUSINESS: A building or business fronting onto two public streets.
83. COURT: A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above ground
level on a lot and bounded on three or more sides by walls or a building.
84. COVENANT: A written agreement between the Buyer and Seller of a parcel of
land, or between Bountiful City and a property owner, to protect the interest of
the neighborhood and the community.
85. COVERAGE, LOT: The percent of the total lot area covered by buildings,
structures, and roofed areas.
86. DAY CARE, CHILD: Persons, associations, corporations, institutions or
agencies providing on a regular basis care and supervision, (regardless of
educational emphasis) to children under fourteen years of age, in lieu of care and
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 9
supervision ordinarily provided by parents in their own homes, with or without
charge, are engaged in providing child day care.
87. DAY CARE CENTERS (COMMERCIAL): Persons, associations, institutions or
agencies, which provide day care for thirteen (13) or more children and/or
educational opportunities for children for periods of more than four (4) hours in
any one day.
88. DEVELOPMENT SITE: The area within the perimeter of a subdivision or a
planned unit development, or in the absence of such, the area within the
perimeter of a tract, lot, or parcel of land.
89. DIRECTIONAL SIGN: An on-premises sign for traffic direction or for designation
of, or direction to, any building or location.
90. DISABILITY: A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or
more of a person's major life activities, including a person having a record of
such a problem or being regarded as having such an impairment. The following
definitions are incorporated into the definition of disability:
a. Disability does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to, any
federally controlled substance as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled
Substances Sect, 21 USC 802, or as defined under Title 58, Chapter 37,
Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended;
b. A physical or mental impairment includes the following:
i. Any psychological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement,
or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body
systems: neurological, musculoskeletal; special sense organs;
respiratory, including speech organs; cardiovascular, reproductive;
digestive; genitourinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and
endocrine; or
ii. Any mental or physiological disorder, such as mental retardation,
organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific
learning disabilities; or
iii. Such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech and
hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy, muscular
dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes,
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), mental retardation,
emotional illness, drug addiction (other than addiction caused by
current, illegal use of controlled substances) and alcoholism.
91. DISMANTLED VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle partially or wholly disassembled.
92. DISSOLVE: An image transition effect accomplished by varying the image
intensity or pattern, where the first image gradually appears to dissipate and lose
legibility simultaneously with gradual appearance and legibility of the subsequent
image.
93. DOMESTIC EMPLOYEE OR HELP: A person who lives as part of the family of
another, paying no rent for such occupancy and paying no part of the cost of
utilities therefore, working within or around the house where they live performing
household, maintenance, child care or similar duties in behalf of the family
owning said house. No person and no family member of any person who pays
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 10
rent for himself or his family shall be deemed the domestic employee or help of
the person to whom such rent is paid. In single family residential zones, separate
apartments or dwelling units may not be created for domestic employees,
whether attached, unattached, or within the single family residence structure. In
multiple family residential zones, any separate apartment or dwelling unit for
domestic employees must meet all of the requirements applicable to any other
dwelling unit in the zone.
94. DOMESTIC STAFF: Persons employed or residing on the premises of a dwelling
or other residential facility to perform domestic services or to assist residents in
performing major life activities.
95. DOUBLE-FACED SIGN: A single sign structure with two sign faces, essentially
back-to-back, but which are parallel (no greater than 1 foot apart) or diverge from
a common edge by an angle not greater than 30 degrees.
96. DRIVE-APPROACH (see also “CURB-CUT” or “DRIVE-ACCESS”): The portion
of a right-of-way located between the outside edge of a street travel-way and an
adjacent property and which is used or designated for vehicular passage.
97. DRIVEWAY: A private roadway, the use of which is limited to persons residing,
employed, or otherwise using or visiting the parcel on which it is located.
98. DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof designated or used exclusively for
residential purposes, except tents, travel trailers, hotels, motels, hospitals,
nursing homes, and boarding houses.
99. DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY: A building arranged, designed, and intended to
be occupied by one (1) family, the structure having only one (1) dwelling unit.
100. DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building arranged, designed, and intended to be
occupied by two (2) families, the structure having only two (2) dwelling units.
101. DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY: A building arranged, designed, and intended
to be occupied by three (3) or more families, the structure having three (3) or
more dwelling units.
102. DWELLING, UNIT: One or more rooms in a dwelling, apartment, hotel or
apartment motel, designed for or occupied by one (1) family for living or sleeping
purposes and having one (1) kitchen or set of fixed cooking facilities other than
hot plates or other portable cooking units unless a second kitchen has been
approved pursuant to Section 14-4-120 of this title.
103. EASEMENT, PRIVATE UTILITY: A legal interest in land for the stated purpose
of access to or placement of utilities serving a specific property or individual.
104. EASEMENT, PUBLIC UTILITY (P.U.E.): A legal interest in land for the stated
purpose of access to or placement of utilities serving the general public.
105. ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER (see also “ELECTRONIC READER
BOARD” or “ELECTRIC PANEL”): A sign, or portion of a sign, containing
graphics, text, or any other form of visual communication which can be changed
or rearranged by electronic means, but does not include a digital electronic
gasoline price sign that shows numbers only, and does not flash, change colors,
show pictures, video or words, or exceed the brightness allowed for electronic
message centers.
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 11
106. ELDERLY HOUSING: A general term for the different types of age restricted
residential developments and facilities allowed under the Federal Fair Housing
Act, which include: Senior living units, independent living facility, assisted living
facility, nursing home, and continuing care retirement community.
107. ELDERLY PERSON: A person who is sixty (60) years or older, who desires or
needs to live with other elderly persons in a group setting, but who is capable of
living independently.
108. ELECTRIC AWNING SIGN: An awning sign which is internally illuminated or
“back lit”.
109. ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER (see also “ELECTRONIC READER
BOARD” or “ELECTRONIC PANEL”): A sign, or portion of a sign, containing
graphics, text, or any other form of visual communication which can be changed
or rearranged by electronic means.
110. FACE OF A SIGN: The area of a sign on which the copy is placed.
111. FADE: Means an image transition effect accomplished by varying the intensity of
the image, where the first image gradually reduces intensity to the point of not
being legible and the subsequent image gradually increases intensity to the point
of legibility.
112. FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or
adoption, or a group of not more than four (4) persons (excluding domestic help)
who are not related, living in a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit and
using common cooking facilities and entrances.
113. FENCE, PERFORATED (NONSOLID or OPEN STYLE): A fence that is at least
seventy-five percent (75%) open which does not present a visual barrier/hazard
for pedestrians or drivers.
114. FENCE, SOLID: A solid, rigid fence or wall of wood, metal, fiberglass, or
masonry, being no more than ten percent (10%) open.
115. FINAL DECISION: A successful motion made by the City Council, Planning
Commission, or Administrative Committee to approve or deny a land-use item,
effective the moment the vote is taken.
116. FLAG: Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or
symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity.
117. FLAG LOT: A building lot whose access to a public road is through a section of
property that is longer than the minimum required front yard setback, and
narrower than the minimum required lot width.
118. FLASHING SIGN: (see “ANIMATED SIGN”)
119. FLAT SIGN (see also “WALL SIGN”): Any sign erected parallel to and attached
to an exterior wall of a building with messages or copy on one side only
120. FLOODLIGHTED SIGN: Any sign made legible in the absence of daylight by
devices which reflect or project light upon it.
121. FLOOR AREA: The sum of the areas of one or several floors of a building,
including areas used for human occupancy in basements, attics and penthouses,
as measured from the exterior face of walls. It does not include cellars,
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 12
unenclosed porches, or attics not used for human occupancy, or any floor space
in accessory buildings or in the principal building intended and designed for the
parking of motor vehicles in order to meet the parking requirements of this Code,
or any such floor space intended and designed for accessory heating and
ventilating equipment. It shall include the horizontal area at each floor level
devoted to stairwells and elevator shafts.
122. FOOTCANDLE: An English unit of measurement for luminance, which is equal to
one lumen, incident upon an area of one foot.
123. FREESTANDING SIGN (see also “POLE SIGN”): Any sign supported by
structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are
independent from any building or other structure.
124. FRONTAGE: The length of the property line of any one premises along a public
right-of-way on which it borders.
125. GARAGE AND/OR YARD SALE: An occasional sale conducted by a property
owner at the owner’s place of residence which offers obsolete personal
possessions for sale but does not include items brought to the site for sale.
126. GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or an accessory portion of the
principal building, designed and/or used primarily for the shelter or storage of
vehicles owned and/or operated by the occupants of the principal building, and in
which no business for profit is conducted.
127. GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any premises, except those described as private garages,
used for the storage or care of self-propelled vehicles, or where any such
vehicles are equipped for operation repairs, or kept for remuneration, hire, or
sale.
128. GARAGE, REPAIR: A structure or portion thereof other than a private garage,
use for the repair or refinishing of self-propelled vehicles, trailers, or boats,
including general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles,
or trailers, and minor collision service, but not including major body, frame or
fender repairs or overall automobile or truck painting, except by Conditional Use
Permit. A repair garage may also include incidental storage, care, washing, or
sale of automobiles.
129. REGULATORY SIGN: A temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained
by the city, county, state or federal government for traffic direction or for
designation of or direction to any school, hospital, historical site, or public
service, property, or facility as authorized by the City Engineer or Planning
Director.
130. GRADE: The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground,
paving or sidewalk measured as follows:
a. For buildings abutting one street only, the elevation of the sidewalk at the
center of that wall abutting the street.
b. For buildings abutting more than one street, the average of elevations of
the sidewalk at the centers of all walls abutting streets.
c. For buildings having no walls abutting a street, the average level of the
ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building measured at a line
parallel to the wall within six (6) feet of the wall.
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 13
131. GRADE PLANE: A reference plane representing the average of finished ground
level adjoining the building at exterior walls. Where the finished ground level
slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by
the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line, or where
the lot line is more than six (6) feet from the building, between the building and a
point six (6) feet from the building.
132. GROUND SIGN (see also “BLADE SIGN”): A sign which is anchored to the
ground similar to a pylon or freestanding sign, but which has a monolithic or
columnar line and which maintains essentially the same contour from grade to
top.
133. GUEST: Any person or persons staying temporarily within a dwelling unit without
payment of compensation or remuneration to the owners, tenants, or full time
inhabitants of said dwelling unit.
134. HANGING SIGN: A sign which hangs from the eve of a roof or from an approved
architectural feature of a building.
135. HARD SURFACE: A dust-free paved surface of any of the following materials:
concrete, masonry, cobblestone, brick, asphalt, or any other reasonable
substitutes as determined by the City Engineer.
136. HARDSCAPE: Sidewalks, urban trails, plazas, and other pedestrian-oriented
non-vegetative landscaping elements.
137. HEIGHT OF ANTENNA: The distance upward from the base of the antenna to
the uppermost portion of the antenna. Said distance being measured at a time
when said antenna is extended to its greatest height.
138. HEIGHT OF WALLS AND FENCES: Such height shall be measured from the
highest of the two grades adjacent to the wall or fence, except when the wall or
fence is adjacent to an alley or street right-of-way which has a higher grade than
that on the adjacent site. For such conditions, the height of the wall or fence shall
be measured from the top of the curb or the crown of the alley or street where
there is no curb.
139. HISTORIC BUILDINGS: Any building listed on the Nation Register of Historic
Places, or on the Utah State Register of Historic Sites.
140. HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation conducted entirely within the dwelling
unit and carried on only by persons residing in the dwelling unit, which use is
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes,
does not change the residential character of the dwelling unit, and for which a
home occupation business license has been issued by Bountiful City.
141. HOSPITAL: An institution licensed by the state of Utah which provides
diagnostic, therapeutic, and rehabilitative services to individuals on both an
inpatient and outpatient basis by or under the supervision of one or more
physicians. A medical clinic or professional office which offers any inpatient or
overnight care, or operates on a twenty four (24) hour basis shall be considered
to be a hospital. A hospital may include necessary support service facilities such
as laboratories, outpatient units and training and central services, together with
staff offices necessary to operate the hospital.
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 14
142. HOTEL (includes “MOTELS” and “BED AND BREAKFAST”): A building
designed or used as the temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged,
with or without meals, for compensation.
143. HOUSEHOLD PETS: Animals or fowl ordinarily permitted in the house and/or
kept for company or pleasure, not for profit. Household pets shall not include
chickens, ducks or geese or other domestic farm variety animals nor any animals
which are capable of inflicting harm or discomfort or endangering the health,
safety, or welfare of any person or property. The number of household pets shall
be limited to that allowed by the provisions of each respective zone as set forth in
this Code.
144. ILLUMINANCE: The photometric quantity most closely associated with the
perception of brightness and a measurement of the intensity of light falling on a
surface at a given distance from the light source.
145. ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which has characters, letters, logos, figures,
designs, or outlines illuminated by internal or external lights, luminous tubes,
neon, or similar devices.
146. ILLUMINATION, EXTERNAL: Lighting which is mounted so as to illuminate a
sign from a remote position or from outside of the sign structure.
147. ILLUMINATION, INTERNAL: Lighting which is mounted inside or behind a sign.
148. IMAGE: The display of text, numbers or the likeness of an object or living thing of
any time on an EMC.
149. IMAGE DISPLAY DURATION: Means the period of time that an image remains
static.
150. IMAGE TRANSITION DURATION: Means the period of time in which one image
changes to another on an electronic message center.
151. IMPERVIOUS MATERIAL: Any surface material which does not allow for the
natural percolation of water into the soil, including but not limited to roofs,
concrete patios, concrete or asphalt driveways, tennis and play courts of
concrete or similar material.
152. INCIDENTAL SIGN: Any sign of two (2) square feet or less.
153. INDEPENDENT LIVING FACILITY: An age restricted residential facility with
common area, which may be comprised of houses, townhouses, or stacked
units. A-la-carte services such as housekeeping, meals, recreational programs,
etc., are provided based on the desires of the occupants. Some incidental
medical services may be provided. Residents typically do not require assistance
with everyday tasks.
154. INFLATABLE OR INFLATED SIGN: Any advertising device which is supported
by heated or forced air, or lighter-than-air gases.
155. INOPERATIVE VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle that cannot be moved under its own
power.
156. INTEGRAL ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected or constructed as an integral or
essentially integral part of a roof structure of any design, such that no part of the
sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 15
of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six (6)
inches.
157. INTERIOR SIGN: Any sign located within a building so as to be visible only from
within the building in which the sign is located.
158. JUNK: Old, dilapidated, scrap or abandoned metal, paper, building material and
equipment, bottles, glass, appliances, furniture, beds and bedding, rags, rubber,
motor vehicles and parts thereof.
159. KENNEL: A place where three (3) or more dogs of four (4) months of age or
older are kept.
160. KITCHEN: Any room and/or other place used, or intended or designed to be
used for cooking or the preparation of food that is at a minimum comprised of a
set of fixed cooking facilities other than hot plates or other portable cooking units.
161. LANDSCAPING: The addition of lawns, trees, plants, and other natural
decorative features to land.
162. LOGO: An image or design which serves to represent a business or company’s
identity.
163. LOT: A parcel of real property shown as a delineated parcel of land with a
number and designation on the final plat of a recorded subdivision; or a parcel of
real property defined by metes and bounds, containing not less than the
minimum area and width required in the zone in which it is located (see Figure 3-
4).
164. LOT AREA: The total area measured on a horizontal plane included within the
lot line of the lot or parcel of land.
165. LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two streets; or a lot located
on a street which does not continue in a straight line and where the angle of
departure from the straight line exceeds forty-five (45) degrees (see Figure 3-4).
166. LOT, DEPTH: The horizontal distance between the front and the rear lot lines
measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines (see Figure 3-4).
167. LOT, FLAG: A lot shaped in such a manner as to resemble a flag on a pole
where access from the main portion of the lot (the flag) to the public street is by a
narrow private right-of-way (the pole), (see Figure 3-4).
168. LOT, FRONTAGE: Lot width measured at the required front setback line. When
a lot has more than one street lot line, lot frontage shall be measured, and the
minimum frontage required by this Code shall be provided, at each such line (see
Figure 3-4).
169. LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot (see Figure 3-4).
170. LOT LINE, FRONT: A line separating an interior lot from a street. For corner
lots, the lot owner may elect any street lot line as the front lot line unless
otherwise established by a plat or covenant (see Figure 3-3).
171. LOT LINE, REAR: The line or lines most distant from and generally opposite the
front lot line, except that in the case of an interior triangular or gore-shaped lot, it
shall be a straight line ten (10) feet in length which is parallel to the front lot line
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 16
or its chord and intercepts the two side lot line at points most distant from the
front lot line (see Figure 3-3).
172. LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot boundary line not a front or rear lot line. A side lot line
separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line; a side lot line
separating a lot from a street is a street side lot line (see Figure 3-3).
173. LOT, STORAGE: A hard surfaced, dust free, landscaped open area, not a
street, used to store new or used (not damaged or dismantled), machinery, tools,
boats, motor vehicles or trailers, and building materials.
174. LOT, SUBSTANDARD: A lot or parcel that has less than the required minimum
area or width as established by the district in which it is located and provided that
such lot or parcel was legally recorded in a deed or plat on the effective date of
this Code.
175. LOT, VACANT (UNDEVELOPED): A platted lot or parcel of land upon which no
structure exists.
176. LOT, WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines and measured
at the required front yard setback line (see Figure 3-3).
177. LOW MAINTENANCE: Materials which do not require frequent replacement,
painting, or refurbishing as a result of exposure to the elements.
178. LOW PROFILE SIGN: (see “MONUMENT SIGN”)
179. LUMINANCE: A photometric measure of the luminous intensity per unit area of
light traveling in a given direction.
180. MAJOR LIFE ACTIVITIES: Functions such as caring for oneself, performing
manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and
working.
181. MAJOR STREET: An existing or proposed street which serves or is intended to
serve as a major traffic way, and is so designated on the Master Street Plan.
182. MARQUEE: Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or
extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally
designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
183. MARQUEE SIGN: Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made part of a
marquee.
184. MASTER STREET PLAN: The map and documentation which has been
approved by the Bountiful Planning Commission and the Bountiful City Council
as a plan for the development of the major and collector street system of the City.
185. MINOR SATELLITE ANTENNA: The outdoor portion of equipment used for
receiving satellite signals which appears and is commonly known as a "dish" and
which is three (3) feet in diameter or less.
186. MINOR STREET: An existing or proposed street which is fifty four (54) feet wide
or less, is supplementary to a collector street, is of limited continuity, and which
serves or is intended to serve the local needs of a neighborhood.
187. MOBILE HOME: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis and intended
to be drawn by a motor vehicle, designed to be used with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to utilities and which meets the Department of
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 17
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Federal construction and safety
standards for mobile homes and is used for permanent or semi-permanent
housing or human occupancy, or as an office, a classroom, a laboratory or for
processing, manufacturing, retail sales.
188. MOBILE HOME PARK: Any plot of ground upon which two (2) or more mobile
homes occupied for permanent dwelling purposes are located, whether or not a
charge is made for such accommodation.
189. MODULAR HOME: A home or other building of new construction which has
been assembled fully or in substantial part, upon another site or in a factory and
moved to the site where it is to be placed upon a permanent foundation in
compliance with the provisions of the International Building Code.
190. MONUMENT SIGN (see also “LOW PROFILE SIGN”): Any on-premises or
identification sign incorporated into some form of landscape scheme or planter
box.
191. MOTOR HOME: A motor vehicle built on a truck or bus chassis and designed to
serve as self-contained living quarters for recreational travel and use.
192. MOVABLE SIGN: (see “PORTABLE SIGN”)
193. MULTIPLE-FACED SIGN: A sign containing two (2) or more faces, not
necessarily in back-to-back configuration.
194. NATURAL VEGETATION: This term includes orchards, trees, shrubs, lawns,
grass, and perennial growth.
195. NATURAL WATERWAYS: Those areas varying in width along streams, creeks,
gullies, or washes, which are natural drainage channels, as determined by the
City Engineer.
196. NIT: A unit of measurement for luminance, which is equal to one candela per
square meter, (nit = 1 cd/m²).
197. NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURE (see also “NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE”
or “NONCONFORMING BUILDING”): A structure that legally existed before its
current land use designation; and because of one or more subsequent land use
code changes, does not conform to the setback, height restrictions, or other
regulations, excluding those regulations which govern the use of land.
198. NONCONFORMING SIGN (see also “NONCOMPLYING SIGN”): A sign or sign
structure that legally existed before its current land use (zoning) designation; and
because of subsequent changes to the land use code, does not conform to the
regulations that now govern the use of the sign.
199. NONCONFORMING LOT (see also “NONCOMPLYING LOT”): A parcel that
legally existed before its current land use (zoning) designation. Shown
continuously on the records of the Davis County Recorder as an independently
existing piece of property and because of one (1) or more subsequent land use
code changes does not conform to the minimum size, width, frontage, depth or
other applicable dimensional requirements of the zone where the lot is located.
200. NONCONFORMING USE: A use of land that legally existed before its current
land use designation that has been maintained continuously since the time the
land use code governing the land changed; and because of one or more
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 18
subsequent land use code changes, does not conform to the regulations that
now govern the use of the land.
201. NONCONFORMITY: Is a general term to collectively describe a noncomplying
structure, nonconforming lot, nonconforming sign, nonconforming use, and/or
any other item that legally existed before the current land use (zoning)
designation of the property where the said item is located, and that, because of
subsequent land use code changes does not conform to the regulations that now
govern the use of the land.
202. NON-PLANAR: Any object that has more than two substantial surfaces; including
a sphere, cube, pyramid, freeform, sculpture, or similar shape.
203. NONRESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITY: A facility wherein no persons will
be housed on an overnight basis, and provides services including rehabilitation,
treatment, counseling, or assessment and evaluation services related to
delinquent behavior, alcohol abuse, drug abuse, sexual offenders, sexual abuse,
or mental health. Associated educational services may also be provided to
juvenile occupants.
204. NURSING HOME: An intermediate care/nursing facility or a skilled nursing facility
licensed by the state of Utah, for the care of individuals who, due to illness,
advanced age, disability, or impairment require assistance and/or supervision on
a twenty four (24) hour per day basis. Such a facility does not include an adult
daycare facility or adult daycare provider in conjunction with residential facilities
for elderly persons or a residential facility for persons with a disability.
205. OFFICES: A building, room, or department wherein a business or service for
others is transacted, but does not include the storage or sale of merchandise on
the premises.
206. OFF-PREMISES DEVELOPMENT SIGN: Any sign used for the purpose of
advertising a new residential development, located on another parcel of property
and not on the site intended for such residential development.
207. OFF-PREMISES DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign which provides directional
assistance to access an establishment on a site other than the parcel on which
the sign is located.
208. OFF-PREMISES SIGN: A sign which pertains to the use of a premises and/or
property other than the property on which it is located.
209. ON-PREMISES DEVELOPMENT SIGN: Any sign used for the purpose of
advertising a new residential development and located on the parcel of property
intended for such residential development.
210. ON-PREMISES SIGN: A sign which pertains to the use of the premises and/or
property on which it is located.
211. OPEN SPACE, REQUIRED: The area reserved in parks, courts, playgrounds,
swimming pools, and other similar open areas to meet the density requirements.
212. OPEN SPACE, USABLE: Any portion of a lot or building which meets all the
following conditions:
a. The space shall be open to the sky or shall be open to view on at least
two sides.
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 19
b. The space shall be readily accessible by foot traffic from dwelling units to
which it is accessory.
c. If the space is provided on a balcony, roof, or other facility above grade, it
shall have such protective devices as are deemed necessary by the
Building Official to assure reasonable safe usage by children and/or
adults.
d. The space shall not be provided in any required front or side yard, parking
area, or driveway space.
213. OPEN-STYLE FENCE: A fence that is at least seventy-five (75) percent open
and which does not create a visual hazard for pedestrians and drivers.
214. OTHER NONCONFORMITY: A circumstance governed by this Title other than a
noncomplying structure, nonconforming lot, nonconforming sign, or
nonconforming use that legally existed before the current land use (zoning)
designation of the lot where the nonconformity is located, and because of
subsequent land use code changes does not conform to the regulations that now
govern the use of the land.
215. OUTDOOR DISPLAY: An outdoor arrangement of objects, items, products, or
other materials, typically not in a fixed position and capable of rearrangement,
designed and used for the purpose of advertising or identifying a business, or
product for sale.
216. PACKAGE AGENCY (STATE LIQUOR STORE): Any outlet authorized by the
Utah Liquor Control Commission to sell original packaged liquor or wine for
consumption off the premises.
217. PARKING LOT: A hard surfaced, dust free, landscaped, illuminated open area
other than a street, used to park four (4) or more automobiles. Storage of
damaged, non-inspected, or unlicensed automobiles is prohibited except on lots
approved for such purposes.
218. PARKING SPACE: A permanently surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed for
the parking of one (1) motor vehicle having dimensions of not less than nine (9)
feet by eighteen (18) feet, exclusive of access or maneuvering area, ramps, or
columns, to be used exclusively as temporary storage space for one private
motor vehicle.
219. PARK STRIP: That part of public property which lies between the curb and
sidewalk.
220. PAWN BROKER: A person who owns and/or operates a pawnshop, and as
further defined by State Law.
221. PAWNSHOP: An establishment that engages, in whole or in part, in the
business of loaning money on the security of pledges of personal property, or
deposits, or conditional sales of personal property, or the purchase or sale of
personal property, and as further defined by State Law.
222. PEDESTAL SIGN: A movable sign supported by a column or columns and a
base.
223. PENNANT: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, with or without a
message, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, designed to move in the wind.
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 20
224. PERMITTED USE: A use or occupancy of a building or a use of land which is
allowed in the respective districts in this Code without specific approval of the
Planning Commission but which complies with provisions of the district in which
the use is to be conducted.
225. PERSON: A corporation, company, association, society, firm, partnership or joint
stock company, as well as an individual, a state, and all political subdivisions of a
state or any agency or instrumentality thereof.
226. PLANER: Having the characteristics of a flat surface or plane; including an object
with not more than two identical, flat, parallel surfaces facing opposite directions.
227. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: An integrated design for development of
residential, commercial or industrial uses, or combinations of such uses.
228. PLANNING COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of the City of Bountiful as
duly appointed by the provisions of State Law and this Code.
229. PLAZA: An area open to the public on a controlled basis and used for recreation
activities and relaxation. Plazas are paved areas which contain a number of
substantial amenities, such as seating, drinking and ornamental fountains, art,
trees and landscaping.
230. PRESCHOOL: An educational facility operated on a residential premise,
regularly providing an educational program of instruction for not more than twelve
(12) children, including the operator's natural, adopted, or foster children less
than six (6) years of age, at any one time. Class shall include not more than
twelve (12) children for more than four (4) hours a day and shall be operated
between the hours of eight (8) a.m. and six (6) p.m. Instructors shall be licensed
by the State of Utah and provide at least thirty-five (35) square feet of interior
floor area and at least one hundred (100) square feet of secured outdoor play
area per child. Such use shall be defined as a home occupation, conditional use
for purposes of this Code and be in compliance with all city codes and
regulations of such.
231. POLE SIGN: (see “FREESTANDING SIGN”)
232. PORTABLE READER BOARD OR TRAILER SIGN: A reader board sign which
is mounted on a portable framework or trailer and intended for temporary use.
233. PORTABLE SIGN (see also “Movable Sign”): Any sign not permanently attached
to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported,
including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of
wheels; signs converted to A-frame or T-frames; menu and sandwich board
signs; balloons or other inflatable figures used as signs; umbrellas used for
advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from
the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day
operations of the business.
234. PRIVATE SATELLITE ANTENNA: Any accessory structure capable of receiving
for the sole benefit of the principal use, radio, or television signals from a
transmitter or a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit.
235. PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that
its leading edge extends more than six (6) inches beyond the surface of such
building or wall.
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 21
236. PROMOTIONAL EVENTS: Includes carnivals, craft shows, mechanical and
animal rides, or the display and/or sale of merchandise or product that are not
typically sold or serviced on the site.
237. PROMOTIONAL SIGNAGE: Temporary devices such as banners, streamers,
flags, balloons, pennants, trailer signs, and inflated signs.
238. PROPERTY: A lot or parcel of land together with all structures located thereon.
239. PROTECTIVE HOUSING FACILITY: A facility either: a) operated, licensed, or
contracted by a governmental entity, or b) operated by a charitable, nonprofit
organization, where for no compensation, temporary, protective housing is
provided to: 1) abused or neglected children awaiting placement of foster care; 2)
pregnant or parenting teens; 3) victims of sexual abuse; or 4) victims of domestic
abuse.
240. PUBLIC: That which is under the ownership or control of the United States
Government, the State of Utah or any subdivision thereof, Davis County, or the
City of Bountiful (or any departments or agencies thereof).
241. PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENT: The area on a recorded plat map or other
recorded document that is dedicated to the use and installation of public utility
facilities.
242. READER BOARD SIGN: (see “CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN”)
243. REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION: A change in any rule, policy, practice, or
service necessary to afford a person with a disability equal opportunity to use
and enjoy a dwelling. The following words have the following definitions:
a. Reasonable: A requested accommodation that will not undermine the
legitimate purpose of existing zoning regulations notwithstanding the
benefit that the accommodation will provide to a person with a disability.
b. Necessary: The applicant must show that, but for the accommodation,
one or more persons with a disability likely will be denied an equal
opportunity to enjoy the housing of their choice.
c. Equal Opportunity: Achieving equal results as between a person with a
disability and a nondisabled person.
244. RECORD OF IMPAIRMENT: Having a record of impairment means having a
history of, or having been misclassified as having a mental or physical
impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities.
245. RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: Any area where one or more travel trailer
lots are rented for a relatively short term of occupancy to users of such items as
travel trailers, tents, motor homes, etc.
246. REGARDED AS HAVING AN IMPAIRMENT: A person is regarded as having an
impairment when:
a. The person has a physical or mental impairment that does not
substantially limit one (1) or more major life activities but is treated by
another person as having such a limitation;
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 22
b. The person has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits
one (1) or more major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of
others towards such an impairment; or
c. The person has none of the impairments defined in this section but is
treated by another person as having such an impairment.
247. REHABILITATION/TREATMENT FACILITY: A facility licensed or contracted by
the state of Utah to provide temporary occupancy and supervision of individuals
(adults and/or juveniles) in order to provide rehabilitation, treatment, or
counseling services. Without limitation, such services may include rehabilitation,
treatment, counseling, or assessment and evaluation services related to
delinquent behavior, alcohol abuse, drug abuse, sexual offenders, sexual abuse,
or mental health. Associated educational services may also be provided to
juvenile occupants.
248. RELATED: Related by blood, marriage or adoption within the definition of "family"
means a father, mother, husband, wife, son, daughter, sister, brother, uncle,
aunt, nephew, niece, first cousin, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brother-in-law,
sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandparent, or grandchild, to include
the half as well as the whole blood.
249. RESIDENTIAL FACILITY: Any building or portion thereof where an individual is
actually living at a given point and time and intends to remain, and not a place of
temporary sojourn or transient visit.
250. RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR ELDERLY PERSONS: A dwelling unit that is
occupied on a twenty four (24) hour per day basis by eight (8) or fewer elderly
persons in a family type arrangement. A residential facility for elderly persons
shall not include any of the following:
a. A facility which is operated as a business; provided that such facility may
not be considered to be operated as a business solely because a fee is
charged for food or for actual and necessary costs of preparation and
maintenance of the facility;
b. A facility where persons being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse are
placed; a facility where placement is not on a strictly voluntary basis or
where placement is part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or
treatment in a correctional institution; or a facility which is a healthcare
facility as defined by Title 26, Chapter 21, Section 2, Utah Code
Annotated, 1953, as amended; or a facility which is a residential facility
for persons with a disability.
251. RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS: A single-family or
multiple-family dwelling that meets the requirements of Sections 10-9-601
through 604, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, and the provisions of this
Code.
252. RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY: A residence in
which more than one person with a disability resides and which is:
a. Licensed or certified by the Department of Human Services under Title
62A, Chapter 2, of the Utah Code, licensure of programs and facilities; or
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 23
b. Licensed or certified by the Department of Human Health under Title 26,
Chapter 21, health care facilities licensing and inspection act.
253. RESIDENTIAL SIGN: Any sign located in a district zoned for residential uses
that contains no commercial message except advertising for goods or services
legally offered on the premises where the sign is located, if offering such service
at such location conforms to all requirements of this Code.
254. RETAIL WAREHOUSE SALE: The sale of products or merchandise to the
general public by a manufacturing business established on a site which does not
operate a retail outlet as a normal element of its business operation.
255. RETAINING WALL: A wall designed to resist the lateral displacement of soil or
other materials.
256. RETIREMENT HOME or RETIREMENT FACILITY: A residential facility
designated, occupied, and intended for residents fifty (50) years of age or older
where common facilities for cooking and dining are available to all residents and
independent facilities are provided for living, sleeping, and sanitation. For
purposes of calculating density, three (3) beds shall constitute one (1) dwelling
unit.
257. ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected or constructed on or over the roof of a building,
supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest
portion of the roof.
258. ROOF, HIGHEST POINT: The coping or parapet on a flat roof, the deck of a
mansard roof, or the mean level between the eves and the ridge for a gable, hip,
or gambrel roof.
259. ROTATING SIGN: (see “Animated Sign”)
260. SCINTILLATE or SCINTILLATING: Light flashes, light sparkling, light starbursts,
light twinkling, light pulsating, or any other image transition effect or animation in
which an image instantly and repeatedly changes.
261. SCREENING DEVICE: A specific application of a wall or fence to conceal areas
used for refuse, mechanical equipment, parking, service or loading bays or lanes,
multi-family habitation, and commercial and industrial activities from adjacent
residential districts or from street views.
262. SCULPTURED SIGN: A free-form or three-dimensional sign which has a depth
greater than two (2) feet.
263. SEASONAL USE: A specific type of temporary use that reoccurs each year for a
definite period of time and which occupies the same location and configuration.
264. SECONDHAND MERCHANDISE: The purchase, exchange, or sale of used or
previously owned personal property, including precious metals, and as further
defined by State Law.
265. SECONDHAND MERCHANDISE DEALER: An owner or operator of a business
that deals in secondhand merchandise, and as further defined by State Law.
266. SENIOR LIVING UNIT: Commonly referred to as “senior apartments,” “senior
condominiums,” or “retirement community.” An age restricted residential
development where residents live independently and do not require assistance
with day-to-day activities.
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 24
267. SEPARATION: The horizontal distance between signs measured parallel with
the street or curb.
268. SETBACK: The shortest horizontal distance between the property line of a lot
and the structure or part thereof.
269. SETBACK (sign): The horizontal distance between a property line and the
closest edge of the sign structure.
270. SHELTER FOR THE HOMELESS: Charitable lodging or sleeping rooms
provided on a temporary basis (usually on a daily basis) to those members of
society lacking other safe, sanitary, or affordable shelter. A shelter for the
homeless may also include kitchen and cafeteria facilities.
271. SHELTERED WORKSHOP: An onsite supervised educational or vocational
training facility for persons with a disability and does not provide any residential
facilities.
272. SIGN: Any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any color, form,
graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise, announce the purpose of, or
identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information of any
kind to the public.
273. SIGN AREA: The total area of all faces and decorative elements of a sign or
sign structure, excluding the minimum frame and supports. The exception is that
for area calculation purposes, the sign area of a double-faced sign shall be the
total area of all face and decorative elements on only one side of the structure.
For signs which do not have defined display areas or are irregular in shape, the
sign area shall be the area of the smallest rectangle or square which will frame
the display.
274. SIGN CONSTRUCTION: The materials, architecture, assembly, and installation
of a sign.
275. SIGN DESIGN: The form, features, colors, and overall appearance of a sign
structure.
276. SIGN HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the highest point of the
sign to the grade of the adjacent street, curb, or sidewalk, or the crown of the
street where there is no curb or sidewalk.
277. SIGN LOCATION: The position on a property where a sign is to be placed.
278. SIGN MAINTENANCE: The maintenance of a sign in a safe, presentable, and
good condition including the replacement of defective parts, repainting, cleaning,
and other acts required for the care, good appearance, and safety of said sign.
Sign maintenance does not imply that a sign may be altered in any way without a
sign permit.
279. SIGN SETBACK: The horizontal distance between a property line and the
closest edge of a sign structure.
280. SITE PLAN: A schematic, scaled drawing of a building lot or location which
indicates the placement and location of yards, property lines, adjacent parcels,
utilities, topography, waterways, irrigation, drainage, landscaping, parking areas,
driveways, buildings, trash containers, open storage, streets, sidewalks, curbs,
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 25
gutters, signs, lighting, fences or other features of existing or proposed
construction or land use.
281. SNIPE SIGN: A sign for which a permit has not been issued and which is
attached to a public utility fixture or other outdoor structure located within a public
right-of-way or easement, or located on public property.
282. SOFTSCAPE: Landscaping consisting of living plants and organic materials.
283. STATIC: Having no motion of any type or form.
284. STORAGE CONTAINER (see also “CARGO CONTAINER” or “FREIGHT
CONTAINER”): A pre-manufactured receptacle or vessel that is or appears to
be designed for or used in the packing, shipping, movement or transportation of
freight, articles, goods or commodities.
285. STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story
shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the
topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly
above a usable or unused under-floor space is more than six (6) feet above
grade as defined herein for more than fifty percent (50%) of the total perimeter or
is more than twelve (12) feet above grade as defined herein at any point, such
usable or unused under-floor space shall be considered a story.
286. STORY, FIRST: The lowest story in a building which qualifies as a story, as
defined herein, except that a floor level in a building having only one floor level
shall be classified as a first story, provided such floor level is not more than four
(4) feet below grade, as defined herein, for more than fifty percent (50%) of the
total perimeter, or not more than eight (8) feet below grade, as defined herein, at
any point.
287. STREET: A publicly dedicated thoroughfare which affords principal means of
access to abutting property. The term shall include avenue, drive, circle, road,
parkway, boulevard, highway, thoroughfare, or any other similar term.
288. STREET, ARTERIAL - MAJOR AND MINOR: A street providing for through
traffic movement between areas and across the city, with moderate access to
abutting property subject to necessary control of entrances, exits, and curb use.
289. STREET, COLLECTOR - MAJOR AND MINOR: A street providing for traffic
movement between major arterials and local streets, and direct access to
abutting property.
290. STREET, LOCAL: A street providing for direct access to abutting land, and for
local traffic movements.
291. STREET, PRIVATE: A thoroughfare which is designated for private travel and is
in private or public agency ownership over which access is legally denied to the
public.
292. STREET, PUBLIC: A thoroughfare which is in public ownership and designated
for public travel.
293. STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground.
A building is included in this definition.
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 26
294. STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change, addition, or modification in
construction of a building or structure, or any change in the structural members of
a building or structure, such as walls, partitions, columns, beams, girders, or
exits.
295. SUBDIVIDER: The party owning the land that is to be subdivided, or its agent,
whether it is an individual, corporation of any form, partnership, or other form of
operation.
296. SWAP MEET: The retail sale or exchange of new, handcrafted, or second-hand
items conducted by a sponsor for not more than forty-eight (48) hours; includes
flea markets.
297. SWIMMING POOL: A water-filled enclosure, permanently constructed or
portable, having a depth of more than twenty-four (24) inches below the level of
the surrounding land, or an above-surface pool, having a depth of more than
thirty (30) inches, which is designed for swimming, wading or bathing. Hot tubs
with hard covers and a capacity of less than one thousand (1,000) gallons are
not included in this definition.
298. TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not
permanently mounted or fixed to the ground.
299. TEMPORARY CARNIVALS AND FAIRS: A specific type of temporary use that
includes the provision of mechanical and animal rides, games, eating and
drinking facilities, live entertainment, animal exhibitions, or similar activities
outdoors or in a tent or other temporary structure.
300. TEMPORARY SALES ACTIVITIES: A specific type of temporary use that
includes the sale of products outside of, but in close proximity to, a building by a
permanent occupant of a site and includes sidewalk sales, inventory reduction or
liquidation sales, distressed merchandise sales, and similar sales.
301. TEMPORARY SALES OFFICE: A specific type of temporary use that includes a
model home or unit within a subdivision, apartment complex, or planned unit
development which serves as an office for the sale or lease of property in that
subdivision, apartment complex or planned unit development, or a temporary
structure located on the site of a development project which serves as a
temporary business office while a permanent office is under construction on the
site.
302. TEMPORARY USE: A use of land that is short term in nature and that does not
involve the erection of a permanent structure or other permanent commitment of
the land.
303. THRIFT STORE: A retail operation that deals in secondhand merchandize that is
exempt from the provisions of the “Pawnshop and Secondhand Merchandise
Transaction Information Act,” set forth in Utah Code 13-32a-101, et seq., and as
amended.
304. TOWN-HOUSE (see also “TOWN-HOME” or “ROW-HOUSE”): A series of three
or more single-family dwelling units designed and constructed with at least twostories
of above ground habitable space, and which are attached horizontally at
the foundation, roof, and side wall in a linear arrangement, and which have a
private ground level entrance and a totally exposed front and rear wall to be used
for access, light, and ventilation.
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 27
305. TRADE OR VOCATIONAL SCHOOL: A post high school educational or
vocational training facility.
306. TRANSITIONAL HOUSING FACILITY: A facility owned, operated or contracted
by a governmental entity or a charitable, not for profit organization, where, for no
compensation, temporary housing (usually 3 to 24 months, but in no event less
than 30 days) is provided to homeless persons, while they obtain work, job skills,
or otherwise take steps to stabilize their circumstances. A transitional housing
facility shall not include a shelter for the homeless, and a dwelling unit provided
to a family for the exclusive use as part of a transitional housing program, for
more than thirty (30) days, shall not be considered to be a transitional housing
facility.
307. TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, which is designed or
used for temporary human occupancy and for travel or recreational purposes.
308. UNBUILDABLE LAND (UNUSABLE LAND): Any portion of a property that is
encumbered by physical constraints, such as a flood plain, geologic fault,
escarpment, or similar feature. In the Residential Foothill Zone (R-F) this
definition shall also include any portion of a property that has thirty percent (30%)
slope or greater.
309. UNINHABITABLE (see also “Unlivable”): A structure or property that is
determined to be unfit, unsafe, or unhealthy to reside in or occupy due to
dilapidation, structural damage, fire damage, exposed wires, sanitation issues,
etc.
310. UNREGISTERED VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle not currently registered and
licensed in accordance with Utah State law.
311. UNSIGHTLY: Blighted condition including the accumulation of debris, litter,
rubbish, or rubble; fences characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling,
cracking, peeling, or rusting; landscaping that is dead, characterized by
uncontrolled growth or lack of maintenance, or damaged; and any other similar
conditions of disrepair and deterioration regardless of the condition of other
properties in the neighborhood.
312. USE: The purpose for which a parcel or building is designed, arranged or
intended or for which it is occupied or maintained.
313. USE, PRINCIPAL: The principal use of land or structures, as distinguished from
a secondary or accessory use.
314. UTILITIES: Gas, culinary water, irrigation water, sewer, storm drain, electric
power, and telephone lines, including all poles, wires, pipes, boxes, guy wires
and bracing associated therewith.
315. VARIANCE: A waiver or modification of the requirements of a land use code as
applied to a parcel of property, as set forth in this Title and State Law.
316. VEHICLE PART(S): Any items that can be attached to or included as part of or
within any motor vehicle.
317. VICINITY PLAN: A map or drawing, to scale, showing the physical layout of the
proposed development to existing or proposed streets, buildings, and utilities;
other relevant information such as special terrain or surface drainage; and
existing zoning classifications of all adjacent land.
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 28
318. VIDEO: Simulated movement created by the display of a series of images,
creating the illusion of continuous movement.
319. WALL OR FENCE: Any structure or device used for confinement, prevention of
intrusion, boundary identification, or screening of an activity.
320. WALL SIGN: Any sign mounted flush against the facade of a building, painted
on a building facade, or that is painted in such a way that it gives the visual
appearance of being painted on a wall or building facade but not having a frame
or separation from the wall or building facade.
321. WIND SIGN: A sign inflated by, or displayed by wind or air.
322. WINDOW SIGN: A sign attached to interior or exterior of either a window or
door, or located within a building so as to be visible through a window or door
from the outside of the building.
323. WRECKED VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle damaged to such an extent that it
cannot be lawfully operated upon a highway.
324. XERISCAPE: A type of landscaping that employs a mix of drought tolerant
plants and organic materials. Asphalt, concrete, brick paving, and other
impervious surfaces are not considered xeriscape.
325. YARD: A required open space on a lot unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upward, except as permitted elsewhere in this Code.
326. YARD, FRONT: A space in the same lot with a building, between the front line of
the building and the front lot line, and extending across the full width of the lot.
The depth of the front yard is the minimum distance between the front lot line and
closest point of the building. In the event a development includes a residential
unit placed sideways or at some other angle on a lot (rather than facing directly
to the street), the area from the front of the building to the property line shall also
be considered a Front Yard.
327. YARD, REAR: A space in the same lot with a building, between the rear line of
the building and the rear lot line and extending the full width of the lot. The depth
of the rear yard is the minimum distance between the rear lot line and the closest
point of the building. In the event a development includes a residential unit
placed sideways or at some other angle on a lot (rather than facing directly to the
street), the area from the back of the building to the property line shall also be
considered a Rear Yard.
328. YARD, SIDE: A space in the same lot with a building, between the side lot line of
the building and the side lot line and extending from the front yard to the rear
yard. The width of the side yard shall be the minimum distance between the side
lot line and the closest point of the building. In the event a development includes
a residential unit placed sideways or at some other angle on a lot (rather than
facing directly to the street), the area adjacent to the ends/sides of the building
do not become the Side Yard.
329. ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT: Single-family dwellings arranged on lots with
one side wall of the building located on the property line.
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 29
FIGURE 3-2
ROOF TYPES
FIGURE 3-1
Chapter 3 Definitions Ord 2020.01.docx
3 - 30
FIGURE 3-4
FIGURE 3-3
4 - 1
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 4
(R) SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
14-4-101 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
14-4-102 DEFINITIONS
14-4-103 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, AND PROHIBITED USES
14-4-104 MAXIMUM DENSITY AND MINIMUM LOT STANDARDS
14-4-105 YARD AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
14-4-106 PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS
14-4-107 BUILDING LOCATION AND HEIGHT
14-4-108 DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS
14-4-109 PERMISSIBLE LOT COVERAGE
14-4-110 PARKING, LOADING, AND ACCESS
14-4-111 NON-RESIDENTIAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL
14-4-112 LANDSCAPING
14-4-113 STORAGE OF COMMERCIAL ITEMS
14-4-114 WALLS AND FENCES
14-4-115 LOT ACCESS AND SITE LAYOUT
14-4-116 PARCELS OF LAND NOT IN SUBDIVISIONS WITHIN THE R-F SUBZONE
14-4-117 REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING IN THE R-F SUBZONE
14-4-118 SUBDIVISION AND PLANNED DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND APPROVAL
PROCEDURE FOR THE R-F SUBZONE
14-4-119 DOMESTIC FARM ANIMALS
14-4-120 DWELLING UNITS CONTAINING SECOND KITCHENS
14-4-101 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
The Single-Family Residential Zone (R) is established to provide areas for single-family,
detached dwellings on individual lots. Within the Single-Family Residential Zone are various
subzones with individual criteria that have been created to address specific needs pertinent to
the areas these subzones encompass.
A. The Residential Foothill subzone is created to provide standards, guidelines, and criteria
which permit reasonable development of private property while minimizing flooding,
erosion, and other environmental hazards, and which protect the natural scenic
character of the foothill areas, and which ensure the efficient expenditure of public funds.
B. The goals to be achieved by the Residential Foothill subzone include but are not limited
to the following:
1. The protection of the public from natural hazards of storm water runoff and
erosion by requiring drainage facilities and the minimal removal of natural
vegetation while still allowing reasonable use of the land.
2. The minimizing of the threat and damages of fire in foothill areas by establishing
fire protection measures.
3. The preservation of natural features, wildlife habitat, and open space consistent
with the provisions of this Title and State Law.
4 - 2
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
4. The preservation of legal public access to mountain areas, trails, and natural
drainage channels.
5. The preservation and enhancement of visual and environmental quality by use of
natural vegetation and the prohibition of excessive excavation and terracing.
6. The establishment of traffic circulation facilities that ensure ingress and egress
for vehicles including emergency vehicles into all developed areas at any time of
the year with minimal cuts, fills or visible scars.
7. The encouragement of a variety of a development designs and concepts which
are compatible with the natural terrain of the foothill areas and which will
preserve open space and natural landscape and that allow a reasonable use of
the land.
8. The establishment of land use management criteria which will encourage
protection of natural elements while allowing a harmonious and satisfying
residential environment.
9. Encouragement of regard for the view of the foothills as well as a view from the
foothills.
10. Public and individual personal safety.
11. To assure that the taxpayers of Bountiful are not burdened by extraordinary costs
for services attributable solely to the development of hillside areas.
C. It is the intention of the City Council that every subdivision, lot, or parcel within the
Residential Foothill subzone be developed with as little disturbance to the natural
ground, with the most harmony with natural conditions, and with the greatest conformity
with the purposes and requirements of this Code, as possible under individual
circumstances. It is the finding of the City Council that all possible circumstances, and
the best means of dealing with them, cannot be anticipated in the preparation of these
regulations. Therefore, the City Council may, unless expressly stated to the contrary in
this chapter, grant a reasonable use exception to the provisions of this chapter to
implement its purposes by modifying requirements in the R-F subzone as individual
circumstances may merit subject to the criteria set forth below. The provisions set forth
in this chapter regarding the R-F subzone shall be the standard, but when conditions
merit a reasonable exception, discretion may be exercised, even where the term "shall"
is used in the regulation, in accordance with such criteria. The following findings and
conclusions may justify a reasonable exception and shall be included in the record of the
proceedings.
1. The proposed development is located on a lot or parcel that was legally created.
2. There is no other reasonable use or feasible alternative to the proposed
development with less impact on sensitive land areas including phasing or
project implementation, change in timing of activities, setback or other variance,
driveway relocation or placement of any structure.
4 - 3
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
3. The development cannot be located outside sensitive land areas due to
topographic constraints of the parcel or size and/or location of the parcel in
relation to the limits of sensitive land areas and a building setback, street width,
or other possible variances have been reviewed, analyzed and rejected as
feasible alternatives.
4. The proposed development does not pose a threat to the public health, safety, or
welfare on or off the site, including degradation of groundwater or surface water
quality, nor is it anticipated that it will damage nearby public or private property.
5. Any alteration of sensitive land areas is the minimum necessary to allow for
reasonable use of the property; and the proposal reasonably mitigates impacts
on sensitive land areas while still allowing reasonable use of the site.
6. The inability of the applicant to derive reasonable use of the property is not the
result of actions by the applicant in unlawfully subdividing the property or
adjusting a boundary line thereby creating the undevelopable condition after the
effective date of this Title.
14-4-102 DEFINITIONS
See Chapter 3 of this Title for the following definitions:
“AVERAGE SLOPE”
“DEVELOPMENT SITE”
“IMPERVIOUS MATERIAL”
“NATURAL VEGETATION”
“USABLE AND UNUSABLE LAND”
14-4-103 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, AND PROHIBITED USES
Subject to the provisions and restrictions of this Title, the following principal uses and structures,
and no others, are allowed either as a permitted use (P) or by Conditional Use Permit (C) in the
Residential zone. Some uses may be expressly prohibited (N) in this zone. Any use not listed
herein is also expressly prohibited.
Table 14-4-103
Use R-3, R-4
& R-F
R-1
Accessory Dwelling Unit, as set forth in the Supplementary
Development Standards chapter of this Title
C C
Chickens and related structures as set forth in this Title P P
Churches, Synagogues, and Temples P P
Coops, barns, stalls, pens, and any other animal housing as set
forth in this Title
N P
Denominational and Private School C C
Domesticated Farm Animals, as set forth in this Chapter N P
Home Occupation, Temporary, and Seasonal Uses as set forth in
this Title
P/C P/C
4 - 4
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
Use R-3, R-4
& R-F
R-1
Household Pets as set forth in this Title P P
Library C C
Multi-Family Residential Dwelling N N
Municipal Facility P P
Preschool, Group Instruction, or Daycare with eight (8) or less
children, including those residing in the home
P P
Preschool, Group Instruction, or Daycare with nine (9) to twelve
(12) children, as set forth in this Title and State Licensing
Requirements
C C
Private Recreational Facility C C
Public or Private Cemetery C C
Public or Private Utility Facility C C
Public Recreational Facility P P
Public Schools P P
Residence for Persons with Disability as set forth in 10-9a-504 of
the Utah Code
P P
Residential Accessory Structure P/C P/C
Residential Facility for Elderly Persons as set forth in 10-9a-519 of
the Utah Code
P P
Schools for the Disabled C C
Single or Two-Family Dwelling – Existing P P
Single-Family Dwelling – New P P
Telecommunication Facility not on City Property C C
Telecommunication Facility on City property P P
Two Family Dwelling – New N N
Utility Lines and Rights-of-Way P P
14-4-104 MAXIMUM DENSITY AND MINIMUM LOT STANDARDS
Areas within the (R) Residential Zone are divided into subzones based on the maximum
permitted density. The maximum density is indicated by the number following the Zone
designation. For example, R-4 means Single-Family Residential with a maximum of four (4)
units per acre. In addition to the maximum density requirement, each subzone has a standard
for minimum lot size and buildable area. The R-F subzone (Residential - Foothill) has varying
standards based on the average slope within the development or development phase, and
therefore has no density marker.
A. All structures and all other site improvements of whatever description shall be located
only upon areas constituting usable land. Furthermore, all lots or parcels that are
designated or zoned for residential development shall have a minimum rectangular
buildable area with a length to width ratio between 2:1 and 1:2, that is located entirely on
ground of less than thirty percent (30%) slope, that does not encroach into required
setbacks or easements, and that meets the area requirements as outlined in this section.
The minimum building pad may not be modified by Council discretion. The exact location
of the minimum building pad shall be designated by the developer or owner during the
approval process and shown on the subdivision plat or site plan, as applicable.
4 - 5
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
Table 14-4-104a
Subzone Max. Density
(Units/Acre)
Min. Lot Size
(Sq Ft)
Min. Buildable
Area (Sq Ft)
Min. Lot Width
(Ln. Ft)
R-4 4 8,000 2,000 70
R-3 3 11,000 3,000 80
R-1 1 40,000 5,000 100
Table 14-4-104b
Subzone Avg. Slope Max. Density
(Units/Acre)
Min. Lot
Size (Sq Ft)
Min.
Buildable
Area (Sq Ft)
Min. Lot
Width
(Ln. Ft)
R-F 0 -15% 2 20,000 sq ft 6,000 100
R-F 15 - 20% 1 40,000 sq ft 6,000 120
R-F 20 - 25% 0.50 2 acres 6,000 120
R-F 25 - 30% 0.20 5 acres 6,000 120
R-F 30 - 35% 0.10 10 acres 6,000 120
R-F 35% + 0.025 40 acres 6,000 120
B. Each lot or parcel in the (R) Zone shall have a minimum width, measured at the
minimum front yard setback line, as outlined in this Title. Each lot or parcel shall also
abut a public street for a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet, as measured along a line
parallel to the center of the street or along the circumference of a cul-de-sac improved to
City standards. For property fronting on a cul-de-sac not improved to City standards,
frontage shall be calculated by measuring the linear distance between the side property
lines at the tangential point of the arc.
C. Each corner lot or parcel in the (R) Zone shall be ten (10) feet wider and ten percent
(10%) larger than the minimum requirement for interior lots in the sub-zone in which it is
located, except for the R-F subzone. Also, each corner lot shall meet the minimum width
and frontage requirements along both street frontages. A parcel of land on a street
corner may not be subdivided diagonally from the corner in order to avoid the provisions
of this section.
D. Not more than one single-family dwelling or primary building may be placed on a lot or
parcel in the (R) Zone.
E. It is unlawful to subdivide, modify or otherwise create a residential lot that does not have
the minimum required width, except for legally existing non-conforming lots.
Furthermore, no residential lot may be narrower than the minimum required width at any
point between the front property line and the closest point of the primary dwelling and/or
the approved buildable area.
F. A building permit shall not be issued for any type of construction on a flag lot or
landlocked parcel that has not been approved by the City as a developed lot.
14-4-105 YARD AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
The following minimum yard requirements shall apply in the (R) Zone:
4 - 6
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
A. Front Yard – Each lot or parcel shall have a front yard setback of not less than twentyfive
(25) feet from the front lot line. Except for corner lots, where the elevation of the
ground differs ten (10) feet or more from the curb level, as measured at a point fifty (50)
feet from the front lot line and midway between the side lot lines, said front yard setback
may be reduced to twenty (20) feet.
B. Side Yard; Interior Lot – Each interior lot or parcel of land shall have two (2) side yards
as indicated below for the sub-zone in which the lot or parcel is located:
Subzone Minimum Side Yard (ft) Total Combined (ft)
R-3, R-4, R-1 8 16
R-F 8 20
C. Side Yard; Corner Lot – On each corner lot or parcel of land, the side yard setback
contiguous to the street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet, and shall not be paved or
used for vehicle parking, except for a legally constructed driveway or parking area. The
interior side yard setback shall be the same as the side yard setback for an interior lot.
The twenty (20) foot street side yard extends from the minimum front yard setback to the
rear property line.
D. Side Yard; Flag Lot – A flag lot shall have a minimum side yard setback equal to the
minimum required rear yard setback.
E. Side Yard; Deep Setback – Any home that is located more than one hundred (100) feet
from the front property line shall have a minimum side yard setback equal to the
minimum required rear yard setback.
F. Side Yard; Driveway – When used for vehicle access to a garage, carport, or parking
area in the rear yard, an interior side yard setback shall include at least eight (8) feet of
unobstructed paved surface exclusive of window wells, stairs, door stoops, chimneys
and other obstructions. Vehicle access to rear yards shall be in accordance with the
minimum dimensions shown on Figure 14-4-1.
G. Side Yard; Accessory Structure – No accessory structures shall be allowed in any
required side yard setback.
H. Rear Yard – Each lot or parcel shall have a rear yard setback of not less than twenty
(20) feet.
I. Rear Yard; Irregular Lot – On any lot which is not generally rectangular in shape, the
required minimum rear yard setback may be an average of the distances measured from
the rear corners of the main building directly to the rear property line(s). However, at no
point may the main building be closer than fifteen (15) feet to the rear property line(s).
J. Accessory Structure, Primary Use Required – An accessory structure shall not be
permitted on any lot or parcel of land unless a primary structure is first constructed on
the site. If the primary structure is removed and not immediately replaced, any accessory
structure must also be removed. A lot or parcel shall not be subdivided such that an
accessory structure is located on a lot or parcel without a primary structure.
4 - 7
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
1. Accessory Structure, Permitted Use – An accessory structure allowed as a
permitted use shall meet all of the following:
a. The total footprint of any and all accessory structures shall not exceed ten
percent (10%) of the entire lot or parcel area, and no lot or parcel shall be
reduced in area after the construction of an accessory building, such that
it is in violation of this provision.
b. An accessory structure shall meet all of the setbacks of a primary
structure, or it shall be located behind the rear building line of a primary
structure, and shall be setback at least three (3) feet from a rear or
interior side property line, and at least twenty (20) feet from a street side
yard property line.
c. An accessory structure shall be located at least five (5) feet from a
primary structure, including eaves, bay windows, chimneys and any other
protrusion on either the accessory building or the primary structure.
d. No part of an accessory structure, excluding the eaves, shall be closer
than twelve (12) feet to any primary dwelling on an adjacent property.
e. The eaves of an accessory structure shall be setback at least one (1) foot
from any property line.
f. An accessory structure shall be designed and constructed so as to
prevent roof runoff from impacting an adjacent property.
g. An accessory structure shall meet all applicable provisions of the
International Building Code.
h. An accessory structure shall not encroach on any easements, recorded or
otherwise.
i. The sidewall of an accessory structure shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in
height, as measured from the average slope of the ground to the point
where the undersides of the eaves connect to the top of the sidewall. For
a flat or mansard roof, the sidewall shall be measured from the average
slope of the ground to the highest point of the roof, including any coping,
parapet or similar feature.
j. The height of an accessory structure shall not exceed twenty (20) feet.
k. Accessory structures used or designed for vehicle parking shall be
connected to the street by a paved driveway.
2. Accessory Structure, Conditional Use – An accessory structure may be allowed
as a conditional use in accordance with the following:
a. The approval body shall consider the following when reviewing the
proposed accessory structure:
4 - 8
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
i. The extent that sunlight, air and view sheds are
obstructed/disturbed,
ii. The proximity to adjoining structures,
iii. The contour of the land, both existing and proposed,
iv. Features peculiar to the site and the immediately adjoining
properties.
v. The location of windows, doors, balconies and other openings that
may intrude on the privacy of adjoining property owners,
vi. The proposed and potential uses based on the size, configuration
and other aspects of the structure.
b. The total building footprint of any and all accessory structures shall not
exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the entire lot or parcel area, and no lot or
parcel shall be reduced in area after the construction of an accessory
building, such that it is in violation of this provision.
c. An accessory structure shall meet all of the setbacks of a primary
structure, or it shall be located behind the rear building line of a primary
structure, and shall be setback at least three (3) feet from a rear or
interior side property line, and at least twenty (20) feet from a street side
yard property line. The approving body may require an increased setback
based on the criteria of 14-4-106(C.)(1.).
d. An accessory structure shall be located at least five (5) feet from a
primary structure, including eaves, bay windows, chimneys and any other
protrusion on either the accessory building or the primary structure.
e. No part of an accessory structure, excluding the eaves, shall be closer
than twelve (12) feet to any dwelling on an adjacent property.
f. The eaves of an accessory structure shall be setback at least one (1) foot
from any property line.
g. An accessory structure shall be designed and constructed so as to
prevent roof runoff from impacting an adjacent property.
h. An accessory structure shall meet all applicable provisions of the
International Building Code.
i. An accessory structure shall not encroach on any easements, recorded or
otherwise.
j. The sidewall of an accessory structure shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in
height, as measured from the average slope of the ground to the point
where the undersides of the eaves connect to the top of the sidewall. For
a flat or mansard roof, the sidewall shall be measured from the average
4 - 9
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
slope of the ground to the highest point of the roof, including any coping,
parapet or similar feature.
k. The height of an accessory structure shall not exceed twenty (20) feet.
l. Accessory structures used or designed for vehicle parking shall be
connected to the street by a paved driveway.
14-4-106 PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS
A. The following structures may be erected on or project into any required yard:
1. Fences and walls in conformance with City codes or ordinances.
2. Landscape elements, including trees, shrubs, agricultural crops and other plants.
3. Necessary appurtenances for utility service.
B. The structures listed below may project into a minimum front or rear yard not more than
four (4) feet, and into a minimum side yard not more than two (2) feet:
1. Cornices, eaves, awnings, belt courses, sills, buttresses or other similar
architectural features.
2. Fireplace structures and bays, provided that they are not wider than eight (8)
feet, measured generally parallel to the wall of which they are a part.
3. Stairways, balconies, door stoops, fire escapes and planter boxes or masonry
planters not exceeding twenty-four (24) inches in height.
C. Any permanent roof or canopy attached to the main building which covers a use
customarily recognized as an open, outdoor use, such as a patio, patio deck, hot tub,
etc., may extend into the rear yard no further than one-half the required rear yard setback
distances, and into a front yard not more than seven (7) feet, if the following criteria
are met:
1. The roof or canopy is not more than one (1) story in height.
2. The roof or canopy is no longer than one-half (1/2) the width of the main dwelling
on which it is located.
3. The roof or canopy is entirely open on three (3) sides except for supporting
columns and customary architectural features.
4. The columns supporting the roof or canopy are constructed on individual pad
footings or similar design, and not on a continuous footing wall that could be
used for future expansion of living space.
5. In no instance may the additions encroach to within less than twenty (20) feet of
a front or street side yard property line, or to within less than ten (10) feet of a
rear property line.
4 - 10
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
D. None of the above structures or additions may project into any side yard abutting a
street on a corner lot.
14-4-107 BUILDING LOCATION AND HEIGHT
A. No building or structure in the (R) Zone shall exceed two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet
in height as measured at the average grade. Chimneys, flagpoles, church towers and
similar accessory elements not used for human occupancy are excluded in determining
height; however, the City may limit the height of any protrusion that is found by the City
Council to be a public nuisance.
B. No building or structure in the R-F Zone may extend above the closest ridgeline of the
ground, as measured on a level line perpendicular to the ridgeline. If for any reason this
is not possible, then the building or structure shall be located as far away from the
ridgeline as feasible.
14-4-108 DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS
The horizontal distance between any dwellings on adjacent lots shall not be less than sixteen
(16) feet, excluding permitted eave extensions. The horizontal distance between any accessory
building and any dwelling shall not be less than five (5) feet, as measured at any point. The
horizontal distance between any accessory building or structure and any primary dwelling on an
adjacent property shall not be less than twelve (12) feet, as measured at any point.
14-4-109 PERMISSIBLE LOT COVERAGE
A. In the (R) Zone, all structures, including accessory structures, and all impervious
surfaces such as driveways, sidewalks, patios, parking areas, sports courts and pools
shall not cover a total of more than sixty percent (60%) of the area of the lot or parcel of
land.
B. At least fifty percent (50%) of all required front yard areas shall be landscaped.
C. At least fifty percent (50%) of all required side yard areas shall be landscaped.
D. At least fifty percent (50%) of all street side yard (corner lot) areas shall be landscaped.
E. At least fifty percent (50%) of all rear yard areas shall be landscaped
.
F. For institutional uses, such as churches, private schools and public buildings, the
approving authority may increase the amount of impervious surface area to up to
seventy percent (70%), if the additional hard surfacing is used to provide parking spaces
beyond the minimum required.
14-4-110 PARKING, LOADING, AND ACCESS
Each lot or parcel in the (R) Zone shall have on the same lot or parcel off-street parking
sufficient to comply with Chapter 18 of this Code. Said spaces shall be paved with asphalt,
concrete, or similar material, and shall include a paved driveway accessing a public street. For
single family and two-family residential uses, at least two (2) of the required on-site parking
spaces per unit shall be provided behind the minimum front yard setback.
4 - 11
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
A. Front and Street Side (Corner Lot): Parking spaces shall not be permitted between the
residence and the street in either the front yard or street side yard except for the
following:
1. Street Side Yard (Corner Lot): Parking is only allowed on approved parking areas
either within an approved garage or carport or located at least 10 feet from the
street side property line and behind a six foot screening fence. Fencing adjacent
to driveways on corner lots shall be subject to required clear view requirements
of Section 14-16-108.
14-4-111 NON-RESIDENTIAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL
Site plan approval is required for any non-residential use in the (R) Zone per the procedures set
forth in Chapter 2 of this Title.
14-4-112 LANDSCAPING
The following landscaping provisions shall apply to any developed lot or parcel in the (R) Zone:
A. All portions of the lot not improved with structures or other impervious surfaces shall be
maintained with suitable landscaping of plants, trees, shrubs, grass and similar
landscaping materials.
B. Landscaping shall also be installed in each adjacent parkstrip to the same standards as
other on-site landscaping. Asphalt, concrete, bricks, pavers, railroad ties, and other nonvegetative
material are not allowed in the parkstrip area between the curb and sidewalk.
Xeriscaping is permitted in accordance with the Landscaping and Fencing Chapter of
this Title.
14-4-113 STORAGE OF COMMERCIAL ITEMS
The storage of commercial goods, commercial materials, or construction related items is
expressly prohibited. No property in the (R) zone may be used to display or proffer items for
sale except for personal items belonging to the residents of the property, and which meet the
criteria for a “garage and yard sale” as set forth in the Temporary Use section of this Title.
14-4-114 WALLS AND FENCES
All walls and fences erected or maintained in the (R) Zone shall comply with the provisions of
Chapter 16 of this Code.
14-4-115 LOT ACCESS AND SITE LAYOUT
A. Each proposal to construct a primary structure more than one hundred fifty (150) feet
from a public street shall be reviewed and approved by the Administrative Committee
and Fire Marshall prior to receiving a building permit. Furthermore, all proposals must
adhere to Section 503 of the International Fire Code, as adopted by the South Davis
Metro Fire Agency and all other criteria as set forth below.
All of the following must be met before the Administrative Committee may grant
approval:
4 - 12
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
1. Surface. An all-weather surface capable of supporting the imposed load of fire
apparatus shall be provided. If constructed of asphalt, the access road or
driveway shall be a minimum of two and one-half (2 1/2) inches of asphalt over a
minimum of six (6) inches of compacted road base. If constructed of concrete,
the access road or driveway shall have a minimum of five (5) inches of concrete
over a compacted road base.
The access road or driveway shall be maintained by the property owner or
possessor of the premises in good condition and repair and with adequate snow
removal so as to provide free and uninhibited access by emergency service
vehicles.
2. The access road or driveway shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet wide.
Where such roadway is adjacent to required fire hydrants, the width shall be a
minimum of twenty-six (26) feet within twenty (20) feet in either direction from the
hydrant. Such required widths shall be unobstructed, including parking of
vehicles, and shall have a minimum vertical clearance of thirteen (13) feet six (6)
inches.
3. A turn-around shall be provided at the end of the access road or driveway in
accordance with the standards and specifications of Article 10 of the International
Fire Code and in accordance with the minimum requirements of Figure 4-1. The
minimum turning radii for all turns and/or curves shall conform to the forty-five
(45) foot radius single unit truck or bus contemplated in Figure 4-4. If access
roads are not looped, then the provided dead end access road shall meet the
requirements in Figure 4-2.
4. An access road or driveway shall be extended to within one hundred fifty (150)
feet of all portions of the exterior walls of the first story of any building.
5. The maximum grade for access roads or driveways shall not exceed fifteen (15)
percent at any point as measured along the centerline of the access road or
driveway.
6. Each property owner shall identify and mark fire lanes to the satisfaction and
approval of the Fire Chief. Signs shall be posted near the entrances of access
roadways and driveways. Spacing and placing of signs shall be subject to the
approval of the Fire Chief. Signs shall be a minimum of twelve (12) inches by
eighteen (18) inches in two and one-half (2.5) inch block lettering with one-half
(.5) inch stroke on a contrasting background. Signs shall read "No Parking - Fire
Department Access Road.”
7. The property owner or possessor of the premises shall establish the base grade
of the access road or driveway before the water system is installed. The property
owner or possessor shall clear the right-of-way for the water system and
establish the proposed fire hydrant locations and grades by use of an offset
stake. The City shall install the water system and set the fire hydrant to the grade
established by the owner. If there are any changes to the access road or
driveway or right-of-way areas which do not allow for a minimum of forty-two (42)
inches of cover over the water line or not more than four (4) inch vertical
difference between the flange of the fire hydrant and the finished surface of the
4 - 13
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
access road or driveway, the owner shall be responsible for all expenses
associated with the relocation or adjustment to the water system. No building lot
shall be allowed or approved where the static water pressure from the City water
system serving the proposed lot or lots is less than forty (40) pounds per square
inch.
8. Fire Hydrants. A fire hydrant shall be installed by Bountiful City at the expense of
the property owner and shall be connected by a six (6) inch water line from the
water main. The hydrant shall be located in accordance with Article 10 of the
International Fire Code. Fire hydrants shall be located on all required access
roads or driveways as required by City Code and shall be located within five (5)
feet of the required access road or driveway.
If, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, fire hydrants are vulnerable to vehicular
damage, appropriate crash posts shall be required. No obstruction shall exist
within a three (3) feet working area of each fire hydrant. Required crash posts
shall be a four (4) inch concrete filled pipe, having a minimum of three (3) feet in
height above grade, with two (2) feet of pipe below grade set in concrete.
Hydrant shut-off valves shall be located no closer than five (5) feet from the
hydrant and no further than twenty (20) feet.
9. Easements. The fire hydrant, water line, and access road or driveway shall be
located within a public utility easement of at least twenty (20) feet in width such
that emergency and utility service vehicles and personnel have unimpeded
access to the improvements (Figure 4-3).
10. All of the required improvements shall be installed at the lot or property owner's
expense.
11. As an alternative to the access requirements described above, the Fire Marshall
may approve the installation of a pressurized interior fire protection sprinkling
system that complies with the minimum standards of the IRC and/or IBC, and
that receives the Fire Marshall’s approval.
B. All new residential structures shall comply with the requirements of the IBC for
foundation elevation on graded sites (1805.3.4 and 1805.3.5). For most approved lots,
the “approved drainage facility” is the street R.O.W. On these sites, the finished grading
shall direct runoff from the front yard setback to the street R.O.W. by means of the
driveway or front yard grading, or as approved by the City Engineer. Driveway slopes
shall have a minimum slope of two percent (2%), and a maximum slope of fifteen
percent (15%), as measured along the centerline of the driveway.
C. Downhill or reverse grade driveways must be reviewed and approved by the City
Engineer. Approvals will be considered based on proximity of the lot to storm drain
facilities or natural draining features such as creeks, swales or other features that
convey runoff water directly to the storm drain system. Approval shall be conditional
upon inclusion of the following requirements:
1. The driveway shall provide a minimum length of ten (10) feet of positive slope
(two percent (2%) minimum) to the street R.O.W.
4 - 14
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
2. The maximum grade of the driveway shall be seven percent (7%).
3. The approved site plan shall include any additions or modifications to the existing
storm drain system necessary to prevent erosion or impact to adjacent
properties, or impact to the storm drain system.
4. Other requirements as determined by the City Engineer based on conditions
specific to the property.
14-4-116 PARCELS OF LAND NOT IN SUBDIVISIONS WITHIN THE R-F SUBZONE
No dwelling shall be constructed on a parcel of land not included as part of an approved
subdivision without City Council approval of the parcel of land as a legal building lot. In order to
be approved as a legal building lot, the Council must determine that the parcel meets the lot,
yard, and other requirements of this Title. As part of the review process, the City Council and
Planning Commission may request any information typically required for subdivision review.
Also, the City Council may require that the applicant record a one lot subdivision plat for the
purpose of establishing utility easements and fulfilling other provisions of this Title.
14-4-117 REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING IN THE R-F SUBZONE
No construction, excavation, or removal of vegetation may occur on any lot or parcel in the R-F
subzone until a permit has been issued, and no permit may be issued until the proposed plans
have been approved by the appropriate land use authority. The following rules apply to all
building and construction in the Residential Foothill Zone.
A. Drainage and Erosion.
1. Lots shall be arranged so as to ensure required setbacks from drainage channels
as defined by the Army Corps of Engineers on official Flood Insurance Rate
Maps.
2. Facilities for the collection of storm water runoff shall be required to be
constructed on development sites and according to the following requirements:
a. Such facilities shall be the first improvement constructed on the hillside.
b. Such facilities shall be designed to retain safely and adequately the
maximum expected storm water runoff for a twenty-five-year storm, as
determined by Technical Paper No. 28, prepared by the U. S.
Department of Commerce - Weather Bureau, for a sufficient length of
time so as to prevent flooding and erosion during storm water runoff flow
periods.
c. Such facilities shall be so designed to divert surface water away from cut
surfaces or sloping surfaces of a fill.
3. Construction on a development site that may disturb vegetative cover shall be
minimized between December 1 of any year and April 15 of the following year.
4 - 15
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
B. Vegetation and Re-vegetation.
1. Any area on a development site cleared of natural vegetation in the course of
construction of offsite improvements shall be replanted with vegetation which,
when established, shall have characteristics of erosion control equal to or
exceeding the original vegetation.
2. New plantings shall be protected with organic cover.
3. The use of persons or firms having expertise in the practice of re-vegetation (i.e.,
licensed landscape architects or nurserymen) shall be employed to supervise the
planning and installation of re-vegetation cover.
4. Vegetation shall be removed only when absolutely necessary, e.g., for the
construction of buildings, roads and filled areas.
5. Vegetation shall be planted in all disturbed areas within three (3) weeks of the
completion of off-site improvements or as directed by the City Engineer. Such
vegetation shall be of a perennial and low combustibility nature and which, when
established, shall be sufficient to stabilize the soil.
C. Spark arresters shall be installed in every fireplace constructed indoors or outdoors.
Screen openings in such arresters shall not be in excess of one-quarter (1/4) inch in
diameter.
D. Grading, Cuts and Fills
1. Exposed unstable surfaces of an excavation or fill shall not be steeper than one
(1) vertical to two (2) horizontal.
2. Permanent fill shall be located so that settlement, sliding, or erosion shall not
damage or cover any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk or building.
3. All fill and degrees of compaction shall comply with the standards established by
the Bountiful City Engineer in accordance with applicable codes and standards
adopted by the City.
4. The top or bottom edges of slopes caused by an excavation or fill up to ten (10)
vertical feet shall be at least three (3) horizontal feet from the property line and/or
street right-of-way lines. Cut and/or fills greater than ten (10) feet shall be
setback an appropriate distance as determined by the City Engineer.
5. The maximum vertical height of any cut or fill shall be ten (10) feet, except for
existing, naturally occurring, and/or man-made site anomalies. An anomaly shall
mean any abnormal deviation from the natural contours of a property
encompassing less than ten (10) percent of the entire parcel area or one
thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is less.
6. Any structure except a retaining wall or soil stabilization improvement shall have
a setback from the crest of the cut or base of the fill of a minimum distance equal
to the depth of the fill or the height of the cut, unless a structurally sound
4 - 16
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
retaining wall is built for the cut or fill slope. Retaining walls may be a part of a
dwelling unit.
7. The distance from any structure to the toe of a slope shall be at least the height
of the slope divided by two (H/2), up to fifteen (15) feet.
8. No cut, fill, or other area of disturbance may have a finished grade exceeding two
(2) horizontal feet for every one (1) vertical (a 2:1 slope). Retaining walls shall be
required in any area of disturbance where the grade exceeds a 2:1 slope. Any
retaining wall that is (4) feet in height or taller shall be designed by a licensed
engineer and approved by the Bountiful City Engineer in accordance with
applicable codes adopted by the City.
9. No retaining wall shall exceed ten (10) feet in height.
E. Streets, roadways, and private access ways shall follow as nearly as possible the natural
terrain. The following additional standards shall apply:
1. At least two (2) ingress and egress routes shall be provided for each subdivision.
2. Points of access shall be provided to all developed and undeveloped areas for
emergency and firefighting equipment. Any driveway located upon a lot
extending from a public street shall have at any point a maximum grade of fifteen
(15) percent as measured along the centerline of the driveway, and a minimum
width of twenty feet, and shall be of a sufficient width and design to admit and
accommodate firefighting equipment. Any driveway to an accessory building or
secondary garage may be reduced to a minimum width of ten (10) feet if the
Planning Director or Building Official determines that it is not necessary for
providing emergency access.
3. No cul-de-sac shall exceed six hundred (600) feet in length, and each cul-de-sac
shall have a turnaround with a radius of fifty-four (54) feet. A stub street that is
longer than the width or length of any adjacent single lot or that is longer than two
hundred (200) feet, whichever is less, shall have a temporary turnaround at the
end thereof.
4. Centerline curvatures shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet radius on any
curved street pattern. Depending on the slope of the street and other site specific
conditions, the City Engineer may require a larger curvature in accordance with
AASHTO and other applicable standards adopted by the City.
5. Variations of street design standards developed to solve special hillside visual
and functional problems may be presented to the Planning Commission for
consideration. Examples of such variations may be the use of split roadways to
avoid deep cuts, modifications of surface drainage treatments or sidewalk
design.
6. Any road or right-of-way for vehicular access dedicated for public use shall be
subject to the following limitations:
4 - 17
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
a. The maximum grade of such road or right-of-ways shall be twelve (12)
percent except as hereafter provided.
b. The City Council, after receiving a recommendation from the Planning
Commission, may grant approval for the construction of a straight section
of road or right-of-way having a grade exceeding twelve (12) percent, but
the grade of such streets shall not, in any event, exceed fifteen (15)
percent.
F. Architectural Design and Site Orientation
1. Any building proposed for construction in the Residential Foothill subzone shall
use building materials and colors that blend harmoniously with the natural
settings of the site. Materials such as natural woods, brick (earth colors), and
stone are considered to be most appropriate.
2. The Planning Commission shall review the design and specified exterior
materials and colors for all structures other than single-family dwellings. Building
permits for such structures shall not be granted until building materials and colors
have been approved by the Planning Commission.
3. Landscaping shall be designed and installed to maintain the natural character of
foliage in the area consistent with the proposed development.
4. Any primary structure and its accompanying site improvements and accessory
structures shall be located on the building pad defined and approved for the lot,
but may be located outside of the minimum building pad area only if the ground is
considered usable as set forth in this Title.
G. In addition to the provisions requiring posting of an acceptable bond as set forth in the
Codes of Bountiful, Utah, as amended, a corporate surety bond or cash bond or a letter
of credit supported by a guarantee of a state or federally chartered bank or other
financial institution shall be required by the City Council to guarantee the completion of
public improvements such as streets, sidewalks, curb, gutter, utilities, re-vegetation
projects, the stabilization of gradings, cuts, and fills and constructions of storm water
runoff facilities as required in this Title. The bond shall be in an amount equal to the cost
of construction of such projects and shall continue in effect for one (1) year after the
completion date of such projects, improvements, or facilities.
H. Exceptions to the requirements and provisions set forth in this Title may be approved by
the City Council, provided that the developer or owner of such development can
demonstrate that the requested exception:
1. Is not detrimental or injurious to the property or improvements adjacent thereto,
2. Is not detrimental to the general well-being of the neighborhood,
3. Is minor in its overall scope and not a major departure from the purposes and
objectives of this Chapter,
4. Does not require undue public expense for maintenance, and
4 - 18
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
5. Does not impose an undue burden upon the public or the City.
I. Lot Access and Site Layout
Each proposal to construct a primary structure more than one hundred fifty (150) feet
from a public street shall be reviewed and approved by the Administrative Committee
and Fire Marshall prior to receiving a building permit. Furthermore, any proposal to
construct a primary structure more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a public street
shall also include a residential fire suppression system (sprinklers), and all other criteria
as set forth below. No primary residential structure may be located more than five
hundred (500) feet from a public street, without exception. All measurements shall be
taken from the edge of the public R.O.W. along the centerline of the driveway or private
access road to the nearest point of the primary structure. All of the following must be met
before the Administrative Committee may grant approval:
1. An access road or driveway shall be provided which meets the standards
outlined in Section 14-4-115. In addition, all dwelling structures shall have
installed at the time of construction, and keep continuously maintained, a
pressurized interior fire protection sprinkling system that complies with the
minimum standards of the IRC and/or IBC, and meeting the Fire Marshall’s
approval.
14-4-118 SUBDIVISION AND PLANNED DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND APPROVAL
PROCEDURE FOR THE R-F SUBZONE
A. Any proposed subdivision shall require conditional use approval from the Planning
Commission.
B. Any subdivision application, including planned developments, shall include plats and/or
site plans drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100')
with topographical contours drawn at two (2) foot intervals. Furthermore, all subdivision
plats and site plans shall be drawn to scale by a registered land surveyor licensed to
practice in the State of Utah. Said plans and plats shall provide the following information:
1. Location of the proposed subdivision, with identification of abutting streets.
2. Topographic contours.
3. An estimate of the average slope of the proposed subdivision and of each
individual lot within the subdivision.
4. The number of lots.
5. The location and size of proposed lots.
6. Location, width, and grade of all proposed streets and radii of any cul-de-sacs.
7. Location of existing or proposed schools, churches or parks.
C. The following information, in addition to any other information required by City Code,
shall be provided. For a project of less than five (5) total acres, the City Council may
4 - 19
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
accept reports conducted on adjacent properties, if the City Engineer determines that
they are applicable to the subject area.
1. Report of Soil Characteristics. The term “soil characteristics” refers to data
regarding the nature, distribution, and strength of soils within the project area. A
Soils Report shall include:
a. Unified classification of all soils with an estimate of susceptibility to
erosion, plasticity index, liquid limit, shrink-swell potential and general
suitability for development.
b. Estimate of the normal highest elevation of the seasonal high water table.
c. Flood history and potential including proximity to known floor plain areas
and drainage channels.
d. Topographic contours.
2. Report of Geologic Conditions. A Geologic Conditions Report shall include the
following information:
a. Definition of any zones of deformation with respect to active faults and
other mass movements of soil and rock.
b. Identification of anomalies of the terrain or characteristics of the
geological materials which would have any potential impact upon the use
of the site.
c. Determination of ground water characteristics.
d. Written recommendation for construction of proposed improvements to
avoid impact of any potential geologic hazard.
3. Grading and Drainage Report.
a. The application for preliminary approval shall include a plan for grading
and a report on the method by which surface water and natural drainage
will be accompanied. The plan shall be prepared by a professional
engineer licensed to practice in the State of Utah, and shall include the
following information:
i. Indication of existing and proposed contours.
ii. Indication of the present and proposed slope of each graded area.
iii. Location and identification (by species) of existing vegetation, and
an indication of vegetation proposed for removal and re-vegetation
proposal.
4 - 20
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
iv. Existing and proposed drainage patterns. Location of any
drainage channels on the proposed site that have been identified
by the State Geologist.
v. Location and depth of all proposed fills and cuts.
vi. Description of the methods to be employed to achieve stabilization
and compaction.
vii. Location and capacities of proposed drainage, structures, and
erosion control measures.
viii. Computation of maximum runoff for a twenty-five year storm
before and after development.
ix. Location of existing buildings or structures on the site and location
of existing buildings and structures on adjacent properties within
one hundred (100) feet of the site, or which may be affected by
any proposed grading or construction operations.
x. Verification of the existence and location of a six thousand (6,000)
square foot building pad with required access to it.
4. The City Council and Planning Commission may attach such conditions as
deemed necessary to secure the purposes as set forth in this Chapter.
D. No construction, excavation, grading or removal of vegetation may occur until final
subdivision approval has been granted by the City Council and specific site
developments have been approved by the City Engineer. Furthermore, individual lots or
parcels may not be disturbed until a building permit has been issued for that lot or
parcel.
14-4-119 DOMESTIC FARM ANIMALS
A. The City recognizes that farm animals are inextricably associated with certain noise,
sight, and smell nuisances that are generally unacceptable in urban areas. However, the
City also recognizes the importance of maintaining its agricultural heritage and the
traditional values associated with that heritage. It is with this purpose, to preserve the
agricultural heritage of the community, that this Section is enacted.
B. Where permitted, the quantity of animals permitted on a property shall be determined on
the basis of one hundred (100) animal points per vacant acre, (e.g., 0.50 acres x 100 =
50 animal points, 1.45 acres x 100 = 145 animal points).
C. Vacant acreage is determined by the following. At a minimum, a residential property
shall deduct 0.20 acres (approx. 8700 sq. ft.) per unit from the total acreage before
calculating the animal allowance; (e.g., (0.50 acres – 0.20 acres) x 100 = 30 animal
points; (1.45 acres – 0.20 acres) x 100 = 125 points). For a residential property where
more than .20 acres is occupied by driveway, residential building footprint, garage and
areas of human occupancy and use, the actual vacant acreage available for animals
4 - 21
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
shall be calculated by survey. A front yard and any minimum required yard setbacks
shall not be considered vacant acreage or for animal habitat.
D. The animals allowed in Table 14-4-119 below, and no other animals except household
pets, are allowed in a permitted residential zone.
Table 14-4-119
Type of Animal # of Points
per Animal
Pigs, Cattle Not allowed
Horses 40
Sheep, goats, llamas 25
Fowl, pigeons, rabbits 5
Raccoons, skunks, roosters, and any other nuisance animal Not allowed
Any non-domestic animal, and any animal regulated by the
State of Utah, the United States, or any of their agents
Not allowed
E. A commercial agricultural operation is not permitted anywhere within the City of
Bountiful.
F. Coops, barns, stalls, pens, and any other animal housing structure, shall be located in
conformance with the provisions of Title 8 - Public Health of the Bountiful City Code.
14-4-120 DWELLING UNITS CONTAINING SECOND KITCHENS
A. Except as provided below, or in conjunction with an approved accessory dwelling unit,
any dwelling in a Residential Zone shall contain only one (1) kitchen.
B. A dwelling unit in a Residential Zone may have a second kitchen if the owners of the
property have signed a Deed Restriction on the property prepared and signed by the
Bountiful City Planning Director, explicitly stating that the dwelling unit shall be used
only as a single family residence. A permit shall not be granted allowing a second
kitchen or an existing second kitchen shall not be deemed to be authorized until the
Deed Restriction has been recorded at the Davis County Recorder’s office and a copy
showing recording information has been filed with the Bountiful City Planning Director.
C. A dwelling unit shall have no more than two (2) kitchens. This shall be specified in the
Deed Restriction.
D. Second kitchens shall not be allowed in dwelling units that are part of a multi-family
dwelling.
4 - 22
Chapter 4 R - Single Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
Figure 14-4-1
Street
10 feet min.
8 feet min width
Unobstructed
Paved Area
5 feet min.
5 feet
Paving not
allowed within this
area. Must be
landscaped in
accordance with
Chapter 16
5 - 1
Chapter 5 RM - Multi Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 5
(RM) - RESIDENTIAL MULTIPLE FAMILY
14-5-101 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
14-5-102 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, AND PROHIBITED USES
14-5-103 MAXIMUM DENSITY AND MINIMUM LOT STANDARDS
14-5-104 PROPORTIONALITY REQUIREMENT
14-5-105 YARD AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
14-5-106 PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS
14-5-107 BUILDING HEIGHT
14-5-108 DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS
14-5-109 PERMISSIBLE LOT COVERAGE
14-5-110 PARKING, LOADING, AND ACCESS
14-5-111 NON-RESIDENTIAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL
14-5-112 SIGN STANDARDS
14-5-113 LANDSCAPING
14-5-114 STORAGE OF TRASH, DEBRIS, AND COMMERCIAL ITEMS
14-5-115 WALLS AND FENCES
14-5-116 VEHICLE ACCESS
14-5-117 SITE PLAN APPROVAL
14-5-101 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
The Residential Multiple Family Zone (RM) is established to provide areas of the community
which shall be characterized by attractively landscaped condominiums, apartments, two family
and single family dwellings and institutional uses which may be harmoniously blended into each
neighborhood. Apartment developments should be of sufficient size and number of units in
order to allow for on-site management. Condominium developments should be of a sufficient
size and number of units so as to create a permanent, stable, homeowner’s association (HOA).
14-5-102 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, AND PROHIBITED USES
Subject to the provisions and restrictions of this Title, the following principal uses and structures,
and no others, are allowed either as a permitted use (P) or by Conditional Use Permit (C) in the
Residential Multiple Family zone. Some uses may be expressly prohibited (N) in this zone. Any
use not listed herein is also expressly prohibited.
Table 14-5-102a
Use
(RM)
Zone
Accessory Dwelling Unit, as set forth in the Supplementary
Development Standards chapter of this Title
N
Assisted Living Center (Less than two acres in size) N
Assisted Living Center (Two acres or more in size) C
Churches, Synagogues, and Temples P
Denominational and Private School C
Home Occupation, Temporary, and Seasonal Uses as set forth in
this Title
P/C
5 - 2
Chapter 5 RM - Multi Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
Use
(RM)
Zone
Household Pets as set forth in this Title P
Independent Living Center (Two acres or more in size) C
Library C
Multi-Family Residential Dwelling P
Municipal Facility P
Preschool, Group Instruction, or Daycare with eight (8) or less
children, including those residing in the home
P
Preschool, Group Instruction, or Daycare with nine (9) to twelve
(12) children, as set forth in this Title and State Licensing
Requirements
C
Private Recreational Facility C
Public or Private Cemetery C
Public or Private Utility Facility C
Public Recreational Facility P
Public Schools P
Residence for Persons with Disability as set forth in 10-9a-504 of
the Utah Code
P
Residential Accessory Structure P
Residential Facility for Elderly Persons as set forth in 10-9a-519 of
the Utah Code
P
Schools for the Disabled C
Single Family Dwelling – Existing P
Single Family Dwelling – New C
Telecommunication Facility not on City Property C
Telecommunication Facility on City property P
Two Family Dwelling P
Utility Lines and Rights-of-Way P
14-5-103 MAXIMUM DENSITY AND MINIMUM LOT STANDARDS
A. Areas within the (RM) Residential Multiple Family Zone are divided into subzones based
on the maximum permitted density and the minimum lot size. The maximum density is
indicated by the number following the Zone designation. For example, RM-13 means
Single Family Residential with a maximum of thirteen (13) units per acre on a minimum
lot size of one (1) acre. Any lot or parcel that is smaller than the minimum required lot
size and that is at least one-quarter (0.25) acre in area shall have a maximum density of
seven (7) units per acre, regardless of the subzone in which it is located. Density and
minimum lot size are based on the net buildable area. Areas within floodplains or with
slopes steeper than thirty percent (30%), and/or areas that are otherwise encumbered
such that they cannot be used for project improvements are considered unbuildable. In
addition to the maximum density requirement, each subzone has a standard for
minimum lot size and width. Any lot or parcel smaller than one-quarter (0.25) acre in size
shall be developed and used in accordance with the standards for the (R-4) subzone.
B. Any structure and any other site improvement shall be located only upon an area
constituting buildable land. In addition, each corner lot or parcel in the (RM) Zone shall
meet the minimum width requirements along both frontages. Legally existing lots created
prior to this Code and that are improved with a single family residence shall be
5 - 3
Chapter 5 RM - Multi Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
considered legally conforming if they have a minimum sixty five (65) feet frontage and
six thousand five hundred (6,500) square foot lot area.
Table 14-5-103 B.
Subzone Max. Density
(Units/Acre)
Min. Lot Size
(Net Acres)
Min. Lot Width
(Ln. Ft)
RM-7
RM-13
7
13
1.0
1.0
80
80
RM-19 19 1.0 90
RM-25 25 2.0 100
All subzones - less than
the minimum lot size
7 0.25 80
C. Each lot or parcel of land in the (RM) Zone shall have a minimum width, measured at the
minimum front yard setback line, as set forth in this Code. Each lot or parcel shall also
abut a public street for a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet, as measured along a line
parallel to the center of the street or along the circumference of a cul-de-sac improved to
City standards. For property fronting on a cul-de-sac not improved to City standards,
frontage shall be calculated by measuring the linear distance between the side property
lines at the tangential point of the arc.
D. Any existing lot or parcel that is smaller than the minimum lot size requirement and that
has been approved as a buildable lot may have only one (1) single family dwelling unit.
E. Any existing single family or two family dwelling unit(s) may not be converted, added to,
or otherwise modified to accommodate additional units.
F. No additional units may be added to any lot or parcel containing an existing single family
or two family dwelling.
G. No additional units may be added to an existing development situated on a lot or parcel
smaller than the minimum requirement for the subzone in which it is located.
H. For the purpose of determining density within an independent living facility or an
assisted living facility, the conversion rates in Table 14-5-103 H shall apply.
Table 14-5-103 H – Density Conversion Table
Assisted Living
All units 3 occupants = 1 multi-family unit
Independent Living
Single occupancy units w/o kitchen 3 units = 1 multi-family unit
Two occupant units w/o kitchens 2 units = 1 multi-family unit
Single or two occupancy units with kitchens 1.5 units = 1 multi-family unit
I. For the purpose of determining density within an independent living facility or an
assisted living facility, the term “kitchen” shall be defined as a room, or portion of a
room that is at least fifty (50) sq ft in size and that contains a sink, oven, range and
refrigerator greater than ten (10) cu ft, or utility service connections for such. The
term “kitchenette” shall be defined as a portion of a room that is less than fifty (50)
5 - 4
Chapter 5 RM - Multi Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
sq. ft. in size and that is designed and furnished for occasional cooking use, and that
does not include all of the aspects of a kitchen as defined in this Title. A unit with just
a kitchenette shall be deemed to be without a kitchen.
14-5-104 PROPORTIONALITY REQUIREMENT
It is the requirement of Bountiful City that multiple family developments reflect a sense of
proportion. Proportion requires that the development be designed in such a manner that each
unit receives a reasonable and approximately proportionate share of the open space,
landscaping, and other benefits of the site. Locating units in such a way that benefits of the site
fall primarily to one unit, or a few units and not to others is prohibited. Depending upon
topography, property dimensions and site configuration, it is possible that this requirement may
affect the number of units that can be physically located on a lot or parcel. The Planning
Commission and City Council are granted reasonable discretion in administering the
proportionality requirement, and may modify yard setback requirements by up to twenty (20)
percent subject to a finding that such modification will benefit all units more equally than would
be possible if the standard requirement was applied.
14-5-105 YARD AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
The following minimum yard requirements shall apply in the (RM) Zone, except for single family
dwellings which shall meet the setback requirements for the (R-4) Subzone:
A. The minimum setback along any public street at any point shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
No dwellings, parking spaces or other site elements other than sidewalks, landscaping
and approved driveways may be allowed in the front setback.
B. The minimum interior side yard setback shall be ten (10) feet or one-half (½) the height
of the adjacent structure, whichever is greater.
C. The minimum side building separation shall be ten (10) feet or two-thirds (2/3) the height
of the tallest adjacent structure, whichever is greater.
D. The minimum separation between the rear of a building and a property line shall be
twenty (20) feet. The rear of a building shall be any side opposite a primary entrance.
The minimum separation between the rear of a building and any portion of another
building shall be thirty (30) feet.
F. The minimum separation between the front of a building and a property line shall be
twenty-five (25) feet. The front of a building shall be any side with a primary entrance.
G. Accessory Structure – Each accessory structure shall be located within the minimum
setbacks required for principal structures. The exception is that an accessory building
may be located within three (3) feet of a rear or interior side property line if the following
criteria are met:
1. The entire structure is located more than five (5) feet to the rear of any main
building on the same lot on which the building is being placed.
5 - 5
Chapter 5 RM - Multi Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
2. No part of the structure is closer than twelve (12) feet to any dwelling on an
adjacent property.
3. The eaves are at least one (1) foot from the property line.
4. The structure is designed to prevent roof runoff from impacting the adjacent
property.
5. The structure meets all applicable provisions of the International Building Code.
6. The structure does not encroach on any easements, recorded or otherwise.
14-5-106 PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS
A. The following structures may be erected on or project into any required yard:
1. Fences and walls in conformance with City Code.
2. Landscape elements, including trees, shrubs, agricultural crops and other plants
in conformance with City Code.
3. Necessary appurtenances for utility service.
B. The structures listed below may project into a minimum front or rear yard not more than
four (4) feet, and into a minimum side yard not more than two (2) feet:
1. Cornices, eaves, awnings, belt courses, sills, buttresses or other similar
architectural features.
2. Fireplace structures and bays, provided that they are not wider than eight (8)
feet, measured generally parallel to the wall of which they are a part.
3. Stairways, balconies, door stoops, fire escapes and planter boxes or masonry
planters not exceeding twenty-four (24) inches in height.
C. Any permanent roof or canopy attached to the main building which covers a use
customarily recognized as an open, outdoor use, such as a patio, patio deck, hot tub,
etc., may extend into the rear yard no further than one-half (.5) the required rear yard
set-back distances, and into a front yard not more than seven (7) feet, if the following
criteria are met:
1. The roof or canopy is not more than one (1) story in height.
2. The roof or canopy is not longer than one-half (1/2) the width of the main dwelling
on which it is located.
3. The roof or canopy is entirely open on three (3) sides except for supporting
columns and customary architectural features.
5 - 6
Chapter 5 RM - Multi Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
4. The columns supporting the roof or canopy are constructed on individual pad
footings or similar design, and not on a continuous footing wall that could be
used for future expansion of living space.
5. In no instance may the additions encroach to within less than twenty feet (20’) of
a front or street side yard property line, or to within less than ten feet (10’) of a
rear property line.
D. None of the above structures or additions may project into any side yard abutting a
street on a corner lot.
14-5-107 BUILDING HEIGHT
No building or structure in the (R) Zone shall exceed two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in
height as measured at the average grade. Chimneys, flagpoles, church towers and similar
accessory elements not used for human occupancy are excluded in determining height;
however, the City may limit the height of any protrusion that is found by the City Council to be a
public nuisance.
14-5-108 DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS
The horizontal distance between any dwellings on adjacent lots shall not be less than sixteen
(16) feet, excluding permitted yard encroachments. The horizontal distance between any
accessory building and any dwelling shall not be less than five (5) feet, as measured at any
point. The horizontal distance between any accessory building and any dwelling on an adjacent
property shall not be less than twelve (12) feet, as measured at any point.
14-5-109 PERMISSIBLE LOT COVERAGE
In the (RM) Zone, all buildings, including accessory buildings and structures, and all impervious
surfaces such as driveways, sidewalks, patios, parking areas, sports courts and pools shall not
cover a total of more than sixty percent (60%) of the area of the lot or parcel of land.
Furthermore, at least fifty percent (50%) of all required front and rear yard areas shall be
landscaped. For institutional uses, such as churches, private schools, and public buildings, the
approving authority may increase the amount of impervious surface area to up to seventy
percent (70%), if the additional hard surfacing is used to provide parking spaces beyond the
minimum required.
14-5-110 PARKING, LOADING, AND ACCESS
Each lot or parcel in the (RM) Zone shall have on the same lot or parcel off-street parking
sufficient to comply with Chapter 18 of this Ordinance. Said spaces shall be paved with asphalt
concrete, or similar impervious surface, and shall include a paved driveway accessing a public
street. Required parking spaces shall not be provided within a required front yard or street side
yard, including driveways.
14-5-111 NON-RESIDENTIAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL
Site plan approval is required for any non-residential permitted or conditional use in the (RM)
Zone as per Chapter 2 of this Title.
5 - 7
Chapter 5 RM - Multi Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
14-5-112 SIGN STANDARDS
Any sign erected in the (RM) zone shall conform to the sign provisions of this Title. In addition,
the following shall be allowed:
A. A permanent sign of up to two (2) square feet for each unit.
B. A temporary sign of up to six (6) square feet, which may located on the property a
maximum of ninety (90) total days out of the year.
C. Project/Development signs as permitted by the Sign Code.
D. Signs or monuments identifying points of interest or sites of historic significance. The
size and location of said signs or monuments shall be specifically approved by the City
Council by ordinance.
14-5-113 LANDSCAPING
The following landscaping provisions shall apply to each developed lot or parcel in the (RM)
Zone:
A. All portions of the lot not improved with structures or other impervious surfaces shall be
maintained with suitable landscaping of plants, trees, shrubs, grass and similar
succulent landscaping materials.
B. Landscaping shall also be installed in all parkstrips to the same standards as other onsite
landscaping. Asphalt, concrete, bricks, pavers, railroad ties, and other nonvegetative
material are not allowed in the parkstrip area between the curb and sidewalk.
Xeriscaping is permitted in accordance with the Landscaping and Fencing chapter of this
Title.
C At plant maturity the landscaping should represent, as a minimum standard, compatibility
with surrounding developed properties and uses and must be permanently maintained
by the owner and/or occupants.
D. There shall be a minimum ten (10) feet wide landscape buffer around the perimeter of all
non-single family sites, and a minimum five (5) feet wide landscape buffer around all
structures except for approved walkways, driveways, garages and carports.
E. Landscaping shall cover at least forty (40) percent of the development site.
14-5-114 STORAGE OF COMMERCIAL ITEMS
The storage of commercial goods, commercial materials or construction related items is
expressly prohibited on any residential lot or parcel. No residential lot or parcel in the (RM) zone
may be used to display or proffer items for sale except for personal items belonging to the
residents of the thereof, and which meet the criteria for a “garage and yard sale” as set forth in
Chapter 17 - Temporary, Seasonal, and Home Occupation Uses, of this Title.
5 - 8
Chapter 5 RM - Multi Family Residential Ord 2020.01.docx
14-5-115 WALLS AND FENCES
Any wall or fence erected or maintained in the (RM) Zone shall comply with the fencing
provisions of this Title.
14-5-116 VEHICLE ACCESS
Each multi-family projects shall have a circulatory-type driveway system with two (2) vehicle
accesses, one of which may be shared with an adjoining development. Driveway and parking
areas in multi-family projects shall be designed so that vehicles do not back onto a public street.
14-5-117 SITE PLAN APPROVAL
Commercial site plan review and approval is required for any multi-family and non-residential
permitted or conditional use. In addition to the requirements for commercial site plans, the
following criteria shall apply:
A. Structure Design and Materials.
1. Exteriors shall be essentially maintenance free wall material such as high quality
brick, natural stone, weather resistant stucco, masonite type materials or nonwood
siding. Stucco, masonite clapboard or siding may not exceed fifty (50)
percent of the exterior.
2. Each dwelling unit shall have at least fifty (50) square feet of private, fenced
outdoor space in the form of balconies or patios.
B. Each dumpster pad or trash receptacle area shall be enclosed by a solid fence or
masonry wall between four (4) and six (6) feet in height, with gates of sufficient width to
provide access to the trash receptacles. The enclosures shall be designed as an integral
part of the site and all trash receptacles and other items of disposal shall be kept within
the enclosed areas.
6 - 1
Chapter 6 C - Commercial Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 6
(C) COMMERCIAL ZONE
14-6-101 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
14-6-102 AREA OF ZONE
14-6-103 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, AND PROHIBITED USES
14-6-104 MINIMUM LOT STANDARDS
14-6-105 YARD REQUIREMENTS
14-6-106 PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS
14-6-107 BUILDING HEIGHT
14-6-108 DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS
14-6-109 LANDSCAPING
14-6-110 PARKING, LOADING, AND ACCESS
14-6-111 SITE PLAN APPROVAL
14-6-112 OTHER REQUIREMENTS
14-6-113 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
14-6-101 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
The Commercial Zone (C) is established to provide areas dedicated primarily to retail, office, and
service related uses. Within the Commercial zone are various subzones with individual criteria that
have been created to address specific needs pertinent to the areas these subzones encompass.
A. The Heavy Commercial (C-H) subzone is intended for uses which involve heavy automobile
and semi-truck traffic, and/or that are regional in nature. Areas zoned C-H should be near or
immediately adjacent to major arterials. Typical uses in the C-H subzone include: Big-box
retail, light manufacturing, planned commercial developments, office towers, automobile
repair and service, outside storage yards and office/warehouse buildings.
B. The General Commercial (C-G) subzone is intended for uses which involve medium
automobile and semi-truck traffic, and/or that are sub-regional in nature. Areas zoned C-G
should be near or immediately adjacent to major collector streets. Typical uses in the C-G
subzone include: Small retail centers, supermarkets, restaurants, offices and general
services.
C. The Neighborhood Commercial (C-N) subzone is intended for uses which involve light
vehicle traffic and/or that are local in nature. Areas zoned C-N should be near or
immediately adjacent to collector roads.
14-6-102 AREA OF ZONE
Each area of commercial zoning shall meet the following minimum size:
6 - 2
Chapter 6 C - Commercial Ord 2020.01.docx
Table 14-14-102
Subzone Min. Zone Area (Acres)
C-H 3.0
C-G 2.0
C-N 0.5
14-6-103 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, AND PROHIBITED USES
Subject to the provisions and restrictions of this Title, the following principal uses and structures,
and no others, are allowed either as a permitted use (P) or by Conditional Use Permit (C) in the
Commercial zone. Some uses may be expressly prohibited (N) in this zone. Any use not listed
herein is also expressly prohibited.
Table 14-6-103
Use C-H C-G C-N
Assisted Living Center N N N
ATV and Snowmobile Sales w/o Outside Storage
and/or Display
P C N
ATV and Snowmobile Sales with Outside Display P N N
Bail Bonds C N N
Banks, Credit Unions P P N
Bar, Tavern, Drinking Establishment C N N
Bottling, Canning, Food Production P C N
Building/Construction Materials and Supplies w/
Outside Storage
C C N
Building/Construction Materials and Supplies w/o
Outside Storage
P C N
Check Cashing, Title Loans P C N
Construction Services w/ Outside Storage C N N
Construction Services w/o Outside Storage P C N
Convenience Stores P C C
Dry Cleaner, Laundry Service P C C
Fast Food Restaurant w/ or w/o Drive-up P C N
Feed Lots, Animal Rendering, Animal Raising N N N
Fire Arm/Shooting Range – Indoor C N N
Fire Arm/Shooting Range – Outdoor N N N
Food Preparation, Bakery P P C
Funeral Parlor, Cemeteries, and Crematory
Services
P C N
Gasoline Sales P P C
General Retail w/ Outside Storage C C N
General Retail w/o Outside Storage P P C
Grocery Store P P C
Hotels (Interior room access) P C N
Industrial Manufacturing N N N
Kennels, Animal Boarding N N N
Laundromat (Self-operated) P P C
Mail Order/Online Distribution Office w/ Onsite P C N
6 - 3
Chapter 6 C - Commercial Ord 2020.01.docx
Use C-H C-G C-N
Indoor Storage
Mail Order/Online Distribution Office w/ Onsite
Outdoor Storage
C N N
Medical/Dental Laboratory P C N
Medical/Dental Office P P C
Millwork, Cabinetry P C C
Motels (Drive-up/exterior room access) N N N
Motorized Recreation C N N
Municipal Facility P P P
Non-motorized Recreation, Pool, Gymnasium –
Public or Private
P P C
Pawnshop, Secondhand Merchandise, C N N
Personal Services P P C
Professional Services P P C
Public/Private Assembly P P C
Residential N N N
Restaurant P P C
Security Services P N N
Self Storage Units or Warehouse w/o Office N N N
Sexually Oriented Business, Escort Service C N N
Small Engine/Appliance Repair P P N
Tailor, Seamstress, Shoe Repair P P C
Tattoo Parlor C N N
Telecommunication Facility not on City Property C C C
Telecommunication Facility on City property P P P
Thrift Store P C C
Tutoring, Dance, Preschool, Daycare P P C
Vehicle Part Sales P P N
Vehicle Repair P N N
Vehicle Sales P N N
Vehicle Salvage/Wrecking N N N
Vehicle Service and Wash P C N
Vehicle Storage – Indoor P P C
Vehicle Storage – Outdoor C N N
Warehouse w/ Office P N N
Welding, Autobody, Machine Shop, Fiberglass,
Painting – indoor
P N N
Welding, Autobody, Machine Shop, Fiberglass,
Painting - Outdoor
C N N
Accessory uses and structures are permitted in the Commercial Zone provided they are incidental
to and do not substantially alter the character of the permitted principal use of the structure. Such
permitted accessory uses and structures include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Accessory structures such as garages, carports, equipment storage buildings and supply
storage buildings which are customarily used in conjunction with and incidental to a principal
use or structure permitted in the (C) Zone.
6 - 4
Chapter 6 C - Commercial Ord 2020.01.docx
B. Storage of materials used for the construction of a building, including a contractor's
temporary office, provided that such use be located on the building site or immediately
adjacent thereto, and provided further that such use shall be permitted only during the
construction period and thirty (30) days thereafter.
14-6-104 MINIMUM LOT STANDARDS
The minimum area and street frontage for any lot or parcel in the Commercial Zone shall be as
follows:
Table 14-6-104
Subzone Min. Lot Size (Acres) Min. Frontage and Width
C-H 0.50 50
C-G 0.50 50
C-N 0.25 70
A corner lot shall meet the minimum frontage and width requirements along both streets.
14-6-105 YARD REQUIREMENTS
The following minimum yard requirements shall apply in the (C) Zone, except that the minimum
front, rear, and side yards listed below shall be increased by one foot (1’) for each foot in height the
structure extends above thirty-five (35) feet, or the portion of the building extending above thirty-five
(35) feet may be set back the equivalent horizontal distance. An interior side or rear yard setback
may be reduced during the site plan approval process if the land use authority determines that there
is no need for a landscape buffer along that portion of the site, and that the public interest is better
served by reducing the setback. However, no setback may be less than required by the
International Building Code.
A. Front and Street Yards. Any lot or parcel within the (C) Zone shall have a minimum building
setback of twenty (20) feet from any front property line and/or any property line abutting a
public street.
B. Side Yard. Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, any lot or parcel of land in the (C)
Zone shall have a minimum building setback of ten (10) feet from a side property line.
C. Rear Yard. Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, any lot or parcel of land in the (C)
Zone shall have a minimum building setback of ten (10) feet from a rear property line.
D. Yard Abutting Residential Lots. Where property in the (C) Zone abuts a residential lot or
parcel, the minimum building setback shall be twenty (20) feet on the abutting side.
E. Accessory Structure. Each accessory structure shall meet all of the setback requirements of
principal structures on the same lot or parcel. An accessory structure that does not require a
building permit, as per the International Building Code, may be located in a side or rear
setback area only if all of the following conditions are met:
1. The accessory structure is not within a front or street yard setback and is located
more than ten (10) feet from any main building on the same or adjacent property.
6 - 5
Chapter 6 C - Commercial Ord 2020.01.docx
2. The accessory structure has no openings on the side which is contiguous with the
property line, and the walls of said structure which are adjacent to the property line
have a fire retardant rating as specified by the IBC.
3. The accessory structure is designed such that all roof drainage is discharged onto
the lot or parcel on which it is erected.
14-6-106 PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS
A. The following items may be erected on or project into any required yard, except that they
shall not obstruct a required driveway or pedestrian access:
1. Fences and walls in conformance with this Title.
2. Landscape elements, including: trees, shrubs, and other plants.
3. Necessary appurtenances for utility service as long as they are attached to a
permitted structure and do not protrude more than two (2) feet into a required
setback.
B. The structures listed below may project into a minimum front or rear yard not more than four
(4) feet, and into a minimum side yard not more than two (2) feet, except that they may not
obstruct a required driveway or pedestrian access:
? Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses or other similar architectural features.
? Stairways, balconies, door stoops, fire escapes and awnings.
? Planter boxes or masonry planters not exceeding twenty-four (24) inches in height.
? A covered entry or porch used for the protection of pedestrians entering or leaving a
structure provided said structure is not more than one (1) story in height and is
entirely open on at least three (3) sides.
14-6-107 STRUCTURE HEIGHT
No building or structure in the (C) Zone shall exceed three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet in height
as measured at the average grade. Chimneys, flagpoles, church towers and similar accessory
elements not used for human occupancy are excluded in determining height; however, the City may
limit the height of any protrusion that is found by the City Council to be a public nuisance.
14-6-108 DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES
The minimum separation between structures shall be ten (10) feet or as required by the
International Building Code, whichever is greater. This separation may be reduced through the site
plan approval process, except that it shall never be less than distance required by the IBC.
14-6-109 LANDSCAPING
The following landscaping provisions shall apply in the (C) Zone in addition to other requirements of
this Title.
6 - 6
Chapter 6 C - Commercial Ord 2020.01.docx
1. The minimum amount of landscaping required within each subzone shall be as
follows:
Table 14-14-109
Subzone Min. Percent
Landscaping
C-H 15%
C-G 15%
C-N 25%
2. Required landscaping shall be located onsite and shall not include required
landscaping within a public right-of-way or any other location not within the property
boundaries.
3. All landscaping shall be sprinkled and planted with substantial live plant material for
the purpose of buffering, screening, and beautifying the site. At plant maturity, the
landscaping should represent, as a minimum standard, compatibility with
surrounding developed properties and uses and must be permanently maintained by
the owner or occupants.
4. A minimum ten (10) feet wide landscape buffer shall be required along all frontage
areas not occupied by drive accesses.
5. A minimum ten (10) feet wide landscape buffer shall be established adjacent to all
residential properties.
6. All parking, loading, and drive areas shall have a minimum five (5) feet wide
landscape buffer when located adjacent to a side or rear property line, except as
noted for buffering between residential uses.
7. Parking areas shall be landscaped as set forth in this Title.
8. Landscaping shall also be installed in all parkstrips to the same standards as other
on-site landscaping. Asphalt, concrete, bricks, pavers, railroad ties, and other nonvegetative
material are not allowed in the parkstrip area between the curb and
sidewalk. Xeriscaping is permitted in accordance with the Landscaping and Fencing
chapter of this Title.
9. Any area that is not landscaped shall be improved consistent with uses permitted in
the (C) zone.
14-6-110 PARKING, LOADING, AND ACCESS
Each lot or parcel in the (C) Zone shall have vehicle parking, loading, and access designed to meet
the requirements of this Code.
14-6-111 SITE PLAN APPROVAL
Site plan approval shall be required for any new construction or change in use in the (C) Zone.
6 - 7
Chapter 6 C - Commercial Ord 2020.01.docx
14-6-112 OTHER REQUIREMENTS
A. Signs. Each sign erected in the (C) Zone shall conform to the sign provisions of this Title.
B. Uses Within Buildings. Each use permitted in the (C) Zone shall be conducted entirely within
a fully enclosed building. The exception is that a permitted use may include the outdoor
display of merchandise for sale only if all of the following conditions are met:
1. The outdoor display of merchandise shall not be located upon any sidewalk,
walkway, driveway or within any public right-of-way nor shall it interfere with
pedestrian or vehicular movement or with safe and proper ingress and egress of
pedestrian traffic.
2. The outdoor display of merchandise shall not reduce the amount of off-street parking
below that which is required for the associated commercial uses on the premises.
3. No item shall be displayed outdoors except for those lawfully displayed and sold
inside the business or businesses located on the property. No hazardous and/or
flammable materials (such as antifreeze, kerosene, poisons, pesticides and other
similar items) may be displayed outdoors.
4. The aggregate outdoor display area shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of
the linear frontage of the store front or ten (10) linear feet, whichever is greater.
Businesses located on a corner shall be considered as having two (2) store fronts.
5. No outdoor display shall exceed six (6) feet in height.
6. A maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the aggregate outdoor display area may be
located in any required landscaping.
7. Items shall be displayed outdoors only during the hours when the business
conducting the display is open to the public. Live plant material shall be exempt from
this requirement.
8. Additional signs, beyond those normally allowed for the subject business, shall not
be allowed as part of the outdoor display and sales area.
9. Outdoor displays for special sales or for one of a kind items which would exceed any
of these requirements may be granted a special permit by the Planning Director for a
period not to exceed fourteen (14) days provided such special displays do not create
parking, access or traffic hazards.
C. Trash Storage. No trash, used materials, wrecked or abandoned vehicles or equipment
shall be stored in an open area.
Each development in the (C) Zone shall have adequate on-site, screened refuse containers
maintained in a location approved as part of the site plan.
6 - 8
Chapter 6 C - Commercial Ord 2020.01.docx
14-6-113 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
A. Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in the Bountiful City Code, shall be allowed only as
a conditional use and only in the Heavy Commercial (C-H) subzone provided that all of the
following criteria are met:
1. The sexually oriented business may not be operated within six hundred (600) feet of
a church, synagogue or regular place of religious worship, a public or private
elementary or secondary school, or the boundary of a public park, a licensed daycare
center, an existing entertainment business that is oriented primarily towards
children or family entertainment, an adults-only business licensed for on-premise
beer or alcohol consumption, or another sexually oriented business.
2. For the purpose of this Code, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or
structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is
conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, synagogue,
regular place of religious worship, a public or private elementary or secondary
school, or the boundary of a public park, a licensed day-care center, an existing
entertainment business that is oriented primarily towards children or family
entertainment, an adults-only business licensed for on-premise beer or alcohol
consumption.
3. The sexually oriented business shall apply for and meet all of the criteria for a
sexually oriented businesses license and shall continuously maintain current such
business license.
B. It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to deliver any services whatsoever off
premises from the business location in the heavy commercial zone. No delivery or products,
maid service, or any other personal service, may be rendered in any other zone, or to any
other location in the heavy commercial zone.
7 - 1
Chapter 7 DN – Downtown Ord 2020.01
CHAPTER 7
DN – DOWNTOWN
14-7-101 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
14-7-102 AREA OF ZONE
14-7-103 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, AND PROHIBITED USES
14-7-104 MINIMUM LOT STANDARDS
14-7-105 YARD REQUIREMENTS
14-7-106 PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS
14-7-107 STRUCTURE HEIGHT
14-7-108 DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES
14-7-109 LANDSCAPING AND PERMISSIBLE LOT COVERAGE
14-7-110 PARKING, LOADING, AND ACCESS
14-7-111 SITE PLAN APPROVAL
14-7-112 OTHER REQUIREMENTS
14-7-101 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
The Downtown (DN) Mixed Use Zone is established to provide a district primarily for the
preservation of the mixed use character of the commercial and residential uses in and adjacent
to the Main Street downtown area, consistent with the provisions of the adopted Bountiful
Historic Downtown Plan.
14-7-102 AREA OF ZONE
Each area of Downtown zoning shall be at least four (4) acres in size.
14-7-103 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, AND PROHIBITED USES
The following principal uses and structures, and no others, are allowed either as a permitted use
(P) or by Conditional Use Permit (C) in the Downtown zone. Some uses may be expressly
prohibited (N) in this zone. Any use not listed herein is also expressly prohibited. Properties
fronting on 100 West or 100 East shall be limited to the residential uses allowed in the (DN)
zone.
Table 14-7-103
Use DN
Assisted Living Center C
Bail Bonds N
Banks, Credit Unions P
Bar, Tavern, Drinking Establishment N
Bottling, Canning, Food Production C
Building/Construction Materials and Supplies w/ outside
storage
N
Building/Construction Materials and Supplies w/o outside C
7 - 2
Chapter 7 DN – Downtown Ord 2018-02
Use DN
storage
Check Cashing, Title Loans N
Construction Services w/ outside storage N
Construction Services w/o outside storage C
Convenience Stores C
Dry Cleaner, Laundry Service P
Fast Food Restaurant w/ drive-thru window N
Fast Food Restaurant w/ pick-up C
Fast Food Restaurant w/o drive-thru P
Feed Lots, Animal Rendering, Animal Raising N
Fire Arm/Shooting Range – Indoor N
Fire Arm/Shooting Range – Outdoor N
Food Preparation, Bakery C
Funeral Parlor, Cemeteries, and Crematory Services C
Gasoline Sales N
General retail w/ outside storage N
General retail w/o outside storage P
Grocery Store P
Hotels (Interior rooms) P
Industrial Manufacturing N
Kennels, Animal Boarding N
Laundromat (Self-operated) P
Mail Order/Online Distribution office w/ onsite storage C
Medical/Dental Laboratory N
Medical/Dental Office P
Millwork, Cabinetry P
Motels (Drive-up/exterior rooms) N
Motorized Recreation N
Multi-Family Residential – Stand alone, with frontage on
Main Street
N
Multi-Family Residential – Stand alone without frontage on
Main Street
C
Multi-Family Residential w/ Commercial Use on ground floor
(Mixed-Use)
C
Municipal Facility P
Non-motorized Recreation, Pool, Gymnasium – Public or
Private
P
Pawnshop, Secondhand Merchandise N
Personal Services P
Private Schools C
Professional Services P
Public/Private Assembly C
Restaurant P
Security Services C
Self-Storage Units or Warehouse w/o Office N
Sexually Oriented Business, Escort Service N
7 - 3
Chapter 7 DN – Downtown Ord 2020.01
Use DN
Single Family Dwelling, P
Single Family Dwelling- property fronting on Main Street N
Two Family Dwelling – New C
Small engine/appliance repair C
Tailor, Seamstress, Shoe repair P
Tattoo Parlor N
Tutoring, Dance, Preschool, Daycare P
Vehicle Part Sales N
Vehicle Repair N
Vehicle Sales N
Vehicle Salvage/Wrecking N
Vehicle Service and Wash N
Vehicle Storage – Indoor C
Warehouse w/ office N
Welding, Autobody, Machine Shop, Fiberglass, Painting N
Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the Downtown Zone provided that they are
incidental to and do not substantially alter the character of the permitted principal use of a main
structure. Such permitted accessory uses and structures include, but are not limited to, the
following:
A. Accessory structures such as garages, carports, equipment storage buildings and supply
storage buildings which are customarily used in conjunction with and incidental to a
principal use or structure permitted in the (DN) Zone.
B. Storage of materials used for the construction of a building, including a contractor's
temporary office, provided that such use be located on the building site or immediately
adjacent thereto, and provided further that such use shall be permitted only during the
construction period and thirty (30) days thereafter.
14-7-104 MINIMUM LOT STANDARDS
The minimum area and street frontage for any lot or parcel in the Downtown Zone shall be as
follows:
Table 14-7-104
Use Min. Lot Size Min. Frontage and Width
Commercial 8,000 50
Mixed-Use 8,000 50
Single Family 8,000 70
Two-Family and Multi-Family 10,000 50
A. Lots with more than one (1) street frontage shall meet the minimum requirements along
all frontages.
7 - 4
Chapter 7 DN – Downtown Ord 2018-02
B. An existing lot or parcel that does not meet the minimum requirements shall be
considered a non-complying lot, and all proposed development on such lot or parcel
requiring site plan review shall follow the process for non-complying sites and structures.
14-7-105 YARD REQUIREMENTS
A lot or parcel with a single family or two family dwelling shall conform to the minimum setbacks
of the R-4 subzone. All other uses, including multi-family and mixed-use, shall meet the
following requirements:
A. Front and Street Setbacks.
1. Along 100 West and 100 East any building shall have a minimum building setback of 20
feet and a maximum setback of twenty-five (25) feet from any front property line and/or
any property line abutting a public street.
2. Along Main Street any building shall be located within ten (10) feet of the street property
line. Plazas, outdoor eating areas, and other pedestrian oriented site amenities,
including but not limited to, seating, drinking and ornamental fountains, art, trees, and
landscaping, for use by pedestrians, shall be considered part of the building for setback
purposes, as determined by the approving Land Use Authority.
3. Along 500 South, 400 South, 300 South, 200 South, 100 South, 100 North, 200 North, or
300 North and 400 North any building shall be setback at least ten (10) feet and not
more than twenty (20) feet from the street property line.
4. Along Center Street, any building shall be setback at least five (5) feet and not more
than ten (10) feet from the street property line.
B. Side Yard. Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, each lot or parcel shall have a
minimum building setback of ten (10) feet from an interior side property line. Any lot or
parcel that fronts onto Main Street shall have no interior side yard setback except as
required by the International Building Code.
C. Rear Yard. Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, each lot or parcel shall have a
minimum building setback of ten (10) feet from a rear property line.
D. Yard Abutting Residential Lots. Where property abuts an existing single family
residential zone, the minimum building setback shall be ten (10) feet on the abutting
side.
E. Accessory Structures. An accessory structure shall meet all of the setback requirements
of a principal structure. An accessory structure that does not require a building permit,
according to the International Building Code (IBC), may be located in a side or rear
setback area only if all of the following conditions are met:
1. The accessory structure is not within a front or street yard setback and is located
more than ten (10) feet from any main building on the same or adjacent property.
7 - 5
Chapter 7 DN – Downtown Ord 2020.01
2. The accessory structure has no openings on the side which is contiguous with
the property line, and the walls of said building which are adjacent to the property
line have a fire retardant rating as specified by the IBC.
3. The accessory structure is designed such that all roof drainage is discharged
onto the lot or parcel on which it is erected.
F. Residential Uses. It is the requirement of Bountiful City that multiple family developments
reflect a sense of proportion. Proportion requires that the development be designed in
such a manner that each unit receives a reasonable and approximately proportionate
share of the open space, landscaping, and other benefits of the site. Locating units in
such a way that benefits of the site fall primarily to one unit or a few units, and not to
others, is prohibited. Depending upon topography, property dimensions and site
configuration, it is possible that this requirement may affect the number of units that can
be physically located on a lot or parcel. The Planning Commission and City Council are
granted reasonable discretion in administering the proportionality requirement, and may
modify yard setback requirements by up to twenty (20) percent subject to a finding that
such modification will benefit all units more equally than would be possible if the
standard requirement was applied.
14-7-106 PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS
A. The following structures may be erected on or project into any required yard, except that
they shall not obstruct a required driveway or pedestrian access:
1. A fence or wall in conformance with this Code.
2. Landscape elements, including: trees, shrubs and other plants.
3. Necessary appurtenances for utility service as long as they are attached to a
permitted structure and do not protrude more than two (2) feet into a required
setback.
B. The structures listed below may project into a minimum front or rear yard not more than
four (4) feet, and into a minimum side yard not more than two (2) feet, except that they
may not obstruct a required driveway or pedestrian access:
1. Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses or other similar architectural
features.
2. Stairways, balconies, door stoops, fire escapes and awnings
3. Planter boxes or masonry planters not exceeding twenty-four (24) inches in
height.
4. A covered entry or porch used for the protection of pedestrians entering or
leaving a building, provided said structure is not more than one story in height
and is entirely open on at least three (3) sides.
7 - 6
Chapter 7 DN – Downtown Ord 2018-02
C. Buildings that front onto Main Street and that are built within ten (10) feet of the front
property line may have canopies with business identification sign area if the following
criteria are met:
1. The canopy may protrude a maximum of six feet (6’) into the Main Street right-ofway,
over areas of sidewalk.
2. The canopy shall not come within seven feet (7’) of any parking stall, drive lane,
or other portion of the right-of-way used for vehicle access.
3. The total combined length of the canopy or canopies shall not exceed two thirds
(2/3) of the building width.
4. The maximum height of the canopy shall not exceed five feet (5’).
5. Off-premise signs are expressly prohibited.
6. Canopy sign copy area shall be a maximum of thirty-two (32) sq. ft. per property.
14-7-107 STRUCTURE HEIGHT
Any lot or parcel with a single family dwelling shall conform to the maximum height requirements
of the R-4 subzone. All other uses shall comply with the following height standards:
A. Buildings located within 50 feet of the street property line on 100 West and 100 East
shall not exceed 35 feet in height as measured at the average grade.
B. Buildings located between 50 and 200 feet from the street property line on 100 West and
100 East shall not exceed 45 feet in height as measured at the average grade.
C. Buildings located at least 200 feet from 100 West and 100 East street property line shall
not exceed 55 feet in height measured at the average grade.
D. Maximum height for public and quasi-public buildings shall be approved through the site
plan approval process by the land use authority.
E. Chimneys, flagpoles, towers, steeples and similar accessory and architectural elements
not used for human occupancy are excluded in determining height; however, the City
may limit the height of any protrusion that is found by the City Council to be a public
nuisance.
F. In no case shall the area covered by roof mounted equipment exceed twenty percent
(20%) of the roof area. Roof mounted equipment shall be setback from the edge of the
roof a minimum of 1 foot for every foot of height. If mechanical equipment is located
within roofed and enclosed structures, these structures shall not exceed the maximum
height for the zone whether or not these areas are designed for human occupancy.
7 - 7
Chapter 7 DN – Downtown Ord 2020.01
14-7-108 DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES
A lot or parcel with a single family or two family dwelling shall conform to the minimum building
separation requirements of the R-4 subzone. For all other uses, the minimum separation
between structures shall be as required by the International Building Code.
14-7-109 LANDSCAPING AND PERMISSIBLE LOT COVERAGE
A. A lot or parcel with a single family or two family dwelling shall follow the lot coverage
requirements of the R-4 subzone. All others, including multi-family and mixed-use
developments, shall conform to the following criteria, in addition to any other
requirements of this Title:
1. All landscaping shall be sprinkled and planted with substantial live plant material
for the purpose of buffering, screening and beautifying the site. At plant maturity,
the landscaping should represent, as a minimum standard, compatibility with
surrounding developed properties and uses and must be permanently maintained
by the owner or occupants.
2. With the exception of properties fronting on Main Street a minimum ten (10) feet
wide landscape buffer shall be required along all frontage areas not occupied by
drive accesses.
3. A minimum ten (10) feet wide landscape buffer shall be established adjacent to a
residential property.
4. Parking, loading, and drive areas shall have a minimum five (5) feet wide
landscape buffer when located adjacent to a side or rear property line, except for
landscape buffering required between residential uses.
5. Parking areas shall be landscaped as set forth in this Code.
6. Approved landscaping must cover a minimum of ten (10) percent of the
development site exclusive of any parkstrips in a public right-of-way. In addition
to the minimum 10 percent required for all development, mixed-use and multifamily
uses shall provide an additional 50 square feet of landscaping per
residential unit.
7. Landscaping shall also be installed in all parkstrips to the same standards as
other on-site landscaping. Asphalt, concrete, bricks, pavers, railroad ties, rocks,
gravel, and other non-vegetative material is not allowed in the parkstrip area
between the curb and sidewalk.
B. During the site plan approval process, the City may require more or less landscaping
consistent with the provisions of the adopted Historic Downtown Plan.
7 - 8
Chapter 7 DN – Downtown Ord 2018-02
14-7-110 PARKING, LOADING, AND ACCESS
A. Each lot or parcel in the (DN) Zone shall have vehicle parking, loading, and access
designed to meet the requirements of this Code. In addition to the standards of Chapter
18 of the Land Use Code, the following shall apply to properties in the DN Zoning
district.
1. Off street parking is not permitted in the front setback area and/or between the
street and building. Parking shall be located to the side or rear of the building.
2. Parking for buildings fronting on Main Street shall be located completely behind
the principal structure.
3. Required guest parking stalls shall be located in dedicated off-street parking
spaces. Driveways and areas located in front of garage doors (for example in
townhome style developments) shall not be used to satisfy minimum guest
parking requirements.
14-7-111 SITE PLAN APPROVAL
Except for single family dwellings, site plan approval shall be required for any development in
the (DN) Zone as set forth in this Title.
14-7-112 OTHER REQUIREMENTS
A. Signs. Any sign erected in the (DN) Zone shall conform to the sign provisions of this
Title. Single family and two family dwellings shall conform to the criteria for the R-4
subzone, and multi-family uses shall conform to the criteria for the RM-13 subzone. All
others shall conform to the criteria for the DN zone. Pole signs shall not be permitted.
B. Uses Within Buildings. Any commercial use permitted in the (DN) Zone shall be
conducted entirely within a fully enclosed building, except as provided in subsections 1
and 2 below.
1. Outdoor Display of merchandise for sale in the downtown area. Businesses
located in buildings in the (DN) Zone that have setbacks less than three (3) feet
from the public right-of-way may display in the public right-of-way, subject to the
following terms and conditions:
a. Any display of merchandise on the sidewalk may not exceed three (3)
feet into the public right-of-way from the property line of the business,
except during the annual “Sidewalk Days” celebration. There may be no
display of merchandise in the planter boxes in the public right-of-way.
b. During the winter months, a display may not impede snow removal from
the sidewalk.
7 - 9
Chapter 7 DN – Downtown Ord 2020.01
c. The display shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the width of the
lot, parcel, or business. However, businesses with less than forty (40) feet
of width may have a display not to exceed ten (10) feet in width.
d. Only merchandise sold inside the business may be displayed outside.
e. No outdoor display shall exceed six (6) feet in height.
f. Each display shall be taken down at the end of each business day. The
merchant shall be solely responsible for items displayed.
g. Each display shall not create a hazard, sight distance, or other problem to
pedestrians on the sidewalk or to drivers on the street.
h. Displayed merchandise shall not obscure or interfere with any official
notice, public safety sign or device.
2. Any business not listed in subsection 1 may include the outdoor display of
merchandise for sale only if all of the following conditions are met:
a. The outdoor display of merchandise shall not be located upon any
sidewalk, walkway, driveway or within any public right-of-way nor shall it
interfere with pedestrian or vehicular movement or with safe and proper
ingress and egress of pedestrian traffic.
b. The outdoor display of merchandise shall not reduce the amount of
off-street parking below that which is required for the associated
commercial uses on the premises.
c. No item shall be displayed outdoors except for those lawfully displayed
and sold inside the business or businesses located on the property. No
hazardous and/or flammable materials (such as antifreeze, kerosene,
poisons, pesticides and other similar items) may be displayed outdoors.
d. The aggregate outdoor display area shall not exceed twenty-five (25)
percent of the linear frontage of the store front or 10 linear feet, whichever
is greater. A business located on a corner shall be considered as having
two (2) store fronts.
e. No outdoor display shall exceed six (6) feet in height.
f. A maximum of fifty (50) percent of the aggregate outdoor display area
may be located in any required landscaping.
g. Items shall be displayed outdoors only during the hours that the business
conducting the display is open to the public. Live plant material shall be
exempt from this requirement.
7 - 10
Chapter 7 DN – Downtown Ord 2018-02
h. Additional signs, beyond those allowed by this Title, shall not be allowed
as part of the outdoor display and sales area.
i. Outdoor displays for special sales or for one of a kind items which would
exceed any of these requirements may be granted a special permit by the
Planning Director for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) days provided
such special displays do not create parking, access, or traffic hazards.
C. Structure Design and Materials.
Any structure, except for single and two family dwellings, shall meet the minimum design
criteria as set forth in this Title. In addition, the following shall apply.
1. Exteriors shall be maintenance free wall material such as high quality brick,
natural stone, weather resistance stucco or masonite type material, or non-wood
siding. Stucco, masonite or siding may not exceed fifty (50) percent of the
exterior.
2. Each residential unit shall have some private outdoor space in the form of a
balcony or patio.
3. The primary entrance of a building must be oriented to face a street, public plaza
or approved pedestrian-way. Ground floor residential units located adjacent to
the street shall have the primary entrance oriented toward the street.
4. Primary entrance design shall consist of at least two (2) of the following design
elements, or a comparable substitute, at the primary entrance, so that the
primary entrance is architecturally prominent and clearly visible from the abutting
street.
a. Architectural details such as arches, friezes, tile work, canopies or
awnings
b. Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscape or seating.
c. Recessed entrances that include a minimum step back of two feet (2')
from the primary facade and that include glass on the sidewalls.
5. All buildings must meet the ground with some form of base element or detailing
to visually connect the building to the landscape. The base element may be
smooth concrete (architectural grade), masonry or stone.
6. Blank walls shall be prohibited on street-facing facades. At least 50 percent of
the width of a new or reconstructed first story building wall facing a street shall be
devoted to pedestrian entrances, display windows or windows affording views
into retail, office, restaurant, or lobby space. All development shall provide
ground floor windows on the building facade and adjacent to a public or private
7 - 11
Chapter 7 DN – Downtown Ord 2020.01
street. Darkly tinted windows and mirrored windows are prohibited as ground
floor windows.
7. To preclude large expanses of uninterrupted building surfaces, exterior
elevations shall incorporate design features such as offsets, balconies,
projections, or similar elements along each face of the building facing a public
right-of-way or public plaza. Along the vertical face of the structure, offsets shall
occur at a minimum of every 25 feet by providing any two of the following:
a. Recesses (elevated decks, patios, entrances, etc.) with a minimum depth
of four (4) feet, or
b. Extensions (elevated decks, patios, entrances, floor area, etc.) with a
minimum depth of four (4) feet, or
c. Offsets or breaks in roof elevations of three (3) or more feet in height.
8. Buildings with parking located on the ground floor within the footprint of the
structure shall incorporate design features into street facing facades that are
consistent with the remainder of the building design and that are pedestrian
oriented. Features shall include elements typical of a front façade, including
doors, false windows, planters, and/or architectural details providing articulation.
False windows shall be integrated into the framing of the building and shall not
consist of surface mounted features such as tacked on display cases. Required
venting for parking areas, including louvered openings, shall not be located along
a street facing façade.
9. Ground Floor Use Requirement: For buildings located at least 200 feet from 100
West and 100 East the ground floor story of structures located adjacent to the
street shall be built to accommodate an allowed commercial, institutional, or
public use. Required ground floor use shall be located along and oriented toward
street frontages and shall be a minimum horizontal depth of 25 feet as measured
from the front face of the building. With the exception of buildings fronting on
Main Street, residential uses may be permitted within the required area in lieu of
the required use, if the ground floor is designed so that it can be converted to an
allowed commercial use in the future. To accommodate this conversion, the shell
space of the ground floor shall be built to an occupancy standard required by the
adopted Building Code that can accommodate conversion of the interior of the
space to a future permitted commercial use. The following additional
requirements shall apply to the ground floor space if used for residential uses:
a. The shell space shall be at least twelve feet (12') in height measured from
floor deck to floor deck;
b. Each ground floor unit shall have a direct entrance from the sidewalk to
the unit;
c. Each ground floor unit shall be ADA accessible; and
7 - 12
Chapter 7 DN – Downtown Ord 2018-02
d. Each ground floor unit shall include a porch, patio, stoop or other
entrance feature that is a minimum depth of at least five feet (5').
10. The overall width or depth of a mixed use or multi-family residential building shall
not exceed twice the maximum building height allowed. In cases where two
building height standards apply based on setbacks, the 2:1 ratio shall be
calculated from the highest possible height allowed for the building. See Figure
14-7-112-C.
Figure 14-7-112-C
D. Neighborhood Compatibility. Each structure, except for existing single and two family
dwellings, shall be designed consistent with the adopted Historic Downtown Bountiful
Master Plan, particularly with regard to building height, architecture, landscaping and
building mass.
E. Trash Storage. No trash, used materials, wrecked or abandoned vehicles or equipment
shall be stored in an open area. With the exception of single family and two family
dwellings, each development in the (DN) Zone shall be required to have adequate, onsite,
screened refuse containers maintained in a location approved as part of the site
plan.
F. Walls and Fences. Any wall or fence erected around a commercial development or
mixed use development shall comply with the requirements of the (C-G) zone. Any
multi-family development shall comply with the requirements for the RM-13 subzone.
Any single family and two family developments shall comply with the provisions of the R-
4 subzone.
14-7-120 PERMITTED ADJUSTMENTS TO REQUIRED PARKING
A. Downtown Parking District Defined.
2H MAX
H
2H MAX
7 - 13
Chapter 7 DN – Downtown Ord 2020.01
The Downtown Parking District consists of those properties located within the (DN)
Zone.
B. Proximity of Parking to Use.
Required parking spaces for residential uses must be located on site. Required parking
spaces for nonresidential uses must be located on site or in parking areas within five
hundred feet (500') of the development site property boundary. Off-site nonresidential
parking is allowed if the following documentation is submitted in writing to the land use
authority as part of a building or zoning permit application or land use review:
1. The names and addresses of the uses and of the owners or tenants that are
sharing the parking;
2. The location and number of parking spaces that are being shared;
3. An analysis showing that the parking area will be large enough for the anticipated
demands of both uses; and
4. A legal instrument such as an easement or deed restriction that guarantees
access to the parking for both uses.
C. Joint Use Parking.
Joint use of required parking spaces may occur where two (2) or more uses on the same
or separate sites are able to share the same parking spaces because their parking
demands occur at different times. Joint use of required nonresidential parking spaces is
allowed if the following documentation is submitted in writing to the land use authority as
part of a building or zoning permit application or land use review:
1. The names and addresses of the uses and of the owners or tenants that are
sharing the parking;
2. The location and number of parking spaces that are being shared;
3. An analysis showing that the peak parking times of the uses occur at different
times and that the parking area will be large enough for the anticipated demands
of both uses; and
4. A legal instrument such as an easement or deed restriction that guarantees
access to the parking for both uses.
D. No parking calculation which includes the parking areas owned by the Bountiful
Redevelopment Agency gives any right of possession, any real estate interest or
contract right or right of way on any Redevelopment Agency property.
8 - 1
Chapter 8 PO - Professional Office Zone Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 8
(PO) PROFESSIONAL OFFICE ZONE
14-8-101 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
14-8-102 AREA OF ZONE
14-8-103 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, AND PROHIBITED USES
14-8-104 MINIMUM LOT STANDARDS
14-8-105 YARD REQUIREMENTS
14-8-106 PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS
14-8-107 BUILDING HEIGHT
14-8-108 DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS
14-8-109 LANDSCAPING
14-8-110 PARKING, LOADING, AND ACCESS
14-8-111 SITE PLAN APPROVAL
14-8-112 OTHER REQUIREMENTS
14-8-101 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
The Professional Office Zone (PO) and the Professional Office Neighborhood Subzone (PO-N) are
established to provide areas with a variety of general office uses in an attractive office environment.
The zones may be used in buffer or transition areas separating commercial/industrial uses from
residential uses or may be assigned to areas of existing professional office areas which are not
attached to any large commercial zones. Any property within the (PO-N) Subzone shall meet the
requirements of the PO Zone unless specifically stated otherwise.
14-8-102 AREA OF ZONE
Each area of Professional Office zoning shall meet the following minimum criteria:
Table 14-8-102
Min. Zone Area (Acres)
0.25 – if not adjacent to any residential zone
0.50 – if adjacent to any residential zone
14-8-103 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, AND PROHIBITED USES
Subject to the provisions and restrictions of this Title, the following principal uses and structures,
and no others, are allowed either as a permitted use (P) or by Conditional Use Permit (C) in the
Professional Office zone. Some uses may be expressly prohibited (N) in this zone. Any use not
listed herein is also expressly prohibited.
Table 14-8-103
Use PO PO - N
Banks, Credit Unions P N
Bar, Tavern, Drinking Establishment N N
Beauty Salon, Nail Salon N N
8 - 2
Chapter 8 PO - Professional Office Zone Ord 2020.01.docx
Use PO PO - N
Chiropractor, Massage Therapy P P
Construction/Contracting – Office only P N
Daycare/Preschool N N
Mail Order/Online Distribution office w/ onsite storage C N
Medical/Dental Laboratory P N
Medical/Dental Office P N
Motorized and/or Non-Motorized Recreation N N
Municipal Facility P P
Non-Depository Financial Institutions (Check cashing/advance) N N
Optometrist with Ancillary Retail Sales P P
Pawnbroker, Bail Bonds, Tattoo Parlor, Second Hand Merchandise N N
Pharmacy with Ancillary Retail Sales C N
Private School (Pre-K through 12th Grade) N N
Professional Office P P
Professional Services P N
Public/Private Assembly C C
Residential – New N N
Residential Duplex and Multi-family – Existing only P P
Residential Single Family – Existing only P P
Security Services – Office only P C
Sexually Oriented Business, Escort Service N N
Tutoring and Educational Services P C
Utility Lines P P
Utility Substations and Control Facilities P P
Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the Professional Office Zone provided they are
incidental to and do not substantially alter the character of the permitted principal use of a main
structure. An accessory structure shall be lower in height and smaller in size than any primary
structure(s) on the site. Such permitted accessory uses and structures include, but are not limited
to, the following:
A. Accessory structures such as garages, carports, equipment storage buildings and supply
storage buildings which are customarily used in conjunction with and incidental to a principal
use or structure permitted in the (PO) Zone.
B. Storage of materials used for the construction of a building, including a contractor's
temporary office, provided that such use be located on the building site or immediately
adjacent thereto, and provided further that such use shall be permitted only during the
construction period and thirty (30) days thereafter.
14-8-104 MINIMUM LOT STANDARDS
The minimum area and street frontage for any lot or parcel in the Professional Office Zone shall be
as follows:
8 - 3
Chapter 8 PO - Professional Office Zone Ord 2020.01.docx
Table 14-8-104
Min. Lot Size (Acres) Min. Frontage and Width
0.25 70
Corner lots shall meet the minimum frontage and width requirements along both streets.
14-8-105 YARD REQUIREMENTS
The following minimum yard requirements shall apply in the (PO) Zone, except that the minimum
front, rear, and side yards listed below shall be increased by one (1) foot for each one (1) foot in
height the structure extends above twenty-five (25) feet. Required setbacks, except for front and
street yards, may be reduced during the site approval process at the discretion of the City, but only
if the setback is not adjacent to a residential property and the approving authority determines that
the full setback is not necessary to allow for access, landscaping, light and air or for aesthetic
reasons. No building or structure shall be constructed closer to a property line or to another
structure than allowed by the IBC (International Building Code) or any other adopted codes.
A. Front and Street Yards. Any lot or parcel within the (PO) Zone or (PO-N) Subzone shall
have a minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet from any front property line and/or any
property line abutting a public street.
B. Side Yard. Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, any lot or parcel in the (PO) Zone
shall have a minimum building setback of ten (10) feet from a side property line, and each
lot or parcel in the (PO-N) Subzone shall have a minimum building setback of eight (8) feet
from a side property line.
C. Rear Yard. Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, any lot or parcel in the (PO) Zone
shall have a minimum building setback of ten (10) feet from a rear property line, and any lot
or parcel in the (PO-N) Subzone shall have a minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet
from a rear property line.
D. Yard Abutting Residential Lots. Where a property in the (PO) Zone abuts a residential lot or
residential zone designation, the minimum rear yard building setback shall be at least twenty
(20) feet on the abutting side.
E. Accessory Building. An accessory structure shall meet all of the setback requirements of a
principal structure. An accessory structure that does not require a building permit, according
to the International Building Code (IBC), may be located in a side or rear setback area only if
all of the following conditions are met:
1. The accessory structure is not within a front or street yard setback and is located
more than ten (10) feet from any main building on the same or adjacent property.
2. The accessory structure has no openings on the side which is contiguous with the
property line, and the walls of said building which are adjacent to the property line
have a fire retardant rating as specified by the IBC.
3. The accessory structure is designed such that all roof drainage is discharged onto
the lot or parcel on which it is erected.
8 - 4
Chapter 8 PO - Professional Office Zone Ord 2020.01.docx
F. Any existing residential structure constructed prior to October 20, 1982, that does not meet
the setback and separation standards of this Title may be converted to a use allowed in this
zone as long as the other requirements of this Title are met.
14-8-106 PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS
A. The following structures may be erected on or project into any required yard, except that
they shall not obstruct a required driveway or pedestrian access:
1. A fence or wall in conformance with this Code.
2. Landscape elements, including: trees, shrubs, and other plants.
3. Necessary appurtenances for utility service.
B. The structures listed below may project into a minimum front or rear yard not more than five
(5) feet, and into a minimum side yard not more than two (2) feet, except that they may not
obstruct a required driveway or pedestrian access:
1. Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses or other similar architectural features.
2. Stairways, balconies, door stoops, fire escapes and awnings.
3. Planter boxes or masonry planters not exceeding twenty-four (24) inches in height.
4. A covered entry or porch, including the pillars, used for the protection of pedestrians
entering or leaving a building, provided said structure is not more than one story in
height and is entirely open on at least three (3) sides.
14-8-107 STRUCTURE HEIGHT
No structure in the (PO) Zone shall exceed three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet in height as
measured at the average finished grade, and no building or structure in the (PO-N) Zone shall
exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height as measured at the average finished grade. Chimneys,
flagpoles, church towers, and similar accessory elements not used for human occupancy and that
are less than thirty-six (36) square feet in horizontal surface area, are excluded in determining
height. However, the City may limit the height of any protrusion that is found by the City Council to
be a public nuisance.
14-8-108 DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES
The minimum separation between structures shall be sixteen (16) feet or as required by the
International Building Code, whichever is greater.
14-8-109 LANDSCAPING
The following landscaping provisions, in addition to other requirements of this Title, shall apply in
the (PO) Zone.
8 - 5
Chapter 8 PO - Professional Office Zone Ord 2020.01.docx
1. Approved landscaping shall cover a minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the
development site and does not include required landscaping within public rights-ofway
or any other location not within the property boundaries.
2. All landscaping shall be sprinkled and planted with substantial live plant material for
the purpose of buffering, screening, and beautifying the site. At plant maturity, the
landscaping should represent, as a minimum standard, compatibility with
surrounding developed properties and uses and shall be permanently maintained by
the owner or occupants.
3. In the PO zone, a minimum ten (10) feet wide landscape buffer shall be required
along all frontage areas not occupied by approved drive accesses. In the PO-N
subzone, the entire minimum front yard setback shall be landscaped, except for the
area occupied by approved drive accesses and/or walkways.
4. A minimum ten (10) feet wide landscape buffer shall be established adjacent to any
residential property, except for approved parking, loading and drive areas.
5. All parking, loading, and drive areas shall have a minimum five (5) feet wide
landscape buffer when located adjacent to a side or rear property line.
6. Parking areas shall be landscaped as set forth in this Code.
7. Landscaping shall be installed in all parkstrips to the same standards as other on-site
landscaping. Asphalt, concrete, bricks, pavers, railroad ties, rocks, gravel and other
non-vegetative material are not allowed in the parkstrip area between the curb and
sidewalk.
8. Any area that is not landscaped shall be improved consistent with uses permitted in
this zone.
14-8-110 PARKING, LOADING, AND ACCESS
Each lot or parcel in the (PO) Zone shall have vehicle parking, loading, and access designed to
meet the requirements of this Code. In the (PO-N) Subzone, the following shall apply:
A. Parking areas shall be located in the rear of the lot.
B. Parking may be shared between adjacent properties as long as the minimum required
number of stalls for all properties collectively is met.
C. Cross access between parking areas on the same or adjacent properties may be required
anytime a project requires site plan approval or anytime the vehicle circulation or parking
pattern is modified.
14-8-111 SITE PLAN APPROVAL
Site plan approval shall be required for all uses in the (PO) Zone.
8 - 6
Chapter 8 PO - Professional Office Zone Ord 2020.01.docx
14-8-112 OTHER REQUIREMENTS
A. Signs. Any sign erected in the (PO) Zone shall be in conformance with the sign provisions of
this Title.
B. The following permanent signs, and no others, are allowed within the PO-N subzone:
1. One (1) sign of up to ten (10) square feet shall be allowed on each structure. Such
sign shall be illuminated only by exterior, floodlight-style fixtures, shall be attached to
the primary structure, and shall not protrude above the roof eave line. Neon lights,
interior sign lights, and other similar methods of lighting are expressly prohibited.
The design and color of the sign shall be consistent with the Architectural Design
provisions of this Chapter.
2. A maximum of one (1) monument sign per street frontage shall be allowed. The sign
structure shall not exceed four (4) feet in height as measured at the highest point of
the structure to the average finished grade. The width of the sign structure shall not
exceed six (6) feet as measured at the widest point of the sign structure. The sign
depth shall not exceed one (1) foot at the deepest point of the sign structure. The
sign shall be located at least five (5) feet from any property line and shall not be
located within a clear-view area. The sign shall be illuminated only by exterior,
floodlight-style fixtures. Neon lights, interior sign lights, and other similar methods of
lighting are expressly prohibited. The design and color of the sign shall be consistent
with the design provisions of this Chapter.
C. Address Marker. For the purposes of public safety, an address marker, three (3) feet in
height and between one (1) and (2) feet in width, shall be placed in front of every principal
structure. Said marker shall be located between five (5) and ten (10) feet behind the
sidewalk or front property line if there is no sidewalk, and between ten (10) and twenty (20)
feet of the principal driveway entrance to the property. The numeric characters shall be
between eight (8) and ten (10) inches in size and shall be colored in high contrast to the
remainder of the marker. The design and color of the address marker shall be consistent
with the Architectural Design provisions of this Chapter. No other characters or images are
permitted on an address marker. An address marker is not required if the address is
included on a monument sign and meets the height and size requirements of this section.
D. Uses Within Buildings. All uses permitted in the (PO) Zone shall be conducted entirely within
a fully enclosed building.
E. Trash Storage. No trash, used materials, wrecked or abandoned vehicles or equipment shall
be stored in an open area. Each development in the (PO) Zone shall be required to have
adequate, on-site, screened refuse containers maintained in a location approved as part of
the site plan.
F. Fences. Chain-link fencing material is not permitted.
G. Building Scale and Size. All structures shall be constructed of a size and scale similar to the
typical single family homes in the area and shall be oriented toward the public street. The
maximum width of a structure shall be sixty (60) feet, and the minimum width shall be thirty
(30) feet. The maximum footprint of a structure shall be two-thousand (2,000) square feet.
8 - 7
Chapter 8 PO - Professional Office Zone Ord 2020.01.docx
A series of two or more structures meeting these criteria may be linked by a common
corridor or interior connection forming a structure greater than (60) feet in width, but only if
the approval authority determines that such structure will meet the intent of the Architectural
Design criteria set forth in this Chapter.
H. Architectural Design. In the PO-N subzone, any structure shall be designed to appear as a
single-family dwelling or as an accessory element of a single-family dwelling. The approving
authority shall compare any proposed development with the style and appearance of
surrounding residential properties, and shall not approve any design that is not consistent
with the general design and style of the area. The following standards and/or design
features are considered typical of the area and are required elements of any project:
1. There shall be a covered front porch on any main structure.
2. The minimum roof pitch of any structure shall be 5/12.
3. There shall be brick and/or stone exterior treatments on any structure.
4. Any exterior building surface shall be constructed of natural wood, fibrous cement
board, brick or stone. Vinyl siding, aluminum siding, T-111, and similar materials are
not allowed, except for aluminum soffit, fascia and rain gutters.
5. Any roof shall be covered with architectural asphalt shingles or cement/slate
shingles.
6. There shall be no flat, gambrel, mansard, or “barn-style” roof on any structure.
7. The roof on any main structure shall be gabled.
8. All exterior mechanical equipment shall be screened and located at grade.
9. Exterior building colors shall be muted earth tones, with no pink, purple or derivative
shades allowed anywhere.
10. Window trim, soffets, fascias and other exterior details may be painted with bold
earth tones.
11. The color black shall not be permitted on any exterior surface except shingles, signs
and wrought iron fences.
9 - 1
Chapter 9 Hospital Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 9
(H) HOSPITAL ZONE
14-9-101 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
14-9-102 AREA OF ZONE
14-9-103 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, AND PROHIBITED USES
14-9-104 MINIMUM LOT STANDARDS
14-9-105 YARD REQUIREMENTS
14-9-106 PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS
14-9-107 BUILDING HEIGHT
14-9-108 DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS
14-9-109 LANDSCAPING AND PERMISSIBLE LOT COVERAGE
14-9-110 PARKING, LOADING, AND ACCESS
14-9-111 SITE PLAN APPROVAL
14-9-112 OTHER REQUIREMENTS
14-9-101 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
The Hospital Zone (H) is specifically designed for the area encompassed by the Lakeview
Hospital and surrounding properties. The purpose of the Hospital Zone is to provide an area for
medical uses, professional offices and professional services within close proximity to one
another.
14-9-102 AREA OF ZONE
Each area of Hospital zoning shall meet the following minimum size:
Table 14-9-102a
Min. Zone Area (Acres)
1.0
14-9-103 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, AND PROHIBITED USES
Subject to the provisions and restrictions of this Title, the following principal uses and structures,
and no others, are allowed either as a permitted use (P) or by Conditional Use Permit (C) in the
Hospital zone. Some uses may be expressly prohibited (N) in this zone. Any use not listed
herein is also expressly prohibited.
Table 14-9-103a
Use H
Assisted Living, Rest Homes, and Convalescent Facilities C
Helipad C
Hospital P
Medical/Dental Laboratory P
Medical/Dental Office P
Municipal Facility P
Pharmacy and/or Optical Shop – accessory use only C
9 - 2
Chapter 9 Hospital Ord 2020.01.docx
Use H
Professional Services P
Residential – existing only P
Sexually Oriented Business, Escort Service N
Utility Lines P
Utility Substations and Control Facilities C
Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the Hospital Zone provided they are
incidental to and do not substantially alter the character of the permitted principal use of the
structure. Such permitted accessory uses and structures include, but are not limited to, the
following:
A. Accessory buildings such as garages, carports, equipment storage buildings and supply
storage buildings which are customarily used in conjunction with and incidental to a
principal use or structure permitted in the (H) Zone.
B. Storage of materials used for the construction of a building, including a contractor's
temporary office, provided that such use be located on the building site or immediately
adjacent thereto, and provided further that such use shall be permitted only during the
construction period and thirty (30) days thereafter.
14-9-104 MINIMUM LOT STANDARDS
The minimum area and street frontage for any lot or parcel in the Hospital Zone shall be as
follows:
Table 14-9-104a
Min. Lot Size (Acres) Min. Frontage and Width
0.50 70
Corner lots shall meet the minimum frontage and width requirements along both streets.
14-9-105 YARD REQUIREMENTS
The following minimum yard requirements shall apply in the (H) Zone, except that the minimum
front, rear, and side yards listed below shall be increased by one foot (1’) for each foot in height
a structure extends above thirty (30) feet.
A. Front and Street Yards. Each lot or parcel within the (H) Zone shall have a minimum
building setback of thirty (30) feet from any front property line and/or any property line
abutting a public street.
B. Side Yard. Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, each lot or parcel in the (H)
Zone shall have a minimum building setback of ten (10) feet from a side property line,
except for hospitals which shall have a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet.
C. Rear Yard. Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, each lot or parcel in the (H)
Zone shall have a minimum building setback of thirty (30) feet from a rear property line.
9 - 3
Chapter 9 Hospital Ord 2020.01.docx
D. Yard Abutting Residential Lots. Where property in the (H) Zone abuts a residential lot,
the minimum building setback shall be twenty (20) feet on the abutting side.
E. Accessory Building. An accessory building or structure shall meet all of the setback
requirements of a principal structure. An accessory building or structure that does not
require a building permit, according to the International Building Code (IBC), may be
located in a side or rear setback area only if all of the following conditions are met:
1. The accessory building or structure is not within a front or street yard setback
and is located more than ten (10) feet from any main building on the same or
adjacent property.
2. The accessory building or structure has no openings on the side which is
contiguous with the property line, and the walls of said building which are
adjacent to the property line have a fire retardant rating as specified by the IBC.
3. The accessory building or structure is designed such that all roof drainage is
discharged onto the lot or parcel on which it is erected.
14-9-106 PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS
A. The following structures may be erected on or project into any required yard, except that
they shall not obstruct a required driveway or pedestrian access:
1. A fence or wall in conformance with this Title.
2. Landscape elements, including: trees, shrubs and other plants.
3. Necessary appurtenances for utility service as long as they are attached to a
permitted structure and do not protrude more than two (2) feet into a required
setback.
B. The structures listed below may project into a minimum front or rear yard not more than
four (4) feet, and into a minimum side yard not more than two (2) feet, except that they
may not obstruct a required driveway or pedestrian access:
1. Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses or other similar architectural
features.
2. Stairways, balconies, door stoops, fire escapes and awnings.
3. Planter boxes or masonry planters not exceeding twenty-four (24) inches in
height.
4. A covered entry or porch used for the protection of pedestrians entering or
leaving a building, provided said structure is not more than one story in height
and is entirely open on at least three (3) sides.
14-9-107 BUILDING HEIGHT
No hospital building or structure in the (H) Zone shall exceed seven (7) stories or one hundred
9 - 4
Chapter 9 Hospital Ord 2020.01.docx
(100) feet in height as measured at the average grade. No other building or accessory structure
in the (H) Zone shall exceed four (4) stories or forty-eight (48) feet in height as measured at the
average grade. Chimneys, flagpoles, church towers, and similar accessory elements not used
for human occupancy are excluded in determining height; however, the City may limit the height
of any protrusion that is found by the City Council to be a public nuisance.
14-9-108 DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS
The minimum separation between structures shall be ten feet or as required by the International
Building Code, whichever is greater.
14-9-109 LANDSCAPING AND PERMISSIBLE LOT COVERAGE
The following landscaping provisions shall apply in the (H) Zone in addition to other
requirements of this Code:
1. All landscaping shall be sprinkled and planted with substantial live plant material
for the purpose of buffering, screening, and beautifying the site. At plant maturity,
the landscaping should represent, as a minimum standard, compatibility with
surrounding developed properties and uses and must be permanently maintained
by the owner or occupants.
2. A minimum ten (10) feet wide landscape buffer shall be required along all
frontage areas not occupied by drive accesses.
3. A minimum ten (10) feet wide landscape buffer shall be established adjacent to
any residential property.
4. Parking, loading, and drive areas shall have a minimum five (5) feet wide
landscape buffer when located adjacent to a side or rear property line, except as
required for buffering between residential uses.
5. Parking areas shall be landscaped as set forth in this Title.
6. Approved landscaping shall cover a minimum of ten (10) percent of the
development site exclusive of any parkstrips in the public right-of-way.
7. Landscaping shall be installed in all parkstrips to the same standards as other
on-site landscaping. Asphalt, concrete, bricks, pavers, railroad ties, rocks, gravel
and other non-vegetative material is not allowed in the parkstrip area between
the curb and sidewalk.
8. Areas not in landscaping shall consist of uses permitted in this zone.
14-9-110 PARKING, LOADING, AND ACCESS
Each lot or parcel in the (H) Zone shall have vehicle parking, loading, and access designed to
meet the requirements of this Code.
9 - 5
Chapter 9 Hospital Ord 2020.01.docx
14-9-111 SITE PLAN APPROVAL
Site plan approval shall be required for all new or amended uses and sites in the (H) Zone, as
set forth in the Administration and Procedures chapter of this Title.
14-9-112 OTHER REQUIREMENTS
A. Signs. All signs erected in the (H) Zone shall be in conformance with the sign provisions
of this Code.
B. Trash Storage. No trash, used materials, wrecked or abandoned vehicles or equipment
shall be stored in an open area. Each development in the (H) Zone shall be required to
have adequate, on-site, screened refuse containers maintained in a location approved
as part of the site plan.
10 - 1
Chapter 10 MXD - Mixed-Use Zone Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 10
(MXD) MIXED-USE ZONE
14-10-101 PURPOSE
14-10-102 ZONE/PROJECT EVALUATION
14-10-103 SITE CHARACTERISTICS
14-10-104 SUB-ZONE STANDARDS
14-10-105a PERMITTED USES
14-10-105b PROHIBITED USES
14-10-106 DEVELOPMENT PLAN
14-10-107 DEFAULT SETBACKS AND HEIGHT LIMITATIONS
14-10-108 DEVELOPMENT CHARACTERISTICS
14-10-109 DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES
14-10-101 PURPOSE.
The purpose of the Mixed-Use (MXD) zoning classification is to facilitate the integration of
diverse but compatible uses into a single development, with the goal of creating a community
that offers "live, work, and play" opportunities within convenient walking distance of each other.
14-10-102 ZONE/PROJECT EVALUATION
All proposals to include a property within an MXD zone, and all development proposals within
an existing MXD zone, shall at a minimum be evaluated based on their compatibility with:
1. The Bountiful City General Plan
2. The Bountiful City Code and Zoning Code
3. The purpose and characteristics of the MXD Zone
4. Sound planning practices
5. Surrounding land-uses
6. All other City-approved studies
The City may deny any zone map amendment or development proposal that does not comply
with any of these criteria.
10 - 2
Chapter 10 MXD - Mixed-Use Zone Ord 2020.01.docx
14-10-103 SITE CHARACTERISTICS
The typical site zoned MXD shall encompass at least five (5) acres; however, smaller projects
that demonstrate outstanding characteristics may also be considered. Sites zoned MXD should
be adjacent to major automobile and public transit corridors and should have direct access to
both.
14-10-104 SUB-ZONE STANDARDS
Each sub-zone shall have an emphasis toward a particular category of land-use. Percentages
are based on the total square footage of floor area within a project and include areas within a
structure (floors of a building) and areas on the surface of the land (sidewalks, parks, etc.)
Parking, landscaping and similar ancillary uses are calculated on a pro-rated basis for each use
category.
MXD-R 50% - 75% sq. ft. in residential uses
MXD-C 50% - 75% sq. ft. in commercial uses
MXD-PO 50% - 75% sq. ft. in professional office uses
MXD-PF 50% - 75% sq. ft. in public facilities
MXD-E 50% - 75% sq. ft. in entertainment/hotel uses
MXD-M No one category of uses may exceed 33% of the total sq. ft.
14-10-105a PERMITTED USES
Underlined uses may not be located on individual pad sites or parcels. They must be part of a
larger building or physically connected and integrated into the complex. Residential uses may
not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total project floor area, except as indicated by the
sub-zone designation.
Residential
Multi-family - minimum one (1) covered space per unit. Underground and/or structured
parking recommended; carports are not permitted without specific City Council approval.
Office
Professional offices
Banks and credit unions
Medical clinics
Artist studios
Commercial
Convenience stores – with or without fuel sales
Grocery stores – maximum 50,000 square feet per tenant
Retail – maximum 50,000 square feet per tenant/floor, no single tenant to exceed
100,000 square feet total across multiple floors
Institutional/Public
Medical clinics
10 - 3
Chapter 10 MXD - Mixed-Use Zone Ord 2020.01.docx
Colleges/Universities/Educational Services
Museums
Open space/Park
Convention center/Assembly/Auditorium
Government offices
Places of worship
Municipal Facilities
Hotel/Entertainment
Hotels – Rooms off interior corridors (no motor lodges)
Recreation – Indoor/Outdoor
Restaurants and private clubs – without drive-up window
Fast-food restaurant
Movie Theaters - Indoor
Convention center/Assembly/Auditorium
Health clubs
14-10-105b PROHIBITED USES
Motor lodges (drive-up motel units)
Pawn shops
Check cashing/Title loan stores
Sexually oriented businesses
Tattoo parlors
Self-storage units
Body piercing (earrings permitted)
14-10-106 DEVELOPMENT PLAN
1. The property owner (or his agent) shall prepare and submit a proposed Development
Plan for the subject property.
2. The Development Plan guides all development within a particular project and at a
minimum shall include a site plan, a pedestrian connection/trails plan, conceptual
building elevations and design schemes, streetscape and building setback diagrams, a
current survey and legal description, plus any other information typically required for site
plan approval.
3. The general categories and uses to be established within a mixed-use project shall be
specified and enumerated in the Development Plan. The approved Development Plan
shall be considered an integral part of the zoning regulations for the area represented.
Substantial variation between the Development Plan and the Final Site Plan would
require review and recommendation from the Planning Commission and approval from
the City Council. A substantial variation is any addition, modification, or alteration to a
building or site plan that exceeds twenty percent (20%) of the gross floor area, site
acreage or exterior building surface or any change in use greater than five percent (5%)
of the total project floor area. All modifications must meet the minimum standards
10 - 4
Chapter 10 MXD - Mixed-Use Zone Ord 2020.01.docx
required by this Code.
14-10-107 DEFAULT SETBACKS AND HEIGHT LIMITATIONS
The location, height and separation between buildings shall be established as part of the
Development Plan. Unless otherwise stated in the Development Plan, the default standards
shall be as follows:
Minimum building setback 30 feet
Maximum building setback 50 feet
Minimum building separation 20 feet
Maximum building separation 40 feet
Minimum building height 20 feet
Maximum building height 35 feet
14-10-108 DEVELOPMENT CHARACTERISTICS
1. Uses may be mixed within a building or within an overall development, or both. However,
the City encourages mixing uses within a building as much as possible. Furthermore, the
subdividing of land for stand alone parcels is discouraged, and the City may deny the
subdivision of land within the MXD zone if the Planning Commission or City Council
determines that the subdivision is contrary to the purpose and intent of this Code.
2. Developments within an MXD zone shall exhibit urban characteristics such as:
A. Wide sidewalks
B. Street trees and street furniture
C. Community gathering spaces
D. Shared parking
E. Integrated public transit (where available and/or anticipated)
F. Diverse and distinctive design features
3. All developments shall provide at least fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor area or
fifteen (15) percent of the gross site area, whichever is greater, as open space. Open
space shall typically include the following elements: cultivated landscaping, plazas,
parks, urban trails/sidewalks, wetlands/indigenous landscaping, and community
recreation space. A maximum of fifty (50) percent of all open space may be hard
surfaced. Streets, parking lots, driveways and private yards are not considered open
space.
4. All lighting and signs shall be pedestrian scale, with a maximum sign height of twenty
10 - 5
Chapter 10 MXD - Mixed-Use Zone Ord 2020.01.docx
(20) feet. Lights or signs on building facades may be higher than the twenty (20) feet
maximum. Sign standards shall be the same as for the Downtown (DN) zone, although
for buildings larger than those normally allowed in the Downtown (DN) zone, the City
may approve larger scale lighting and/or signs proportional to the size of the buildings
approved. Projects ten (10) acres or larger with at least one hundred thousand (100,000)
sq. ft. of non-residential uses may have one pole sign per frontage on an arterial street,
evaluated using the standards for pole signs in the CH zone. The pole or structural
support element of the sign may exceed the maximum pole width allowed if the structure
itself incorporates specific site design elements, at the discretion of the approving body.
5. Parking requirements shall be determined per existing City standards for each use.
However, parking requirements may be reduced if it can be shown that shared parking is
a viable alternative. The City reserves the right to dictate the amount of parking and/or
the location of parking spaces within a project to achieve the objectives of this Code.
6. Site plans shall clearly indicate the mixture of land uses within the project area and the
percentage of the overall site that each use occupies. Furthermore, site plans shall
indicate the amount of parking prorated to each use and shall illustrate how public
transit, (where available and/or anticipated), is to be integrated into the site.
7. An additional site plan shall illustrate pedestrian movement throughout the project area,
with trail hierarchies established based on levels of pedestrian use. The purpose of this
plan is to demonstrate how effectively uses are mixed, and to determine the efficiency of
the site layout. The plan shall provide convenient and attractive pedestrian connections
through the mixing of land uses and quality design practices.
14-10-109 DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES
Upon approval of the Development Plan and zone change to MXD, all uses allowed in the
development shall be processed as if they were permitted uses.
11 - 1
CHAPTER 11
(PF) PUBLIC FACILITIES ZONE
[RESERVED]
12 - 1
Chapter 12 MWP - Mountain Development Watershed Protection Zone 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 12
(MWP) MOUNTAIN DEVELOPMENT AND
WATERSHED PROTECTION ZONE
14-12-101 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
14-12-102 PERMITTED USES
14-12-103 SPECIAL USE PERMITS
14-12-104 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
14-12-105 CONDITIONS FOR SPECIAL AND CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
14-12-106 SITE PLAN REVIEW
14-12-101 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
The purpose of the Mountain Development and Watershed Protection Zone is to provide for the
controlled development of the mountains and protection of the watershed areas east of Bountiful
City. It is deemed in the public interest that unnecessary and scattered conversion of open space to
developed uses be controlled and the resultant adverse impacts of development, conversion and
destruction of natural habitats be prevented and mitigated, including:
A. despoliation of the area's natural environmental quality by air, water and noise
pollution;
B. destruction of scenic beauty;
C. disturbance of the ecology and natural habitat;
D. unnecessary roads;
E. hazards related to geology, fire and flood;
F. loss of lands which provide watershed for the urban areas; and
G. excessive costs of providing the necessary public services and infrastructure to
accommodate isolated and dispersed pockets of development.
14-12-102 PERMITTED USES
For each parcel within the Mountain Development and Watershed Protection Zone, the following
uses are permitted to the extent otherwise permitted by law or Code:
A. Continuation of the existing uses actually being made of each parcel as of the effective
date of this Code, as well as any uses made of such parcel of a substantial basis during
the immediately preceding period of five (5) years, at the same general level of intensity
and density of such uses.
B. Crops, grazing and other agricultural uses.
C. Management for watershed, and for fish and wildlife habitat, hunting and fishing.
12 - 2
Chapter 12 MWP - Mountain Development Watershed Protection Zone 2020.01.docx
D. Accessory uses that are customarily incidental or subordinate to, or are reasonably
necessary in order to continue and maintain, any of the foregoing principal uses that are
actually being made.
E. Any other uses, including recreational uses, that (a) are compatible with one or more of
the foregoing uses actually being made or to which the parcel is suited, and (b) do not
require substantial new construction, grading, fill, improvements, road-cutting, clearcutting,
draining, dredging or other modifications of the existing surface features of the
parcel.
F. Municipal Facility.
G. No use.
14-12-103 SPECIAL USE PERMITS
For a period of five (5) years from the effective date of this Code, the City Council may, upon appeal
and after review and recommendation from the Planning Commission, authorize special use
permits for additional uses, or greater intensities or densities of use, of particular parcel within the
Mountain Development and Watershed Protection Zone, provided that such special use permits will
not be contrary to the public interest and, owing to special conditions unique to the parcel, a literal
enforcement of the use limitations applicable to the parcel would cause extreme hardship to the
owner. Any such special use permit which is granted shall thereafter expire unless the additional
use, or greater intensity or density of use, permitted thereby is substantially commenced within one
(1) year of the granting of the variance.
Extreme hardship shall be found to exist only if the permitted uses leave the owner no worthwhile
use, no means of obtaining an appreciable economic return, and only a bare residual value under
applicable market conditions. Hardship shall not include owner-created hardship, nor shall hardship
include any condition that results from prior use or abuse of the land by any current or prior owner
of an interest in it, including prior extraction or destruction of the land's natural resources. Hardship
resulting from voluntary subdivisions may be considered only (a) to the extent the subdivisions were
approved and completed prior to the effective date of this Code or (b) if a finding is made that the
original subdivided tract cannot be reconsolidated, in whole or in part, on an economically viable
basis.
No special use permit shall be authorized merely because the permitted uses, or intensities or
densities or use, (a) result in practical difficulty, (b) provide less than the highest or best return to
the owner, or (c) prevent a return proportionate to the current owner's investment in the parcel if,
under applicable market conditions, the amount of such investment exceeds the fair market value
which the parcel had in light of its use, adaptations for use, intensity or density of use or surface
features at the time that the investment was made.
14-12-104 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
The City Council may, upon application by the owner and after review and recommendation by the
Planning Commission, grant conditional use permits authorizing otherwise prohibited additional
uses, or greater intensities or densities of use of particular parcels within the Mountain
Development and Watershed Protection Zone, including new construction, residential structures,
grading, fill, improvements, road-cutting, clear-cutting, draining, dredging or other modifications of
the existing surface features of the parcel, if the applicant makes an affirmative showing that:
12 - 3
Chapter 12 MWP - Mountain Development Watershed Protection Zone 2020.01.docx
A. The public interest would be served by permitting such additional use or greater
intensity or density of use, at the proposed location;
B. The same public interest cannot be reasonably served by the currently lawful use of
other lands within or outside the Mountain Development and Watershed Protection
Zone.
14-12-105 CONDITIONS ON SPECIAL AND CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
Every special use permit or conditional use permit shall include such conditions as the City council
shall determine to be necessary to ensure that any additional use, or greater intensity or density of
use, authorized thereunder will be accomplished with the minimum possible modification of and
impact on the existing surface features of the particular parcel, and without impairment of the uses
for which the neighboring lands are reasonably adapted.
14-12-106 SITE PLAN REVIEW
All locations of buildings, accessory structures, roads and other improvements in the Mountain
Development and Watershed Protection Zone shall be determined by site plan review at the time a
special or conditional use permit is considered and authorized by the City Council.
13 - 1
Chapter 13 PDO - Planned Development Overlay Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 13
(PDO) PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE
[RESERVED]
14 - 1
Chapter 14 Supplementary Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 14
SUPPLEMENTARY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
14-14-101 PURPOSE
14-14-102 LOT STANDARDS
14-14-103 YARD SPACE FOR ONE BUILDING ONLY
14-14-104 FRONT YARD MODIFICATION - DEVELOPED AREAS
14-14-105 COMBINED LOTS - RESTRICTIONS
14-14-106 SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR EXISTING SINGLE AND TWO-FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS
14-14-107 LOCATION OF TRAILERS, BOATS, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND
STORAGE CONTAINERS
14-14-108 USE OF MOBILE HOMES, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES, CAMPER TRAILERS
AND STORAGE CONTAINERS
14-14-109 ABANDONED, WRECKED, OR JUNKED VEHICLES
14-14-110 TRASH, DEBRIS, WEEDS, AND SIMILAR HAZARDS
14-14-111 REFUSE SITING STANDARDS
14-14-112 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS - EXCEPTIONS
14-14-113 ADDITIONAL HEIGHT ALLOWED
14-14-114 STORAGE OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES - RESIDENTIAL ZONES
14-14-115 SWIMMING POOLS
14-14-116 SATELLITE TELEVISION ANTENNAS
14-14-117 SEMI-PRIVATE SWIMMING CLUBS AND RECREATION FACILITIES
14-14-118 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER SITES
14-14-119 SIGHT CLEARANCES ON CORNER LOTS
14-14-120 RESERVED
14-14-121 RESERVED
14-14-122 TEMPORARY CLASSROOMS AT PRIVATE SCHOOLS
14-14-123 FILLING, GRADING, AND EXCAVATING
14-14-124 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT
14-14-125 PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENTS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
14-14-126 PRIVATE POWER PLANTS
14-14-101 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish miscellaneous land development standards which
are generally applicable to more than one (1) zone. The requirements of this Chapter shall be in
addition to and in some circumstances may supersede the requirements contained within the
provisions of each respective zone and/or other chapters of this Title.
14-14-102 LOT STANDARDS
A. Newly Created Lots to Conform to Parcel Requirements. Except for more flexible
requirements, such as those pertaining to planned developments, every lot or parcel
created within the city shall conform to the minimum requirements of this Title regarding
width, yard, area, coverage, parking and frontage upon a dedicated public street or upon
an approved private street or right-of-way before a building permit may be issued.
14 - 2
Chapter 14 Supplementary Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
B. Transfer of Required Yard Space Prohibited. No space needed to meet the width, yard,
area, parking, frontage or other requirements of this Title for a lot, parcel, or building may
be transferred, sold, bequeathed or leased apart from such lot, parcel or building unless
other space so complying is provided and approved by the City. No land shall be sold or
transferred which will result in a lot or parcel being created for building purposes that
does not comply with the provisions of this Code.
C. Minimum Buildable Area. Any lot or parcel designated or zoned for residential
development shall have a rectangular buildable area with a length to width ratio between
2:1 and 1:2, that is located entirely on ground of less than thirty percent (30%) slope,
that does not encroach into required setbacks or easements and that meets the
following criteria:
R-4 2,000 sq ft
R-3 3,000 sq ft
RF 6,000 sq ft
All other zones 5,000 sq ft
14-14-103 YARD SPACE FOR ONE BUILDING ONLY
No required yard or other open space around an existing building or which is hereafter provided
around any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Title shall be
considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building; nor shall any yard or other
required open space on an adjoining lot be considered as providing yard or open space on a lot
or parcel where on a building is to be erected or established.
14-14-104 FRONT YARD MODIFICATION - DEVELOPED AREAS
In instances where at least seventy-five (75) percent of the lots within a subdivision and/or at
least fifty percent (50%) of the lots along the side of a street have front yard setbacks which are
less than that required for the zone in which they are located, the minimum front yard setback
requirement for vacant lots shall be equal to the average of the existing front yards. However, in
no case shall the front yard setback be less than twenty (20) feet.
14-14-105 COMBINED LOTS - RESTRICTIONS
A combined lot may be created from two (2) or more contiguous lots or parcels that are
undeveloped. The side, front, and rear yard requirements of this Code shall apply only to the
external boundaries of the combined lot. However, once a combined lot has been created, it
shall not be divided except through a new subdivision plat meeting current City Code. Prior to
receiving a building permit and/or commencing any development activity, the property owner
shall record at the Office of the Davis County Recorder a deed restriction memorializing the
creation of the combined lot, and shall amend any easements in conflict with the utilization of
the combined lot. Failure to produce or record the required deed restriction shall not void any
provision of this Code, and no part of this Code shall abrogate any use restriction provided by
deed or other written recorded instrument affecting or otherwise restricting the use of the real
property in question.
14 - 3
Chapter 14 Supplementary Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
14-14-106 SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR EXISTING SINGLE AND TWO-FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS
In order to encourage the revitalization of older homes and neighborhoods within Bountiful City,
the following provisions shall apply to single family and two family residential dwellings:
A. Any dwelling built prior to January 1, 1965, that does not meet the current setback
standards may be expanded consistent with the setbacks approved at the time of initial
construction, as determined by the location of the original building foundation in
relationship to the property lines, with the condition that the new construction shall meet
the provisions of the current International Building Code or International Residential
Construction Code (IBC/IRCC) and does not violate provisions of this title regarding
maximum lot or parcel coverage.
B. Any dwelling built prior to January 1, 1965, that does not have an attached two (2) car
garage, may be allowed the following actions, upon the condition that all new
construction shall meet the provisions of the current IBC/IRCC and does not violate
provisions regarding maximum lot or parcel coverage:
1. Construct an attached two car garage within five (5) feet of a side property line as
long as the opposite side yard is at least eight (8) feet wide. A single story of
living space may be constructed directly above and/or below the garage addition,
but no additional horizontal living space may encroach into the minimum required
side yard setback. Maximum garage width shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet.
This shall not apply to situations where there is sufficient space to construct a
two car garage but the home has been, or is proposed to be, modified from its
original configuration, thus creating the need for a reduced setback.
2. Attach an existing detached garage to a dwelling without an attached garage.
The garage shall be located at least three (3) feet from the nearest side property
line and at least twenty (20) feet from the rear property line. No additional living
space may be constructed above or beneath the garage unless the new space is
setback at least five (5) feet from a side property line and the opposite side yard
is at least eight (8) feet wide. The existing garage shall have been constructed
prior to the adoption of this section, and the new construction tying the structures
together shall meet all of the minimum required yard setbacks.
C. Any existing dwelling may expand vertically within the original foundation boundaries to
the maximum height allowed by this Title or the IBC/IRCC, whichever is more restrictive,
unless otherwise limited. All new construction shall meet all provisions of the IBC/IRCC.
D. The Building Official may require any structural upgrades to an existing building or
structure as necessary to accomplish a requested addition or modification. Such
upgrades may be required during plan review or during construction if the existing
conditions deviate from approved plans.
14-14-107 LOCATION OF TRAILERS, BOATS, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND
STORAGE CONTAINERS
A. Any boat, boat trailer, camper, travel trailer, utility trailer, storage container or other
14 - 4
Chapter 14 Supplementary Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
similar device shall not be placed, kept, stored or maintained on any property in Bountiful
City except in accordance with the following:
1. In a residential zone, no boat trailer, camper, travel trailer, utility trailer, storage
container or other similar device shall be located within a front yard or street side
yard except on legally established driveways. A minimum setback of ten (10) feet
from the street property line is required so as to preserve adequate visibility for
pedestrian and traffic safety.
2. In a non-residential zone, storage containers shall be located in screened areas
that have been designated for storage in an approved site plan.
3. In any zone, no boat trailer, camper, travel trailer, utility trailer, storage container
or other similar device shall be located in a clear-view area or vacant lot as
defined in this Title.
14-14-108 USE OF MOBILE HOMES, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES, CAMPER TRAILERS
AND STORAGE CONTAINERS
A. It is unlawful for any person to place, keep, occupy, or maintain a mobile home upon any
lot or parcel of land within the City except in a mobile home park or mobile home
subdivision. Mobile offices that are part of a construction site or development project
may be permitted as a temporary use as provided in this Title.
B. It is unlawful for any person to reside in or otherwise utilize a recreational vehicle,
camper trailer, or similar device, whether temporarily or permanently, except in an
approved recreational vehicle park.
C. It is unlawful to park, place, or otherwise locate a storage container on any fire access
lane, public street, public easement or public right-of-way without the express, written
permission of the Bountiful City Public Works Director. The City may abate any unlawful
situation without notice and at the expense of the owner of the container.
D. A storage container is not allowed in any residential zone, professional office zone,
downtown zone, mixed use zone, watershed protection zone, hospital zone or any other
non-commercial zone, except as a temporary use associated with construction,
renovation, or moving. In such instances, the storage container shall be located on a
concrete or asphalt surface, and shall meet all of the following criteria:
1. A storage container shall not be placed on a site more than thirty (30) days prior
to the permitted activity.
2. A storage container shall be removed within thirty (30) days after a permitted
activity is substantially completed.
3. Only one (1) storage container may be located on a lot or parcel except for in a
commercial zone.
E. A storage container in a commercial zone shall be used in accordance with the following
criteria:
14 - 5
Chapter 14 Supplementary Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
1. A storage container shall be used solely for the transportation or shipment of
goods and products, and
2. It is unlawful to use a storage container for business operations, and
3. A storage container not being actively used for transportation or shipment shall
not be stored within Bountiful City.
F. A storage container shall not be located on any property for more than six (6) months in
any twelve (12) month period, measured continuously from the day the container is first
placed. The Bountiful City Planning Director may grant extensions of up to six (6)
months, but only if he/she determines that:
1. The storage container is located on a site with an active building permit, and
2. The storage container is a necessary part of the construction process, and
3. Construction is moving forward in a timely manner and in accordance with
generally accepted industry standards.
G. It is unlawful to use a storage container as a permanent structure or as an appendage to
a permanent structure.
H. It is unlawful, in any zone, to vertically stack two (2) or more storage containers or
stack/place any other materials or items on top of or around a storage container.
14-14-109 ABANDONED, WRECKED, OR JUNKED VEHICLES
See Chapter 3 of this Title for the following definitions:
“UNREGISTERED VEHICLE”
“INOPERATIVE VEHICLE”
“DISMANTLED VEHICLE”
“WRECKED VEHICLE”
“ABANDONED VEHICLE”
“VEHICLE PART(S)”
A. Unlawful Conduct. It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any owner or tenant to cause
or permit any unregistered, inoperative, dismantled, wrecked, or abandoned motor
vehicle(s) and/or vehicle part(s) to be parked, stored, or remain on any property or
premises, unless within an enclosed garage or in connection with a lawfully situated and
licensed business engaged in the repair of motor vehicles. Violations of this section may
be prosecuted by criminal prosecution or by abatement provision for public nuisances.
B. Exception Permit. A permit may be granted by the Planning Director for an exception to
Section 14-14-109(B) if the owner of an unregistered, inoperative, dismantled, wrecked
or abandoned motor vehicle and/or vehicle part(s) submits written application to the
Bountiful Planning Director providing:
1. Proof that the applicant is the owner of the motor vehicle;
14 - 6
Chapter 14 Supplementary Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
2. Proof that the applicant is the owner of or has permission of the owner of the
property upon which the motor vehicle and/or vehicle part(s) will be parked,
stored or remain;
3. A description of the condition of the motor vehicle, i.e., that the motor vehicle is
unregistered, inoperative, dismantled, wrecked and/or abandoned;
4. A description of the plan by which the condition of the motor vehicle will be
changed, i.e., the date upon which the vehicle will be registered, repaired,
removed from the property, etc.;
5. The address at which the motor vehicle and/or vehicle part(s) will be parked,
stored, or remain while its/their condition is being changed;
6. The location upon the property, at the address set forth in condition 3), above,
where the motor vehicle and/or vehicle part(s) will be parked, stored or remain
while its/their condition is being changed; and,
7. That a nuisance or health hazard will not be created while the motor vehicle
and/or vehicle part(s) are parked, stored or retained.
C. An exception permit is valid for only one (1) vehicle. Only one (1) permit may be issued
per year per property, and for a period not to exceed six (6) months. When the permit
expires, the vehicle shall either be repaired and lawfully registered or removed from the
property along with all vehicle parts.
D. Any vehicle maintained on a property under an exception permit shall be otherwise kept
in compliance with all applicable laws, shall not be parked or kept in the public right-ofway
or on landscaped areas, shall not constitute a hazard in any way, and shall not
constitute a public nuisance. A permit may be revoked by the Planning Director for
failure to comply with these terms, and a permit may be denied for failure to comply with
these terms for earlier vehicles. The denial or revocation of a permit may be appealed as
set forth in the Administration and Procedures chapter of this Title.
E. Penalty. Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a
class B misdemeanor.
14-14-110 TRASH, DEBRIS, WEEDS AND SIMILAR HAZARDS
A. No yard or other open space shall be used for the storage of trash, debris, junk, outdoor
storage, or abandoned equipment, except as specifically authorized by and in
compliance with the provisions of this Code.
B. It is unlawful to allow weeds, grass, or similar growth to exceed six (6) inches in height
on an improved property.
C. It is unlawful and deemed a public safety hazard for a property owner or tenant to cause
or allow the following conditions:
14 - 7
Chapter 14 Supplementary Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
1. The storage or accumulation of flammable materials, yard clippings, tree
trimmings, and similar items outside of a structure, except for permanent
propane/natural gas tanks meeting the approval of the Fire Marshall, and
firewood stacked in accordance with the Fire Code.
2. The existence of a vacant lot, open field, or other undeveloped parcel adjacent to
a developed property without a firebreak at least twenty (20) feet wide.
D. Whenever an “Extreme Conditions” or “Red Flag” warning is issued by the Fire
Department or other fire management agency with jurisdiction over lands within the
South Davis County Metro area, the City or its agent may abate high risk fire hazards
without notice. If a situation abated was also in violation of City Codes and/or
ordinances, the City may recuperate full costs, including administrative expenses,
through any legal means necessary. A high risk fire hazard shall be:
1. Any item deemed a public safety hazard under this Section.
2. Any vacant lot within a developed subdivision that has weeds, grass, or similar
growth higher than six (6) inches, or that does not have a firebreak at least ten
(10) feet wide around the perimeter of the property.
3. Any item deemed by the City or its agents to be in immediate peril.
14-14-111 REFUSE SITING STANDARDS
A. When refuse storage containers are used or otherwise required by this Title, the
containers shall be of sufficient size and numbers to provide suitable capacity to contain
the refuse generated at the site. Containers shall be closed by an attached cover at all
times.
B. All containers shall be kept at a location easily accessible by collection vehicles and
refuse producers. Refuse containers shall be kept away from overhead utility lines and
structures with projections to facilitate pickup. Container sites shall also comply with the
International Fire and International Building Codes.
C. Outdoor refuse containers, except for individual residential containers, shall be
completely encompassed by a solid enclosure that is: architecturally compatible with the
main structure(s), equipped with a solid barrier access gate, and located on a paved
surface.
D. Outdoor refuse containers in industrial or commercial areas located within an area
completely encompassed by a site obscuring wall or fence and not visible from the street
shall not need a separate barrier enclosure unless it is a specific requirement of
conditional use or site plan approval.
E. In cases where a refuse container enclosure is required, the container shall be enclosed
by a six (6) foot high enclosure or solid barrier fence with a minimum gate opening of
nine (9) feet wide. The fence or enclosure shall have a minimum clearance of two (2)
feet from the refuse container to be stored within it.
14 - 8
Chapter 14 Supplementary Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
F. No refuse collection areas shall be permitted between the street and the front building
line except as shown on an approved site plan.
G. Temporary refuse collection containers on construction sites or other related uses shall
be exempt from barrier fencing.
14-14-112 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS - EXCEPTIONS
A. Where doubt exists as to the height of fences, hedges, buildings and other items
regulated by this Title, height limitations shall be measured from the averaged finished
grade of the front yard of a building or from the average finished grade of the yard in
which the fence, hedge or other such item is located.
B. The height limitations of this Code shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, or
domes not used for human occupancy, or to chimneys, ventilators, fire or parapet walls,
flag poles, sky lights, water tanks, silos, cornices without windows, antennas, radio
towers or properly screened mechanical appurtenances usually carried above the roof
level of a building unless otherwise stated in this Title; except in no case shall it be lawful
to construct, build, or establish a building, tree, smoke stack, chimney, flag pole, wire,
tower or other structures or appurtenances thereto which may constitute a hazard or
obstruction to navigation or landing and take-off of aircraft at a publicly used airport.
Regulations established by the Federal Aviation Agency shall be considered to be the
minimum acceptable standards for facilities in such an area.
C. A private power plant is not exempt from the height requirements of the Zone in which it
is located, and shall be considered an occupied structure for the purposes of calculating
height.
14-14-113 ADDITIONAL HEIGHT ALLOWED
Public and quasi-public buildings, when authorized in a zone, may be erected to a height
greater than the required height limit by conditional use permit if it is found that the additional
height is necessary for the operation of the facility and if the impact has been reasonably
mitigated.
14-14-114 STORAGE OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES - RESIDENTIAL ZONES
A. No truck, motor vehicle, or commercial trailer having a gross weight of twelve thousand
(12,000) pounds or more shall be stored or parked on any lot or parcel within any
residential zone.
B. No contracting and/or earth moving equipment shall be stored or parked on any lot or
parcel in any residential zone except as follows:
1. The equipment shall be completely stored within an enclosed structure,
2. The equipment shall not be used wholly or in part for any commercial activity or
enterprise,
3. Equipment may be parked on-site and outside of a structure if there is a current
14 - 9
Chapter 14 Supplementary Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
building permit issued for the property and the equipment relates to the actual
work being performed. Any equipment allowed by this provision shall be removed
immediately if it is not actively used, if the permit expires or upon final permit
approval.
C. Any vehicle parked or stored in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance, and may be removed summarily from public property by the City by towing,
and may be prosecuted criminally and/or civilly. The owner of any towed vehicle shall
have the right of a post-towing hearing as provided in Section 13-1-121 of the City Code.
14-14-115 SWIMMING POOLS
Any swimming pool in a single family residential zone shall be set back at least five (5) feet from
any property line and shall have at least five (5) feet of unobstructed area around the entire
perimeter. A pool located in any other zone may only be constructed after receiving site plan
approval, and the land use authority may require an increased setback depending upon the size
and occupancy of the pool. Each pool shall be surrounded by a substantial fence or wall
meeting the requirements of the Davis County Health Department and the IBC or IRCC. In
addition, any required fence or wall shall be equipped with a self-closing, self-latching device on
each gate. Any swimming pool in a multi-family development, motel, or hotel shall require
conditional use permit approval in addition to site plan approval.
14-14-116 SATELLITE TELEVISION ANTENNAS
A. Definitions. See Chapter 3 of this Title for the following definitions:
“COMMERCIAL SATELLITE ANTENNA”
“MINOR SATELLITE ANTENNA “
“HEIGHT OF ANTENNA “
B. Permit Required.
1. It shall be unlawful for any individual, firm, partnership, or corporation to install,
construct, reconstruct, or materially alter a commercial satellite television
antenna without first obtaining a building permit from the City of Bountiful.
2 Application for a building permit for a commercial antenna structure shall be
accompanied by construction drawings showing the proposed method of
installation, and a plot plan showing the proposed location of the antenna upon
the lot or property.
C. Standards for Residential and Institutional Districts.
1. All commercial satellite antennas shall be subject to the following provisions:
a. On interior lots, a commercial satellite television antenna:
(1) Shall not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet measured from the
highest point of the antenna to the ground.
14 - 10
Chapter 14 Supplementary Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
(2) Shall be located in the rear or side yard.
(3) Shall be located no closer to a public street than the main building
on a lot or parcel that has a reduced front yard setback.
(4) Shall be located at least five (5) feet from any rear or side property
line.
b. On corner lots, a satellite antenna:
(1) Shall not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet measured from the
highest point of the antenna to the ground.
(2) Shall not be permitted within the front yard, or the side yard that
fronts upon a public street.
(3) Shall be located at least five (5) feet from any rear or side property
line that is adjacent to the adjoining lot.
D. Standards for Commercial and Industrial Districts. Any commercial satellite antenna
installed, located, constructed, reconstructed, or materially altered as provided in this
Section, shall be subject to the following provisions:
1. The antenna shall not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet if mounted on the
ground.
2. The antenna shall not be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to any public street.
3. The antenna shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet to any residential
property line.
4. If used for advertising purposes, the antenna shall not be installed on any floor
and shall be deemed a sign governed by the sign regulations as provided in this
Title.
5. If an antenna is proposed to be mounted on the roof of a building the antenna
shall:
a. Not exceed the height limit established for the zone in which it is located.
b. Not be used for any advertising purposes.
c. Be screened from public view as per the requirements of this Title.
6. If an antenna is proposed to be located in any landscaped area, the antenna
shall:
a. Be located so as not to create any traffic safety or vision problems.
b. Be screened by shrubs and/or other landscaping features.
14 - 11
Chapter 14 Supplementary Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
14-14-117 SEMI-PRIVATE SWIMMING CLUBS AND RECREATION FACILITIES
The Planning Commission may permit the use of land in any residential zone for semi-private
swimming clubs or recreational facilities provided all of the following are met:
A. The facilities shall be owned and maintained by members with a minimum of seventyfive
percent (75%) of the membership being residents of the neighborhood or section of
the subdivision in which the recreational facility is to be located.
B. The property or proposed project area shall be of sufficient size to accommodate all
proposed facilities and still maintain all of the minimum yard setbacks for a principal
structure for the zone in which it is located.
C. The area to be developed into a recreational area shall be of such size and shape as not
to cause undue infringement on the privacy of the abutting residential areas and be in
keeping with the design of the neighborhood in which the recreational area is to be
situated.
D. The use of the property shall be for private recreational use by members, their families,
and guests. Under no condition may any admission fee be charged nor any type of retail
or business facility, vending machine, or other commercial use be allowed except as
specifically approved by the Planning Commission and listed on the conditional use
permit.
E. Accessory facilities other than standard shower and changing rooms (i.e., clubhouses)
shall not be allowed.
F. Any nighttime indoor or outdoor activity shall conform to the Bountiful City Noise
Ordinance. The facility shall close for any activity at 11:00 p.m.
G. A solid masonry or concrete block wall or substitute as approved by the Planning
Commission, shall be required around the entire recreational area to a height of not less
than six (6) feet. The fence across the front of the property shall be constructed no
closer to the front property line than the required front yard setback for the zone in which
it is located.
H. At least ten percent (10%) of the site area shall be landscaped, including any front yard,
side yard, and at least ten (10) feet depth at side and rear yard lines abutting a
residential zone or property. Landscaping of park strips shall be required in addition to
the on-site landscaping required.
I. The facility shall include an on-site parking area, and shall provide on-site parking
spaces equal to twenty percent (20%) of the capacity of the proposed recreational
facility, as determined by the Fire Marshall and/or Building Official.
J. Approval of any recreational facility by the Planning Commission under this section shall
be by Conditional Use Permit and any and all conditions as required by the Planning
Commission must be complied with by the owners of the facility or the approval may be
revoked.
14 - 12
Chapter 14 Supplementary Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
14-14-118 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER SITES
A. It is the finding of the City Council that:
1. It is in the best interests of the citizens of the City to have quality cellular wireless
telephone service available. This necessarily entails the erection of
telecommunications towers within the City limits.
2. It is the right of private enterprise to do business within the City, subject only to
reasonable regulation by the City. This includes the telecommunications
business.
3. It is in the best interests of the citizens that the telecommunications towers which
are constructed are:
a. as unobtrusive as possible in their location, size and construction;
b. as few in number as possible;
c. subject to such reasonable restrictions as may best minimize the impact
upon surrounding properties and the City as a whole; and
d. not placed in residential areas unless there is no other alternative.
4. It is in the best interests of telecommunications businesses to have access to
towers which are of the appropriate height and location to serve their reasonable
needs.
5. It is the policy of the City of Bountiful to make available to telecommunications
companies such sites as the City owns and which can reasonably serve the
needs of the companies, the citizens and the City.
6. The visual burden of towers is borne by the public, and it would be appropriate
for the revenues of those towers go to the public. Therefore, telecommunication
towers shall be located on publicly owned sites (i.e. lands owned by
governmental entities such as the City, schools, etc) where possible, and on
private property only when public properties serving the same area are not
available.
B. In order to serve current and reasonably foreseeable needs, any site approved by the
City, regardless of location, shall be subject to all of the following requirements:
1. The applicant shall consent in the lease to two co-locations (in addition to
applicant) on the same tower
2. The tower shall be constructed in such a manner as to accommodate three (3)
different services, meaning the original company's equipment and two colocations
on the same tower.
C. Any tower shall be located, designed and constructed in such a manner that it is:
14 - 13
Chapter 14 Supplementary Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
1. As unobtrusive as possible in its location,
2. Necessary for the telecom system to function properly,
3. subject to such reasonable restrictions as may best minimize the impact upon
surrounding properties and the City as a whole, and
4. not placed in residential areas unless there is no other alternative.
D. When later applications for towers are received, the applicants shall be required to:
1. co-locate on an existing tower, unless it can be shown by a preponderance of the
evidence that all existing sites are inadequate to serve that company's
reasonable needs due to location, height or other reason, and
2. pay reasonable compensation to the original tower company to fairly share past
and future costs.
14-14-119 SIGHT CLEARANCES ON CORNER LOTS
This section has been moved to, and consolidated with, the provisions for clear-view areas
found in Chapter 16 of this Title.
14-14-120 RESERVED
14-14-121 RESERVED
14-14-122 TEMPORARY CLASSROOMS AT PRIVATE SCHOOLS
The Administrative Committee may issue a temporary use permit to allow the placement or use
of temporary classroom facilities on private school property. The time limit for the temporary use
shall be established at the time of approval. Any permit without an approved time limit or that
exceeds the approved limit may be revoked by the City immediately.
14-14-123 FILLING, GRADING, AND EXCAVATING
No lot or parcel may be filled, excavated, graded, or otherwise disturbed without an excavation
or building permit issued by Bountiful City, except for the following:
A. Soil disturbance that occurs during the natural course of bona fide agricultural
production.
B. Landscaping that involves the disturbance of a total of ten (10) cubic yards of material or
less.
14-14-124 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT
A. Purpose: The city recognizes that accessory dwelling units (ADUs) in single-family
residential zones can be an important tool in the overall housing plan for the City. The
14 - 14
Chapter 14 Supplementary Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
purposes of the ADU standards of this Code are to:
1. Allow opportunities for property owners to provide social or personal support for
family members where independent living is desirable;
2. Provide for affordable housing opportunities;
3. Make housing units available to moderate income people who might otherwise have
difficulty finding homes within the city;
4. Provide opportunities for additional income to offset rising housing costs;
5. Develop housing units in single-family neighborhoods that are appropriate for people
at a variety of stages in the life cycle; and
6. Preserve the character of single-family neighborhoods by providing standards
governing development of ADUs.
B. An accessory dwelling unit shall only be approved as a conditional use.
C. An accessory dwelling unit shall not be approved, and shall be deemed unlawful, unless
it meets all of the following criteria:
1. An accessory dwelling unit shall be conditionally permitted only within a singlefamily
residential zone, and shall not be permitted in any other zone.
2. It is unlawful to allow, construct, or reside in an accessory dwelling unit within a
duplex or multi-family residential building or property.
3. It is unlawful to reside in, or allow to reside in, an accessory dwelling unit that has
not received a conditional use permit or without written authorization from the
Bountiful City Planning Department.
4. A maximum of one (1) accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted as a conditional
use on any lot or parcel in a single-family zone.
5. It is unlawful to construct, locate, or otherwise situate an accessory dwelling unit
on a lot or parcel of land that does not contain a habitable single-family dwelling.
6. A deed restriction limiting the use of a property to a single-family use, prepared
and signed by the Bountiful City Planning Director and all owners of the property
on which an accessory dwelling unit is located, shall be recorded with the Davis
County Recorder’s Office prior to occupancy of the accessory dwelling unit. If a
building permit is required, then said deed restriction shall be recorded prior to
issuance of the building permit.
7. The property owner, which shall include titleholders and contract purchasers, must
occupy either the principal unit or the ADU, but not both, as their permanent
residence and at no time receive rent for the owner occupied unit. Application for an
ADU shall include proof of owner occupancy as evidenced by voter registration,
14 - 15
Chapter 14 Supplementary Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
vehicle registration, driver's license, county assessor records or similar means.
8. Separate utility meters shall not be permitted for the accessory dwelling unit.
9. Any property and any structure that contains an approved accessory dwelling
unit shall be designed and maintained in such a manner that the property
maintains the appearance of a single-family residential use. A separate entrance
to the ADU shall not be allowed on the front or corner lot side yard. Any separate
entrance shall be located to the side or rear of the principal residence.
10. It is unlawful to construct an accessory dwelling unit, or to modify a structure to
include an accessory dwelling unit, without a building permit and a conditional
use permit.
11. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for both the primary residential use
and the accessory dwelling unit, and any driveway and parking area shall be in
compliance with this Title. In no case shall fewer than four (4) total off street parking
spaces be provided with at least 2 of the spaces provided in a garage. Any additional
occupant vehicles shall be parked off-street in City Code compliant parking areas.
D. An attached accessory dwelling unit shall be deemed unlawful and shall not be occupied
unless all of the following criteria are met:
1. Shall not occupy more than forty percent (40%) of the total floor area square
footage of the primary dwelling structure,
2. Shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the buildable land of the lot,
3. Shall be at least three hundred fifty (350) sq. ft. in size,
4. Shall meet all of the requirements of the International Building Code relating to
dwelling units,
5. An attached accessory dwelling unit shall meet all of the required setbacks for a
primary dwelling,
6. Shall not have a room used for sleeping smaller than one hundred twenty (120)
square feet, exclusive of any closet or other space.
E. A detached accessory dwelling unit shall meet all of the above criteria, plus the
following:
1. Shall require a conditional use permit, reviewed and approved by the Bountiful
City Administrative Committee.
2. Shall not be located on a lot with less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet
buildable land.
14 - 16
Chapter 14 Supplementary Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
3. Shall be configured so that any exterior doors, stairs, windows, or similar features
are located as far away from adjoining properties as is reasonably possible to
provide privacy to those properties.
4. Shall meet all of the setbacks required of a detached accessory structure
requiring a conditional use permit.
14-14-125 PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENTS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
A public utility easement located on private property shall not be used for a private service
lateral without the permission of the affected property owner. A private service lateral is any
utility connection beyond the trunk line, meter box, transformer, manhole, service riser, or other
main transmission line, that serves a single property, residence or user.
14-14-126 PRIVATE POWER PLANTS
A. A “Private Power Plant” is any device or combination of devices not owned and operated
by a regulated utility company, which convert mechanical or chemical energy into
electricity, or solar energy into any other form of energy. A private power plant with a
peak power generation capacity of 10 Watts/12v/500mAmp (or less) is exempt from the
provisions of this Section. A private power plant, including a windmill or wind turbine,
shall not be permitted within Bountiful City limits, with the following exceptions:
1. A back-up power generator running on unleaded gasoline, diesel, natural gas,
propane or hydrogen fuel cell, rated for a single structure or building lot, located
in accordance with the requirements of the zone in which it is located.
2. A photovoltaic cell array or other passive solar energy system located in
accordance with the requirements for occupied structures for the zone in which it
is located.
B. A private power plant is not exempt from the height requirements of the Zone in which it
is located and shall be considered an occupied structure for the purposes of calculating
height.
C. Solar energy design standards and requirements
1. Solar energy panels or collectors that are mounted to the roof shall:
a. Not extend beyond the roofline.
b. Not reflect sunlight onto neighboring windows or rights-of-way.
c. Not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total roof area.
d. Shall be maintained in good condition.
2. Prior to installation, use, and connection to the grid, the following shall be
required:
14 - 17
Chapter 14 Supplementary Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
a. A Building Permit issued by the City for the proposed installation.
b. Power Department approval of the application for net metering.
c. Power Department approval of the physical installation.
15 - 1
Chapter 15 Design Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 15
DESIGN STANDARDS FOR NON-SINGLE FAMILY DEVELOPMENT
14-15-101 PURPOSE
14-15-102 SCOPE
14-15-103 DEFINITIONS
14-15-104 ARCHITECTURE
14-15-105 SITE DESIGN
14-15-106 OFF-STREET PARKING - LAYOUT
14-15-107 OFF-STREET PARKING - LIGHTING
14-15-101 PURPOSE
The purpose of these design standards and regulations is to preserve property values, enhance
the economic viability and aesthetic value of commercial and investment properties, to provide a
quality environment for both citizens and visitors, and to maintain Bountiful City as the “City of
Beautiful Homes and Gardens.”
14-15-102 SCOPE
Any commercial development and/or any other type of development that requires site plan
review shall be subject to the standards and regulations of this Chapter. Such standards and
regulations are intended to be in addition to existing standards and regulations of the underlying
zone of the property and other applicable regulations of this Title.
A. This Chapter establishes two kinds of design criteria: design standards and design
guidelines.
1. Design standards are required in addition to other standards set forth in this Title
and are indicated by the verb “shall.” In the event of conflict between this section
and other applicable provisions of this Title, the more restrictive provision shall
apply.
2. It is the intent of the City that every development subject to this section be
designed in conformity to the purpose and requirements of this Code. However,
the City also recognizes that it cannot anticipate all possible circumstances, nor
the best means for dealing with them, in the preparation and adoption of these
regulations. For example, criteria established herein may be more germane to
larger projects than to smaller ones, depending on the individual characteristics
of the site, such as size, configuration, topography and location. Therefore, the
approving authority, unless expressly stated to the contrary in this chapter, shall
have reasonable discretion in implementing the purpose of this chapter by
modifying both mandatory and recommended criteria as individual circumstances
may merit. In deviating from the adopted standards, it shall be the responsibility
of the applicant to show why the requirements would be an unreasonable
burden, and how the project would still meet the purpose and intent of the Code.
In the same vein, the approving authority may also require that certain provisions
15 - 2
Chapter 15 Design Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
of this Code, which are not mandatory, be included in a project based on
individual circumstances.
14-15-103 DEFINITIONS
See Chapter 3 of this Title for the following definitions:
“HARDSCAPE”
“SOFTSCAPE”
14-15-104 ARCHITECTURE
A. Articulation
1. A building should reflect a human scale and be inviting to the public. Large
buildings should be stepped, both vertically and horizontally, to break-up the
building mass and provide aesthetic relief.
2. Buildings shall be accessible for pedestrians and public transit users, not just for
people driving private automobiles.
a. Building entrances shall be identifiable and directly accessible from public
sidewalks via on-site pedestrian walkways (drive aisles and other
vehicular accesses shall not be considered pedestrian walkways).
b. Pedestrian walkways shall have at least five (5) feet of unobstructed
width, and shall be part of an approved pedestrian circulation plan.
3. All buildings shall have proper security lighting, and developers should consider
other security measures such as security hardware, surveillance equipment, and
security-oriented building designs.
B. Public Amenities.
1. Overhangs and canopies should be integrated into the building design so as to
enhance pedestrian walkways.
2. Comfortable and attractive amenities such as benches, tables, drinking fountains,
trash receptacles, information kiosks, plazas, fountains, etc., should be provided
for public enjoyment and comfort.
3. Where necessary, bus shelters should be incorporated into the building and/or
site design and meet the criteria of the applicable transit authority.
4. All building access and site amenities should be accessible to the physically
disabled and shall comply with applicable provisions of the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
C. Colors and Materials.
1. All applications for non-single family residential site plan review or construction
15 - 3
Chapter 15 Design Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
within the Bountiful City shall include a storyboard or architectural renderings
indicating the colors and materials to be used on-site. Proposed materials should
harmonize with existing, surrounding development.
2. Building exteriors shall consist primarily of decorative cement block, brick, glass,
stucco, stone or similar maintenance-free materials.
a. At least twenty-five percent (25%) of the primary façade shall have
upgraded architectural features such as canopies, pillars, archways and
other treatments.
b. At least fifteen percent (15%) of a secondary facade (the façade facing a
non-primary frontage) shall be of upgraded architectural features.
c. At least five percent (5%) of all other facades shall be of upgraded
architectural features.
3. Fencing for storage or sales areas shall be of wrought iron, wood, vinyl, cement
block or similar construction up to six (6) feet in height.
a. For non-residential areas, fence height may be extended beyond six (6)
feet for areas which require additional security subject to the issuance of
a conditional use permit or through the site plan approval process. The
additional fencing shall use the same materials or be chain link covered
with screen-fabric.
b. In fence runs longer than fifty (50) linear feet, pillars and/or similar
architectural features shall be constructed at periodic intervals to provide
visual relief.
D. Screening.
1. All rooftop equipment and satellite dishes shall be screened so as to not be
visible from the nearest public street and shall be integrated with the building
design. Screening should be part of the articulation of the building and should not
appear to be an afterthought. All screening shall be architecturally compatible
with the primary structure.
2. Screening devices and landscaping shall be used to mitigate the visual impact of
utility equipment and service areas. All service areas shall be screened to
conceal trash containers, loading docks, transformers, backflow preventers and
other mechanical and/or electrical equipment.
3. Service areas and other screened areas shall have proper security lighting.
14-15-105 SITE DESIGN
A. Overall Design Concepts
1. Dedicated walkways, plazas and other pedestrian oriented hardscape areas may
be included as landscaping, provided that they do not exceed thirty percent
15 - 4
Chapter 15 Design Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
(30%) of the required minimum landscaping requirement.
2. The landscaping plan of each site shall be unified both internally and externally,
and relate to the larger context of the surrounding community.
3. The landscaping plan shall include a pedestrian circulation element that shows
interconnectivity with surrounding sidewalks, urban trails, and surrounding uses.
The city encourages appropriate pedestrian connections to adjacent
neighborhoods.
4. The size and spacing of landscape elements should be consistent with the size
of the project and should relate to the structures and the streetscape. No
landscape element may be constructed, erected, or otherwise placed on a site
without City approval.
5. Proper landscape design shall be utilized to mitigate the visual impact of all site
utility elements such as overhead power lines, transformers, meter boxes,
backflow preventers, fire protection devices, etc.
6. Trees overhanging pedestrian walkways shall be pruned to have a general
canopy clearance of at least seven (7) feet.
7. Trees overhanging drive areas shall be pruned to have a general canopy
clearance of at least eleven (11) feet.
B. Site Grading
1. Site design should minimize the removal of mature trees and other existing
mature vegetation. Where removal is necessary, mature trees should be
salvaged or replaced on a three (3) for one (1) basis. Any trees prohibited by
resolution, Code or statute shall be removed and not be replaced.
2. Abrupt or unnatural changes in grade may create barriers or disrupt drainage
patterns. Proposed grading should be designed to take advantage of the natural
grade and land features.
3. Steep slopes, generally 3:1 or greater, shall be stabilized with vegetation,
retaining walls, or other appropriate measures. Sites shall be designed to
minimize erosion.
4. Landscape plans should preserve and incorporate natural land features such as
streams, washes, springs, etc., into the overall site plan.
C. Drainage
1. Surface water, site drainage, and storm water detention should be integrated with
overall landscape design. Whenever possible, detention areas should be
designed as usable open space.
2. Drainage requirements shall be assessed based on City drainage standards and
individual site characteristics.
15 - 5
Chapter 15 Design Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
D. Groundcover (Living and Nonliving).
1. Future development sites should receive temporary landscaping treatments to
provide dust and weed control and to prevent erosion.
2. Less than seventy-five (75) percent of softscaped areas should be planted in turf
or high water-use plants. Functional turf areas in schools, multiple-family
residential developments, golf courses and other recreational areas shall be
exempt from this requirement.
E. Plant Materials.
1. Plant materials shall be selected according to the criteria set forth in Title 14
Chapter 16.
2. Pedestrian safety and comfort should be considered when selecting trees and
plant material.
3. Water conservation and community image should be important criteria for plant
material selection.
F. Water Elements.
1. Fountains and other water features should be sited and designed so that they are
efficient users of water.
2. Filtered backwash effluent should be discharged into landscaped areas
whenever possible.
G. Art and Furnishings.
1. If public art is used, it should be integrated into the overall design of a project.
2. Lighting fixtures and illumination should compliment a structure and be of similar
design and character as the project's building components.
3. Street furniture and related features are encouraged.
H. Maintenance.
1. Projects should demonstrate that maintenance factors have been considered in
the landscape design.
2. Irrigation systems should be designed to minimize maintenance and water
consumption.
3. Phased developments shall indicate a mechanism for dust, weed, and debris
control on undeveloped portions of the site and shall ensure continuing
compliance.
15 - 6
Chapter 15 Design Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
14-15-106 OFF-STREET PARKING - LAYOUT
A. Surface Parking Design.
1. Five percent (5%) of the gross parking surface area shall be of dispersed interior
landscaping, designed so as to reduce the Aheat island@ effect and to enhance
the aesthetics of a parking area. The following are acceptable interior
landscaping designs. See Figure 14-15-106 (conceptual parking layout).
a. Five (5) feet by five (5) feet tree diamonds placed not more than six (6)
parking spaces apart and located at the intersection of parking space
striping. Tree diamonds shall be used only with ninety (90) degree
parking spaces.
b. Minimum five (5) foot wide landscaped medians with trees planted forty
(40) feet apart; or
c. Other similar designs that disperse landscaping throughout a parking
area, to be determined by the Planning Commission.
2. Parking areas should be buffered from adjacent residential property and
screened from streets so automobiles are not visible below the average headlight
height. Screening methods may include landscaped berms, low walls and
hedges.
3. Access drives, internal circulation drives, parking areas, and pedestrian
walkways shall be designed to provide safety and convenience for both motorists
and pedestrians and to ensure access for the physically disabled. Areas where
pedestrian walkways cross driveways shall be constructed of stamped and/or
raised concrete, or of other material and design so as to differentiate the area as
a pedestrian/vehicle interface.
4. In projects greater than 1 acre, every parking space should be no greater than
one hundred fifty (150) feet from a sidewalk leading to a building entrance. In
projects less than 1 acre, every stall should be within fifty (50) feet of a sidewalk
leading to building entrance.
5. Joint use of parking is encouraged in order to reduce trips. Access to, and the
location of, new parking areas should relate to adopted area plans, planned
parking in the area, or to existing area parking schemes. The Planning
Commission may increase or reduce the minimum required number of parking
spaces required in Title 14 Chapter 18 based on City approved parking studies.
6. The number of curb cuts (street accesses) should be minimized and pedestrian
access enhanced.
7. Site lighting should be aesthetically attractive, of pedestrian scale, and provide
pedestrians with a sense of security.
8. All sites shall meet the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
15 - 7
Chapter 15 Design Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
B. Overall Design Concepts.
1. Parking lot design shall consider development on adjacent sites. The City may
require cross access connections/easements to improve traffic circulation and to
enhance public safety.
2. Traffic circulation patterns should direct commercial traffic onto arterial streets
and not local/neighborhood streets. Multiple-family residential traffic should be
directed onto collector streets. The City may deny access onto a local/residential
street if access to a collector or arterial street is available.
3. A site plan should include landscaped buffers that separate pedestrian and
vehicular traffic.
14-15-107 OFF-STREET PARKING - LIGHTING
A. Lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking spaces, vehicle maneuvering areas, or
loading/unloading areas shall conform to the following standards:
1. Lighting shall be provided at all driveway entrances.
2. Light poles shall be set on pillars or placed in landscaped areas to minimize
direct contact with vehicles.
2. To reduce light pollution, lighting systems shall obscure the lamp image to direct
light where needed.
3. Luminaire mounting height shall reasonably match the scale of the surrounding
buildings.
5. Noise created by electromagnetic ballasts shall be kept to a minimum and shall
not be noticeable above ambient background levels.
6. All parking and drive areas shall have minimum illuminance levels as follows:
a. Commercial uses: 0.5 horizontal footcandles, 0.25 vertical footcandles.
b. Residential, public facility and industrial uses: 0.2 horizontal footcandles,
0.1 vertical footcandles.
7. Lighting shall be arranged or directed so as to reflect the light away from
adjacent properties and to prevent glare for street traffic. The intensity of light at
adjoining residential property shall not exceed 0.1 footcandles.
B. Lighting Plans.
1. Lighting plans submitted for review shall include the location and height of all
light poles.
2. Designers of lighting plans shall consider:
15 - 8
Chapter 15 Design Standards Ord 2020.01.docx
a. Shadow effects of trees, signs, buildings, screen walls or other fixed
objects.
b. Sufficiently illuminating the entire off-street parking area to allow
pedestrians and motorists to see potential danger in their peripheral
vision, to promote pedestrian and vehicle safety, and to prevent assault,
theft and vandalism.
Figure 14-15-106
16 - 1
Chapter 16 Landscaping and Fencing Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 16
LANDSCAPING AND FENCING
14-16-101 PURPOSE
14-16-102 APPLICATION
14-16-103 DEFINITIONS
14-16-104 PLAN SUBMITTAL
14-16-105 PLAN IMPLEMENTATION
14-16-106 INSTALLATION BOND
14-16-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS
14-16-108 CLEAR-VIEW AREAS
14-16-109 TYPES AND LOCATION OF LANDSCAPING
14-16-110 FENCE, WALL AND LIGHTING STANDARDS FOR A SINGLE-FAMILY OR
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING
14-16-111 FENCE, WALL AND LIGHTING STANDARDS IN ALL OTHER
DEVELOPMENTS
14-16-112 GRADE DIFFERENTIAL
14-16-113 VACANT LOTS
14-16-114 NONCOMPLYING WALLS AND FENCES
14-16-115 XERISCAPE STANDARDS
14-16-116 BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRICAL FENCE RESTRICTIONS
14-16-117 TREE SELECTION LIST
14-16-101 PURPOSE
This Chapter establishes general standards for the manner in which landscaping, fences, walls,
and other types of screening and buffering devices shall be installed and maintained. Other
sections of this Title may contain specific criteria that supersede the provisions of this Chapter.
14-16-102 APPLICATION
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all parcels of land located within Bountiful City,
unless specifically stated otherwise in this Title.
14-16-103 DEFINITIONS
See Chapter 3 of this Title for the following definitions:
“WALL” or “FENCE”
“SCREENING DEVICE”
“BUFFERING DEVICE”
“HEIGHT OF WALLS AND FENCES”
“OPEN-STYLE FENCE”
“XERISCAPE”
14-16-104 PLAN SUBMITTAL
Any site plan submittal required by this Title shall include a landscaping plan that includes:
16 - 2
Chapter 16 Landscaping and Fencing Ord 2020.01.docx
A. The location and type of landscaped areas,
B. An area calculation table showing the size and percentage of landscaping and
impervious surface areas,
C. A list of existing and proposed landscape materials/plants,
D. The location of walls, fences and other screening and buffering devices,
E. The location and design of a pressurized irrigation system.
F. Landscape and/or sprinkler plans shall be prepared by a Landscape Architect licensed
to practice in the State of Utah. The City may waive this requirement for projects less
than one (1) acre in size.
14-16-105 PLAN IMPLEMENTATION
In administering the implementation of an approved landscaping plan, the Planning Director
may allow substitutions for approved plants, landscape features and other amenities consistent
with the intent of this Chapter, but only if the existing conditions of the site or the availability of
the building materials make it not possible to implement the plan as approved.
14-16-106 INSTALLATION BOND
Landscaping, sprinkling system, walls, fences, screening structures, walks, parking areas and
other on-site improvements shall be installed and bonded for in accordance with the provisions
of this Title and the City Code.
14-16-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS
The following shall apply to all property within the City of Bountiful:
A. Each property owner and/or occupant shall provide and continuously maintain on-site
landscaping, fencing, walls and other required improvements equal to the minimum
requirements of this Title and as shown on an approved site plan.
B. Any dead vegetation or growth shall be removed immediately and shall not be allowed to
accumulate on the property.
C. Each property owner and/or occupant shall provide and continuously maintain
landscaping within park strip areas (between the curb and sidewalk), except for
approved driveways, walkways and utility service areas. Asphalt or concrete paving in
place of landscaping between the sidewalk and curb is prohibited.
D. Any developed property shall have a pressurized irrigation system that shall be installed
and continuously maintained in all landscape areas.
E. It is unlawful to strip, excavate or otherwise remove top soil from a site unless a permit
allowing the activity has been issued by the Engineering Department.
16 - 3
Chapter 16 Landscaping and Fencing Ord 2020.01.docx
F. Any required improvement, including landscaping, shall be installed within six (6) months
of the date of the occupancy permit or of the equivalent final inspection.
14-16-108 CLEAR-VIEW AREAS
A. For the purpose of providing adequate vision of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, a clearview
area shall be maintained at the intersection of every street, whether public or
private, and at the intersection of every driveway with a public or private street. The
clear-view provisions are considered life-safety standards and shall supersede any
conflicting provisions of this Title.
B. No provision of this section shall be construed to allow the continuance of any
nonconforming tree, shrub, plant or plant growth, fence, wall, other screening material,
or other obstruction which interferes with the safety of pedestrians or vehicle traffic.
C. The clear-view area for a street intersection is the area of land determined by measuring
forty (40) feet from the point of juncture of street curb lines, and then connecting the
termini of those lines forming a triangle that encompasses a portion of the street right-ofway
and the adjoining lot. Within that clear-view area, the following shall apply:
1. Solid fences, walls, signs, sight obscuring vegetation, and/or other sight
obscuring devices shall not exceed two (2) feet in height above the level of the
curb.
2. Open style fences shall not exceed four (4) feet in height above the level of the
curb.
3. Tree trunks shall not be located within the clear-view area; however, tree
canopies may extend into the clear view area if they are trimmed at least seven
(7) feet above the elevation of the sidewalk and eleven (11) feet above the
elevation of the street. It is unlawful to allow any vegetation or other growth to
block any traffic sign, traffic signal, street light, or other public safety device,
regardless of whether it is located in a clear-view area or not.
4. No sign shall be allowed in the clear-view area unless it is specifically permitted
by this Title and it is determined by the City Engineer that it is not a safety
hazard.
5. No obstruction of any sort which interferes with the safety of pedestrians or traffic
shall be allowed within the clear-view area unless it is specifically permitted by
this Title and it is determined by the City Engineer that it is not a safety hazard.
D. The clear-view area for the intersection of a driveway and a street shall be determined
by first establishing the point of intersection of the driveway edge and the street property
line, then measuring ten (10) feet along the property line away from the driveway, and
ten (10) feet along the edge of the driveway in toward the property. A line is then drawn
from the termini of the two lines, forming a triangle. This is accomplished on both sides
of the driveway. Within the triangles and the area between them, the following shall
apply:
1. An open style fence shall be a maximum of four (4) feet in height.
16 - 4
Chapter 16 Landscaping and Fencing Ord 2020.01.docx
2. Any wall or other type of solid fence or sight obscuring growth shall be a
maximum of three (3) feet in height.
3. Tree trunks shall not be located within this clear view triangle; however, tree
canopies may extend into the clear view area if they are trimmed at least seven
(7) feet above the sidewalk and eleven (11) feet above the street.
4. Tree canopies or other growth shall not block signs or signals.
5. Sight obscuring growth shall be a maximum of three (3) feet in height in the
parkstrip.
6. The driveway clear-view fencing provisions may not be required on corner and
double frontage lots for a secondary drive access that is gated, locked and that
accesses the rear yard, if it is determined by the Planning Director that the drive
access is not a primary access.
14-16-109 TYPES AND LOCATION OF LANDSCAPING
With the exception of a single-family or a two-family dwelling on an individual lot, the
landscaping on a lot or parcel shall meet the following criteria:
A. Each tree shall be planted and staked in accordance with the Standard Tree Planting
Detail of this Title.
B. The first ten (10) feet of yard setback adjacent to any street shall be landscaped, except
for approved driveways, walkways, and utility service areas.
C. Street trees shall be required along each street and any reverse frontage conditions.
Each tree shall be a minimum two (2) inch caliper and shall be planted at a minimum
spacing of one (1) tree for every thirty-five (35) lineal feet of street frontage or fraction
thereof over twenty (20) feet.
D. In addition to required street trees, each lot or parcel shall include the following:
1. At least one (1) ornamental tree of at least one (1) inch caliper, and/or one (1)
screening tree of at least two (2) inch caliper, for each
a. Five hundred (500) square feet of required landscaping in commercial
developments that are two (2.0) acres or larger, or
b. Seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of required landscaping in all
multifamily developments and all commercial developments that are less
than 2.0 acres in size; and
2. At least one (1) shrub, minimum five (5) gallon, for each two hundred (200)
square feet of required landscaping.
3. Up to half of the required shrubs may be substituted for trees on a ten to one (10
to 1) basis.
16 - 5
Chapter 16 Landscaping and Fencing Ord 2020.01.docx
4. Screening trees as indicated in the Tree Selection List of this Chapter shall be
planted at thirty (30) foot intervals inside property lines of each multi-family,
commercial, institutional, or industrial use located within twenty (20) feet of a
single-family residential development or zone.
14-16-110 FENCE, WALL AND LIGHTING STANDARDS FOR A SINGLE-FAMILY OR
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING
The following shall apply to any single-family or two-family dwelling on an individual lot:
A. On an interior lot, a fence located within a minimum rear and/or side yard setback shall
be:
1. A maximum of six (6) feet in height if the fence is solid and/or otherwise site
obscuring.
2. A maximum of eight (8) feet in height if the fence is “open style” (at least 75%
open and as further defined by this Title).
3. A maximum of eight (8) feet in height if the lower section of the fence is solid for
a maximum of six (6) feet in height and then “open style” (at least 75% open and
as further defined by this Title) for the remaining vertical distance.
B. In the minimum front yard setback area, an “open style” fence shall be a maximum of
four (4) feet in height, and any wall or other type of fence shall be a maximum of three
(3) feet in height, except as further restricted in a clear-view area.
C. On a corner lot and on any lot that does not qualify as an interior lot, a street side yard
and/or street rear yard may be enclosed by a fence to the same extent as a minimum
rear yard or minimum side yard setback on interior lot, except for any clear-view area.
D. A fence enclosing a recreational facility (whether private or public), such as a tennis
court, swimming pool, ball diamond, etc., may be allowed up to ten (10) feet in height, as
long as it is “open style” and not site obscuring, is located at least five (5) feet away from
the property line, and is not within the minimum front yard setback area. A fence greater
than ten (10) feet in height and/or closer than five (5) feet to a property line may be
permitted with a conditional use permit or through the site plan review process if the
fence is part of a new project. A fence abutting the Interstate freeway system may be
erected to a height not exceeding eight (8) feet on the property line adjacent to the
freeway right-of-way.
E. Outdoor lighting shall be directed downward by means of prismatic lens, deflector, or
other shading device to avoid projecting onto adjacent properties or streets. No flashing
lights shall be allowed except for seasonal decoration allowed by this Title.
14-16-111 FENCE, WALL AND LIGHTING STANDARDS IN ALL OTHER
DEVELOPMENTS
With the exception of a single-family or two-family dwelling on an individual lot, the following
shall apply to any lot or parcel within Bountiful City:
16 - 6
Chapter 16 Landscaping and Fencing Ord 2020.01.docx
A. A wall or fence shall be a maximum of six (6) feet in height, with the exception that any
wall or solid fence located within twenty (20) feet of a public street shall be a maximum
of three (3) feet in height, and any “open style” fence located within twenty feet of a
public street shall be a maximum of four (4) feet in height.
B. Any outdoor storage area shall be screened from view by a minimum six (6) foot high
wall constructed of, or finished with, materials to match or compliment the main building
material of the site.
C. Any roof mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from public view by a
parapet wall or similar device that is no lower in height than six (6) inches below the
height of the mechanical equipment on the exposed side or sides. No chain link fencing,
with or without slats, shall be allowed as a screening device for such equipment.
D. Any loading or delivery facility shall be screened from street view by a six (6) foot high
wall constructed of wood, brick, vinyl, masonry, or similar material as approved by the
land use authority.
E. A solid screening device or wall of masonry, wood, vinyl or similar material shall be
constructed along property lines which are located within twenty (20) feet of a residential
dwelling or zone. Such wall shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height, except for areas
within twenty (20) feet of a public street property line, where it shall be the maximum
height allowed in a single-family residential zone.
F. A wall of six (6) feet in height shall be required along the rear lot line of a reverse
frontage lot. In conjunction with a subdivision plat or Planned Unit Development a fence
along the rear lot line of a reverse frontage lot may have a maximum height of eight (8)
feet with specific approval of the Planning Commission. Such walls shall be constructed
of masonry, wood, vinyl, or similar material as determined by the land use authority. Any
street tree or landscaping element required by this Title shall be installed between the
wall and the public street improvement.
G. The exterior boundary of a mobile home park shall be provided with a masonry, wood or
vinyl wall having a minimum height of five (5) feet and a maximum height of six (6) feet
and shall be designed in an irregular or undulating pattern to create an attractive
appearance, as determined by the land use authority. The mobile home park owner and
a lessee shall landscape the land between the wall and public street improvements with
street trees and other landscape materials and shall maintain the landscaping
continuously as required by this Title.
H. Outdoor lighting shall be directed downward by means of prismatic lens, deflector or
other shading device to avoid projecting onto adjacent properties or streets. No flashing
lights shall be allowed except for seasonal decoration allowed by this Title.
14-16-112 GRADE DIFFERENTIAL
In instances where there is a grade differential along a property line separating two (2) lots as a
result of a retaining wall or topographic feature, a fence, hedge, wall, or other permitted
screening device may be erected to the maximum height permitted on either side of the property
line. Also, in instances where a fence runs along a sloped property line, a pre-manufactured
rectangular fence panel of up to ten (10) feet in length or less may be installed horizontally to
16 - 7
Chapter 16 Landscaping and Fencing Ord 2020.01.docx
vertical posts such that one end of the panel is at grade level, and the other end is no more than
two-tenths (0.2) of a foot above grade level for each linear foot of fence panel. The area
beneath the bottom of the fence and the ground may be filled or remain open, and the panel
height may be the maximum permitted on either side of the property line.
14-16-113 VACANT LOTS
Minimum yard setback areas apply to each lot or parcel, regardless of whether it is vacant or
developed. Therefore, fencing standards shall be applied to a vacant or undeveloped lot in the
same manner as to developed land.
14-16-114 NONCOMPLYING WALLS AND FENCES
A noncomplying wall, fence, landscaping element, or related site feature shall be considered a
noncomplying site element and shall not be reconstructed except as permitted under the
procedures for noncomplying sites as set forth in the Administration and Procedures Chapter of
this Title.
14-16-115 XERISCAPE STANDARDS
The following are the minimum standards for xeriscaping any parkstrip or other landscape area
located within a public right-of-way:
A. There shall be at least one (1) street tree for every forty (40) linear feet of frontage, or
fraction thereof.
B. At least fifty percent (50%) of the required landscape area shall be in live vegetation.
C. Live vegetation shall be distributed throughout the landscape area, and shall not be
clustered or segregated.
D. Bark, lawn clippings, chipped wood, and similar loose materials are not permitted.
E. Decorative rock material shall be a minimum of one (1) inch aggregate, and shall not
exceed the height of the sidewalk nor the top back of curb. Such material shall be at
least three (3) inches deep and shall be placed completely on top of a weed fabric
barrier that allows the permeation of water.
F. White quartz rock, lava rock, and gravel or any other material that approximates the
color of concrete, are not permitted.
G. Any area of xeriscape shall be improved with a drip irrigation system or similar
permanent irrigation system that covers the entire area.
H. Any individual, corporation, or other entity that xeriscapes an area within a public rightof-
way shall be responsible for any damage caused by rocks or other materials that
migrate onto a sidewalk, street, storm drain or other public facility, regardless of how
such migration occurs.
16 - 8
Chapter 16 Landscaping and Fencing Ord 2020.01.docx
14-16-116 BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRICAL FENCE RESTRICTIONS
A. Barbed Wire. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or cause to be erected or to
maintain any barbed wire fence or any similar device on any residential property. Where
allowed, any barbed wire fence or similar device shall be deemed unlawful unless it is
attached at the top of a fence or similar structure at a height not less than six (6) feet
above the ground. In such cases, no more than three (3) strands of barbed wire,
maximum of six (6) inches apart each, strung tightly and not coiled, shall be allowed and
not be included in the overall height requirement of the fence.
B. Electrical Fences. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or cause to be erected or to
maintain any device on a fence with an electrical charge.
14-16-117 TREE SELECTION LIST
The following trees in Table 14-16-117a shall be approved for use in areas of landscaping
regulated by this Title. As new tree varieties are continuously being developed, the City
recognizes that it is not possible for this list to contain every derivation or subspecies of tree
available. Therefore, the land use authority may allow a substitution if it is found that the
proposed tree is similar in size, growth pattern, durability, desirability and impact as a tree
contained in the approved list.
Table 14-16-117a
BOTANICAL NAME
COMMON NAME
TREE
TYPE
1 = Ornamental Tree
2 = Screening Tree
3 = Street Tree
Acer Ginnala Amur Maple 1 2 -
Acer Platanoides Norway Maple 1 - 3
Acer Platanoides Columnare Pyramidal
Norway Maple
1 2 3
Acer Platanoides
Crimson King
Crimson King
Norway Maple
1 2 3
Acer Platanoides
Emerald Queen
Emerald Queen
Norway Maple
1 - 3
Acer Platanoides
Royal Red
Royal Red
Norway Maple
1 2 3
Acer Rubrum Red Leaf Maple 1 - -
Acer Rubrum Red Sunset Red Sunset Maple 1 - 3
Albizia Julibrissin Rubra Mimosa Silk Tree 1 - -
Betula Papyrifera Canoe Birch 1 2 3
16 - 9
Chapter 16 Landscaping and Fencing Ord 2020.01.docx
Betulaplatyphilia Japonica Japanese
White Birch
1 2 -
Catalpa Bungii Umbrella Catalpa 1 2 3
Celtis Occidentals Common Hackberry 1 2 3
Cercis Canadensis Eastern Redbud 1 2 -
Crategus Lavellei Carrier Hawthorn 1 2 3
Cretageus Phaenopyrum Washington Hawthorne 1 2 3
Ginkgo Bilboa
Autumn Gold
Autumn Gold Ginkgo 1 - 3
Gleditsia Triacanthos Imperial Imperial
Honeylocust
1 - 3
Gleditsia Triacanthos Shademaster Shademaster Honeylocust 1 - 3
Gleditsia Triacanthos Skyline Pyrimidal Honeylocust 1 - 3
Koelreuteria Paniculata Golden Raintree 1 2 3
Malus Almey Almey Crabapple 1 2 -
Malus Variety
American Beauty
American Beauty Crabapple 1 2 -
Malus Dolgo Dolgo Crabapple 1 2 -
Malus Hopa Hopa Crabapple 1 2 -
Malus Ioensis
Klehms Improved
Klehms Bechtel Crabapple 1 2 -
Malus Oekonomierat Echtermeyer Echtermeyer Weeping
Crabapple
1 2 -
Malus Radiant Radiant Crabapple 1 2 -
Malus Royalty Royalty Crabapple 1 2 -
Malus Snowcloud Snowcloud Crabapple 1 2 -
Malus Strathmore Strathmore Crabapple 1 2 -
Plantanus Acerifolia European Sycamore 1 - -
Prunus Virginiana Melancarpa
Shubert"
Canada Red Cherry 1 2 -
16 - 10
Chapter 16 Landscaping and Fencing Ord 2020.01.docx
Prunus Cerasifera
"Mt. St. Helen's"
Mt. St. Helens Plum 1 2 3
Prunus Cerasifera Variety Newport Newport Flowering Plum 1 2 3
Prunus Cerasifera Thundercloud Thundercloud Flowering Plum 1 2 3
Prunus Padus Commutata May Day Tree 1 2 3
Prunus Serrulata Kwanzan Kwanzan Flowering Cherry 1 2 3
Prunus Subhirtella Pendula Weeping Cherry 1 - -
Pyrus Calleryana Aristocrat Aristocrat Ornamental Pear 1 2 3
Pyrus Calleryana
Bradford
Bradford Ornamental Pear 1 2 3
Pyrus Clleryana
Rancho
Rancho Ornamental
Pear
1 2 3
Pyrus Calleryana
Trinity
Trinity Ornamental Pear 1 2 3
Quercus Borealis Northern Red Oak 1 - -
Quercus Macrocarpa Bur Oak 1 - 3
Quercus Palustris Pin Oak 1 - 3
Sophora Japonica Japanese Pagoda Tree 1 - 3
Sorbus Aucuparia European Mountain Ash 1 2 3
Tilia Americana Redmond Redmond Linden 1 - -
Tilia Cordata Little Leaf Linden 1 2 -
Tilia Cordata Greenspire Greenspire Little Leaf Linden 1 2 3
Tilia Cordata Olympic Olympic Pyramidal Linden 1 2 3
Picea Pungens Colorado Spruce 1 2 -
Picea Pungens Glauca Colorado Blue Spruce 1 2 -
Pinus Nigra Austrian Pine 1 2 -
17 - 1
Chapter 17 Temporary, Seasonal, and Home Occupation Uses Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 17
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL AND HOME OCCUPATION USES
14-17-101 PURPOSE
14-17-102 DEFINITIONS
14-17-103 LICENSE REQUIRED
14-17-104 APPLICATION AND FEE
14-17-105 HOME OCCUPATION REQUIREMENTS
14-17-106 SPECIAL CONDITIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL DAY CARE OR GROUP
INSTRUCTION
14-17-107 PROHIBITED HOME OCCUPATION USES
14-17-108 HOME OCCUPATION CONDITIONAL USES
14-17-109 REQUIRED INFORMATION AND PLANS
14-17-110 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW PROCESS FOR TEMPORARY USES
14-17-111 ADMINISTRATIVE COMMITTEE REVIEW OF TEMPORARY AND SEASONAL
USES
14-17-112 SEASONAL PERMITS
14-17-113 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR TEMPORARY AND SEASONAL USES
14-17-114 USES, SPECIFIC STANDARDS AND TIME LIMITS
14-17-115 TIME BETWEEN ACTIVITIES
14-17-116 EXEMPT USES
14-17-117 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL AND DENIAL
14-17-101 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish standards regulating the time, place and manner in
which temporary, seasonal and home occupation uses may occur.
14-17-102 DEFINITIONS
See Chapter 3 of this Title for the following definitions:
“ARTS AND CRAFTS SHOW”
“GARAGE AND/OR YARD SALE”
“PROMOTIONAL EVENTS”
“RETAIL WAREHOUSE SALE”
“SEASONAL USE”
“SWAP MEET”
“TEMPORARY CARNIVALS AND FAIRS”
“TEMPORARY SALES ACTIVITIES”
“TEMPORARY SALES OFFICE”
“TEMPORARY USE”
14-17-103 LICENSE REQUIRED
A Bountiful City Business License is required for any entity engaged in a seasonal or home
occupation use, and for some temporary uses as set forth in this Title. In addition, certain uses
17 - 2
Chapter 17 Temporary, Seasonal, and Home Occupation Uses Ord 2020.01.docx
may also require a conditional use permit. The Planning Director shall review the application
and may approve the license or forward it to the Administrative Committee or the Planning
Commission for review and approval, as required by this Title. Any application for Residential
Day Care or Group Instruction facilities with more than eight (8) people shall first make
application for and receive a Conditional Use Permit before applying for a Home Occupation
License.
14-17-104 APPLICATION AND FEE
A. An application for a temporary use permit shall be reviewed for approval by the Planning
Director, and shall be submitted at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the proposed
event. The application shall be made by the owner of the affected property or the
owner’s duly authorized agent.
B. An application for a seasonal use permit shall be reviewed for approval by the
Administrative Committee following the procedures for a conditional use permit, prior to
issuing a business license.
C. An application for a home occupation license shall be reviewed for approval by the
Planning Department. A home occupation use that requires a conditional use permit
shall be reviewed for approval by the Administrative Committee prior to receiving a home
occupation business license.
B. Each application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as established by the
City Council. An application is not complete until the fee is paid.
C. After approval of a temporary, seasonal, or conditional use permit, an applicant shall
also obtain any required business license for the proposed use.
D. An approved temporary use permit shall be effective only on the approved dates. A
temporary use permit shall lapse if not used within the dates approved and may be
revoked by the Planning Director effective immediately upon verbal or written notice for
violation of the permit. Verbal notice shall be confirmed by written notice mailed within a
reasonable time to the permit holder.
14-17-105 HOME OCCUPATION REQUIREMENTS
A proposed home occupation use shall meet the following criteria to qualify for a Home
Occupation Business License:
A. The use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling and shall not
change the appearance, character or condition thereof. There shall be no displays,
advertisements, stock in trade, or signs related to the business except for: one (1) flat
wall sign placed on the dwelling that shall not exceed four (4) square feet in size, and
any sign required by State Law and/or which meet the provisions of this Title.
B. The use shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling, except for work performed offsite.
Only members of the family related by blood, marriage, or adoption, and who reside in
the dwelling, may work onsite. The only exception is that one (1) additional person may
17 - 3
Chapter 17 Temporary, Seasonal, and Home Occupation Uses Ord 2020.01.docx
be employed as a secretary, apprentice, or assistant where there are no more than five
(5) family members actively engaged in the home occupation. Employees who are not
family members and/or who do not reside at the dwelling shall not meet, park, or
otherwise congregate at the home or in the general vicinity. Additional outside
employees are not allowed if there is more than one home occupation at the property.
C. The use shall not involve more than 50% of the entire dwelling.
D. The use shall not involve the area of required, covered, off-street parking.
E. No product or commodity shall be stored onsite, and no customer may physically visit
the site of a home occupation to take delivery of a product or commodity. Commodities
may be produced on the premises and sold offsite.
F. The use shall not create noise, dust, odors, noxious fumes, glare or other nuisances,
including interruption of radio and/or television reception, which are discernable beyond
the premises.
G. The use shall not involve using or storing flammable material, explosives, or other
dangerous materials, including gun powder.
H. The use shall not involve mechanical or electrical apparatus, equipment, or tools not
commonly associated with a residential use or as are customary to home crafts.
I. The use shall not generate traffic in greater volumes than would normally be expected in
a residential neighborhood nor involve the use of commercial vehicles other than
standard delivery vehicles for delivery of materials to or from the premises.
J. The use shall not involve the parking of equipment or motor vehicles having a gross
weight of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or more directly at the residence.
K. The use shall be in compliance with all applicable fire, building, plumbing, electrical and
life safety and health codes of the State of Utah, Davis County, and the City of Bountiful.
L. The residence and property may be inspected from time to time to determine continued
compliance with the provisions of this Code and other applicable codes.
14-17-106 SPECIAL CONDITIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL DAY CARE OR GROUP
INSTRUCTION
The following conditions shall apply only to Home Occupation Business Licenses for Residential
Day Care or Group Instruction, as defined by State Code:
A. The rear yard may be used for outside play area, or instruction where a swimming pool
is involved.
B. Residential day care facilities shall comply with all regulations of the State of Utah and
shall be licensed by the State. One additional person not residing in the dwelling may be
17 - 4
Chapter 17 Temporary, Seasonal, and Home Occupation Uses Ord 2020.01.docx
employed in the residential day care or group instruction where seven eight (7) or more
children or people are involved.
C. Residential group instruction (preschools) shall be limited to no more than twelve (12)
people in each session who are not residents of the home. There shall be no more than
two (2) sessions per day and each session may not exceed four (4) hours. No child or
student may attend more than one (1) session per day. Instruction of more than eight (8)
individuals requires issuance of a Conditional Use Permit.
D. A minimum interior floor area of thirty-five (35) square feet and a minimum secured
outdoor play area of forty (40) square feet per child shall be provided for residential day
care facilities.
E. Total floor area used for residential day care or group instruction may be no more than
fifty percent (50%) of the ground floor area of the residence.
F. An annual inspection for continued compliance will be required for license renewal of all
residential day care and group instruction facilities.
G. A criminal background check is required for any person who operates or is employed at
a daycare or a residential group instruction business.
H. A criminal background check is required for any adult who resides at a dwelling used for
a daycare or group instruction business.
I. No person who has been convicted of a sexually oriented crime may operate, be
employed by, or reside at a dwelling that is used for a daycare or group instruction
business.
14-17-107 PROHIBITED HOME OCCUPATION USES
The following uses, by their nature, involve operations not suited to a residential area and have
a pronounced tendency to grow rapidly beyond the limits for a home occupation and thereby
impair the use and value of a residentially zoned area. Therefore, the uses specified below shall
not be permitted as home occupations:
A. Auto, truck or motorcycle repair at the residence.
B. Furniture or cabinet making.
C. Major appliance repair (washers, dryers, refrigerators, etc.).
D. Small engine and lawn mower repair.
E. Auto body or fender work.
F. Trailer or boat repair.
G. Photo developing and processing beyond a hobby darkroom.
17 - 5
Chapter 17 Temporary, Seasonal, and Home Occupation Uses Ord 2020.01.docx
H. Sexually oriented businesses.
14-17-108 HOME OCCUPATION CONDITIONAL USES
Home occupations in the following areas of work are conditional uses, and licenses may be
issued for them only if a conditional use permit is granted following notice and a public hearing:
A. Lawn care and/or landscaping,
B. Construction and/or contracting,
C. Snow removal,
D. Residential day care or group instruction facilities with more than eight (8) people,
E. A home occupation office use may be allowed in a detached accessory structure in
accordance with the following:
1. The total office area, including a restroom and any storage space, shall not
exceed three hundred (300) square feet.
2. The office shall not be located in an area of required, covered, off-street parking.
3. No part of the office space shall be utilized if the required, covered, off-street
parking is being utilized for a purpose other than parking.
4. The only retail activity allowed is that transacted electronically or by mail. Any
retail activity involving the physical delivery of goods or persons to the property is
expressly prohibited.
5. A home occupation office in a detached accessory structure shall be deemed
unlawful and shall not be occupied unless the owner has recorded a deed
restriction on the property stating that the use of the property is for a single family
dwelling, and that the office space shall only be used in accordance with the
provisions of the Bountiful City Land Use Code as it may be amended from time
to time.
14-17-109 REQUIRED INFORMATION AND PLANS
All applications for a temporary or seasonal use shall include the following:
A. A concise statement describing the proposed use or event, including the purpose, type
of merchandise involved, dates and times of operation, number of employees involved,
provisions for on-site security, provision for on-site parking, and other pertinent
information necessary to adequately evaluate the application.
17 - 6
Chapter 17 Temporary, Seasonal, and Home Occupation Uses Ord 2020.01.docx
B. A copy of a site plan drawn to a standard scale which is no greater than 1" = 20', which
accurately represents the proposed use of the site, including existing buildings,
entrances, exits, parking areas, driveways, utilities, and the location of any proposed
temporary structures such as tents, stand or signs. Depending upon the size and scope
of the proposed use, the Planning Director or approving authority may require that the
site plan be prepared by a licensed Engineer, Surveyor, Architect or Landscape
Architect.
14-17-110 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW PROCESS FOR TEMPORARY USES
The following shall apply to the review and approval of specific temporary uses:
A. The following temporary uses may be reviewed and approved by the Planning Director:
1. Christmas tree lots;
2. Construction trailers;
3. Fireworks stands;
4. Model homes and model home shows;
6. Warehouse sales;
6. Other retail sales;
B. The Planning Director shall review the application and related materials and shall
determine whether or not the proposal is in compliance with all applicable codes,
ordinances, and specific standards for temporary uses as set forth herein. The Planning
Director may request that the City Engineer, Police Chief and Fire Chief review and
comment on applications where traffic control may be a significant issues. The Planning
Director may also evaluate the application and request review and comments from the
County Board of Health and/or other Health related agencies.
C. A written permit shall be issued to the applicant after a determination of compliance has
been made. Reasonable, specific conditions to assure compliance may be attached to
the permit to assure compliance or to deal with circumstances related to neighboring
uses, geography, etc.
D. An application may be denied if the Planning Director determines that the proposal does
not comply with the standards established herein or that the public health, safety, or
welfare may be impaired by issuance of a permit. Denial of the application shall be
communicated to the applicant in writing and shall state the reasons for denial.
E. An appeal of any determination of the Planning Director may be made to the Planning
Commission. Such appeal shall be filed with the Planning Department within ten (10)
working days after a final determination by the Planner Director, stating the specific
reason why the determination should be reversed or modified.
17 - 7
Chapter 17 Temporary, Seasonal, and Home Occupation Uses Ord 2020.01.docx
14-17-111 ADMINISTRATIVE COMMITTEE REVIEW OF TEMPORARY AND SEASONAL
USES
The following temporary and seasonal uses require Administrative Committee approval and a
public hearing:
A. Fairs, carnivals, rodeos, live entertainment, etc.
B. Promotional events.
C. Swap meets.
D. Trailers intended for temporary offices or sales.
E. All seasonal use permits.
F. Other uses which due to unusual circumstances the Planning Director deems
necessary for special review.
14-17-112 SEASONAL PERMITS
A seasonal use permit may be issued instead of a temporary use permit for temporary uses that
reoccur each year for a definite period and which occupy the same location and configuration.
The permit may be issued for a maximum of six (6) months, which may be divided into two
equal or unequal periods. A seasonal use permit may be issued for a maximum of five (5) years,
however, any change in location, ownership, or operation shall render the permit void. A
seasonal use must obtain/renew a Bountiful Business License each year.
14-17-113 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR TEMPORARY AND SEASONAL USES
The following regulations establish the time, place, and manner in which uses that are
temporary or seasonal in nature may occur. A temporary or seasonal use has no inherent rights
within the zone in which it may be located, other than the terms and conditions of an approved
permit, and the City may deny a proposed temporary or seasonal use for non-compliance with
this Title. Temporary and seasonal uses are not permitted or conditional uses, although the City
may follow the same public hearing or noticing process. Temporary uses shall not exceed one
hundred twenty (120) continuous days in length and shall not involve the erection of any
substantial structure or require any other permanent commitment of the land, except as
specifically set forth in this chapter. All temporary and seasonal uses shall comply with the
following:
A. The nature and intensity of the proposed use and the size and location of any temporary
structures shall be planned so as to be compatible with existing development and uses
in the area.
B. Permanent changes to the site are prohibited, except that seasonal uses may install
underground utility lines with the approval of the Building Department. When the use
ends, the applicant shall restore the site to its original condition, including such clean up,
17 - 8
Chapter 17 Temporary, Seasonal, and Home Occupation Uses Ord 2020.01.docx
washing, and replacement of facilities as may be necessary, or, if applicable, shall
complete site improvements according to the approved site development plan.
C. Tents, stands, trailers, mobile equipment and other similar temporary structures may be
utilized provided they are clearly identified on the submitted plan and it is determined by
the Planning Director that they will not impair the parking capacity, emergency access,
or safe and efficient movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on or off the site.
D. Temporary buildings or structures shall conform to all area and setback requirements
established for permanent buildings or structures for the zoning district in which the use
is proposed. Temporary buildings or structures shall not be located in landscaped areas
unless approved by the Administrative Committee and shall be located in a manner that
minimizes traffic impacts.
E. Temporary uses which do not include buildings or structures may be conducted within a
required yard provided the area is paved and the activity does not interfere with parking,
traffic circulation, or emergency vehicle access.
F. Parking Standards:
1. Temporary parking areas may be allowed only during construction on a site.
They must be removed, and the land restored to its original condition, prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the construction.
2. Adequate off-street parking for the proposed event shall be provided for the
duration of the event. Determination of compliance with this requirement shall be
made by the Planning Director who shall consider the nature of the event and the
applicable parking standards of this Code. Consideration shall be given to the
parking needs and requirements of permanent occupants of the site.
3. Temporary uses shall not reduce required parking spaces below the minimum
required for the permanent uses existing on the site.
4. Parking areas for the proposed use shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete,
gravel or other surface acceptable to the Planning Director.
G. Permanent signs are prohibited. The size and location of signs shall be shown on the
site plan and approved by the Planning Director as part of the application approval. All
signs shall be removed when the activity ends.
H. No loudspeakers or other amplifying sound devices shall be used in conjunction with a
temporary use unless specifically approved by the Planning Director.
I. Outdoor lighting, if used, shall be subdued. All lighting shall be designed, located, and
directed so as to eliminate glare and minimize reflection of light into neighboring
properties. Searchlights shall not be permitted.
J. Temporary uses on sites where the primary use is a conditional use shall not violate the
conditions of approval for the primary use.
17 - 9
Chapter 17 Temporary, Seasonal, and Home Occupation Uses Ord 2020.01.docx
K. The applicant shall provide to the Planning Director proof of liability insurance for the
requested use if necessary. This proof shall be submitted with the application.
L. These provisions shall not be construed to exempt the operator from complying with
applicable Building Codes, Health Codes, or permit requirements established by other
regulatory agencies or departments.
14-17-114 USES, SPECIFIC STANDARDS AND TIME LIMITS
A. Residential Zones. Temporary uses in single-family and multiple-family residential zones
shall comply with the general standards, and are limited to the uses specified below:
1. Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
2. Temporary sales offices shall be located in the subdivision where lots are being
sold or in the apartment complex or planned unit development where units are
being sold or leased.
3. Temporary sales offices in trailers. Temporary sales offices located in a trailer or
other portable structure for the sale or lease of property in a subdivision, an
apartment complex or planned unit development is prohibited.
4. Temporary sales offices in a model home or unit for the sale or lease of property
in a subdivision, apartment complex, or planned unit development may be used
until the last lot or unit in the development is sold and closed. If the office is
located in the area of the home intended for a garage, any alterations made to
accommodate the office shall be removed, and the space shall be converted to
the function as a garage upon termination of the temporary office.
5. Construction trailers incidental to a specific construction project may be located
on the site of such a project. The trailer may remain for the duration of the project
and shall be removed within thirty (30) days after substantial completion of the
project. Storage of construction and related material and debris shall not be
permitted in the public right-of-way. Temporary offices housed within construction
trailers wherein a business or service for others is transacted are prohibited.
Examples of such uses are Accountant, Architect, Insurance Sales, Medical and
Dental, Real Estate Sales, etc.
6. Fairs, carnivals, rodeos, live entertainment and other major public gatherings and
fund-raising events or promotional events may be permitted for up to three (3)
consecutive days at a site with an existing public or quasi-public use. Two such
events per sponsor may be permitted per calendar year.
B. Commercial Zones. A temporary use in a commercial zone shall comply with the general
standards set forth for the zone in which it is located, and shall be restricted to the uses
and standards specified below:
1. Hours of Operation for temporary uses shall be established at the time the use is
approved.
17 - 10
Chapter 17 Temporary, Seasonal, and Home Occupation Uses Ord 2020.01.docx
2. Christmas Tree Lots. A temporary use permit and business license shall be
obtained for the display and open lot sales of Christmas trees except where such
display and sales occurs within a permanent outdoor sales area which is
incidental and accessory to an approved conditional or approved use. Christmas
tree sales may occur only between Thanksgiving and Christmas Day. All unsold
trees shall be removed from the property, and the property returned to its original
condition, by December 31 of each calendar year. A cash bond may be required
to insure performance of this requirement.
3. Construction trailers. Construction trailers incidental to a specific construction
project may be located on the site of such a project. The trailer may remain for
the duration of the project and shall be removed within thirty (30) days after
substantial completion of the project. Storage of construction and related material
and debris shall not be permitted in the public right-of-way.
4. Fairs, carnivals, and other major public gatherings. Fairs, carnivals, rodeos, live
entertainment, and other major public gatherings and fund-raising events or
promotional events may be permitted for up to three (3) consecutive days at a
site with an existing public or quasi-public use. Two such events per sponsor
may be permitted per calendar year.
5. Fireworks Sales. Retail sales of fireworks are permitted subject to provisions of
the Bountiful City Business Regulations and State Law. Duration of the fireworks
stands shall be specified and approved by the Planning Director.
6. Promotional events. Promotional events shall not exceed five (5) consecutive
days per event, two (2) of which shall be a Saturday and Sunday. There shall be
no more than two promotional events per calendar year per property.
7. Seasonal Produce Stands Offering Produce and Plants not grown on the
Premises. Stands selling produce and plants which are not grown on the
premises may be permitted for up to two (2) consecutive weeks as a temporary
use, or for the maximum allowed under a seasonal use. This category includes
“Farmers Markets.”
8. Swap meets. Swap meets shall not be permitted for more than three (3)
consecutive days, and not more than four (4) times per year. If an applicant
proposes such events more frequently, the swap meet shall be considered a
permanent use which shall require conditional use approval and site plan
approval prior to issuance of a business license.
9. Temporary office. A temporary office for a business for which a permanent
building is being constructed on a site may be approved and occupied until an
occupancy permit is issued for the permanent building or for six (6) months,
whichever comes first. The temporary office shall be located on the same site as
the future permanent building but shall not be moved onto the site until a building
permit is issued for the permanent building. The Planning Director may renew a
permit for a temporary office if the size and scope of the building requires a
building construction schedule longer than the six (6) month period allowed.
17 - 11
Chapter 17 Temporary, Seasonal, and Home Occupation Uses Ord 2020.01.docx
10. Warehouse sales. Retail warehouse sales are allowed for up to five (5)
consecutive days at any one time.
14-17-115 TIME BETWEEN ACTIVITIES
Except for construction trailers, temporary offices, and seasonal uses, the time between
temporary activities shall be a minimum of five (5) times as long as the duration of the last
event.
14-17-116 EXEMPT USES
The following uses are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter:
A. Fund-raising events conducted by non-profit organizations which are a maximum of
three (3) consecutive days; including such things as bake sales or car washes but not
including larger events such as outdoor carnivals, swap meets or arts and crafts sales.
B. Onsite temporary sales activities involving the display of new retail products, provided
the display area is within ten (10) feet of the main building and does not extend into a
public right-of-way or occupy required parking spaces or landscaped areas.
C. Temporary businesses licensed under the Temporary Business Licensing provisions of
the Bountiful City Code.
D. Garage or yard sales that occur not more than four (4) times a year per property with
each event lasting not more than seventy-two (72) hours. The sale of products brought
to the site is prohibited.
E. Seasonal fruit and vegetable stands selling produce grown on the premises are
permitted subject to compliance with other applicable provisions of the City Code.
F. Community events which are sponsored and/or approved by the City.
G. Other exemptions as specifically approved in writing by the Bountiful City Council.
14-17-117 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL AND DENIAL
The land use authority may approve a use which meets the above requirements, may deny a
use which does not meet said requirements, or may approve a use with such additional
conditions as necessary to meet the requirements of this Title and to assure that the use will be
compatible and will not pose any unreasonable detriment to persons or property. Said
conditions may include a limitation upon hours of operation and/or a time limitation which is less
than the maximum established by this Chapter.
18 - 1
CHAPTER 18 OFF-STREET PARKING ORD 2020.01.DOCX
CHAPTER 18
MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING AND ACCESS STANDARDS
14-18-101 PURPOSE
14-18-102 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIRED
14-18-103 CONTINUING OBLIGATION
14-18-104 CALCULATING PARKING REQUIREMENTS
14-18-105 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PARKING AREAS
14-18-106 TRANSITIONAL AREAS
14-18-107 PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
14-18-108 SIZE OF PARKING STALLS
14-18-109 ACCESS REQUIREMENTS
14-18-110 OFF-STREET LOADING AREAS
14-18-111 DISPLAY OF VEHICLES OR OTHER MERCHANDISE FOR SALE OR RENT
14-18-112 STACKING LANES FOR DRIVE-UP WINDOWS
14-18-101 PURPOSE
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by establishing
motor vehicle parking and access standards.
14-18-102 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIRED
An off-street parking area and access plan meeting the minimum requirements of this Title shall
be provided with any proposal to erect, enlarge, or increase the capacity of any building, any
time a change in use occurs, or any time that site plan review is required by this Title.
Any application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a plot plan showing required
parking spaces with ingress and egress. Said plan shall be reviewed and approved by the
Planning and Engineering Departments.
14-18-103 CONTINUING OBLIGATION
Required off-street parking facilities shall be a continuing obligation of the property owner so
long as the use requiring vehicle parking or vehicle loading facilities continues. It shall be
unlawful for any owner or tenant of any building or use to discontinue or dispense with the
required vehicle parking facilities without providing some other vehicle parking area which
meets the requirements of this Chapter and is approved by the appropriate land-use authority.
14-18-104 CALCULATING PARKING REQUIREMENTS
A. Whenever parking requirements are based on square footages, calculations shall be
based on the gross square footage of the structure.
B. When a structure or parcel contains multiple uses, more than one (1) parking standard
may apply.
18 - 2
CHAPTER 18 OFF-STREET PARKING ORD 2020.01.DOCX
C. Available on-street parking spaces shall not be used to meet the requirements of this
Title, unless specifically permitted and regulated by the zone in which the property is
located. And no development plan shall be based on the assumption that excess
vehicles can be parked on a public street, unless specifically permitted and regulated by
the zone in which the property is located.
D. When parking regulations are based on the number of employees, parking calculations
shall use the largest number of employees who work on any one (1) shift. Where shift
changes may cause substantial overcrowding of parking facilities, the approving
authority may require additional spaces as needed in order to accommodate the overlap
period or peak parking period.
E. When parking use intensities vary during the course of a day because of mixed uses or
staggered operational shifts, the approving authority may permit reduced parking
standards based upon accepted professional standards. The approving authority may
also require a shared parking analysis performed by a traffic engineer.
14-18-105 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PARKING AREAS
A. Each off-street parking area shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete pavement, or
comparable material, and shall be graded to dispose of all surface water. The perimeter
of the paved surface shall be finished with concrete curb and gutter. Surfacing may be
installed in stages as approved by the approving authority. All parking and grading plans
shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer.
B. Parking areas shall be designed to provide orderly and safe circulation, loading,
unloading, parking, and storage of vehicles. All parking areas shall be landscaped,
striped, marked and maintained according to approved plans.
C. Lighting provided in off-street parking areas shall be directed away from adjoining
premises and streets in accordance with the design standards of this Title. The type and
location of luminaries shall be approved by the approving authority.
D. Off-street parking areas shall allow vehicles to enter and exit from a public street by
forward motion only. This regulation shall not apply to single-family and two-family
residential units, or to town-home style residential units approved and constructed after
December 31, 2006, that front onto a public street that is not designated on the Street
Master Plan as a collector or arterial street and that does not exceed an average daily
traffic volume of one thousand (1,000) vehicles.
E. Pavement, striping, landscaping, paintings, lighting and all other parking area
components shall be maintained to prevent deterioration and safety hazards.
F. No off-street parking shall be permitted in any required residential front yard or street
side yard except as allowed in Section 14-4-110 of this Title. And no vehicle, trailer or
similar device may be parked on a lawn, park strip or any other non-paved surface.
G. No tandem parking (one space behind another) shall be allowed, except for conventional
single-family dwellings. Duplexes, apartments, townhouses and condominiums may
18 - 3
CHAPTER 18 OFF-STREET PARKING ORD 2020.01.DOCX
have tandem parking providing that both spaces are assigned to the same dwelling unit
and the plan is approved by the approving authority.
H. Off-street parking spaces shall be located at least ten (10) feet from any street property
line except for driveways serving one and two-family dwellings. For single family and
two-family residential uses, at least two (2) of the required on-site parking spaces per
unit shall be provided behind the minimum front yard setback. No driveways or paved
vehicle areas of any kind are allowed in a street side yard (corner lot) setback unless
they provide access to an approved parking area located within an approved garage or
carport or a paved area located at least 10 feet from the street side property line and
behind a six foot screening fence as required in Section 14-4-110.
I. Landscaping of all commercial and industrial parking areas is required and shall meet
the requirements and standards of this Title.
14-18-106 TRANSITIONAL AREAS
Multi-family, commercial, institutional, or industrial off-street parking areas which are adjacent to
residential uses or residential zoning districts shall be effectively screened on the abutting sides
by a solid barrier fence which is in compliance with the provisions of this Title and which has
been approved by the approving authority. Such wall or fence shall be six (6) feet in height and
shall be permanently maintained with no advertising thereon.
14-18-107 PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the number of off-street parking spaces for
various uses will be as follows:
1. Automobile Service and Repair Center. Three (3) exterior parking spaces for
each stall, service bay or work station. Such spaces shall be for customer
parking only and are not intended for storage or parking of vehicles under repair.
Adequate parking for vehicles under repair or impound must be provided in
addition to the required customer parking spaces.
2. Banks, Business Offices or Professional Offices Providing Customer Services or
Sales (Excluding Medical and Dental Offices). One (1) space for each two
hundred (200) square feet of floor area.
3. Bowling Alleys. Four (4) spaces for each alley plus parking space for all
accessory uses (i.e., coffee shop, restaurant, bar) as herein defined.
4. Car Wash. Three (3) spaces in approach lane to each hand wash bay, or 6
stacking spaces for each automated wash facility.
5. Churches. One (1) parking space for every four (4) seats for fixed, individual
seating; one parking space for each six (6) feet of linear pew; or one (1) parking
space for every twenty (20) square feet of floor area where temporary seating
can be located.
18 - 4
CHAPTER 18 OFF-STREET PARKING ORD 2020.01.DOCX
6. Dwellings, Multiple Family. Parking for multiple family developments shall be
based on the following standards:
Bedrooms Required Spaces Visitor Spaces
1 1.5/Unit .25/unit
2 2.0/Unit .25/unit
3 or more 2.5/ Unit .25/unit
At least one (1) of the required parking spaces above shall be a designated,
covered parking stall for each dwelling unit. Visitor parking spaces shall be
distributed throughout the project for convenient access from all units.
7. Dwellings, Single Family. Four (4) parking spaces for each single family dwelling
unit. At least two (2) spaces shall be in a garage.
8. Funeral Homes, Mortuaries. One (1) parking space for each forty (40) square
feet of floor area located in the assembly chapel and viewing room(s).
9. Furniture and Appliance Stores, Hardware Stores or Other Similar Uses Which
Require Large Display Areas But Generate Light Traffic Demands. One (1)
parking space for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area.
10. General Business/Retail Not Specifically Described. One (1) parking space for
each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area.
11. Handicapped/Disabled Persons Parking. Parking spaces shall be provided in
conformance with the following:
18 - 5
CHAPTER 18 OFF-STREET PARKING ORD 2020.01.DOCX
Handicap Stall Calculation Table
Number of Spaces in Lot Minimum # of Spaces for Disabled
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 Two percent (2%) of total plus 1
for each 100 over 1,000 spaces
In addition, one (1) in every eight (8) spaces for the disabled, but not less than
one (1) shall be made accessible for vans. See Section 14-18-108 for special
space requirements.
All parking spaces for the disabled shall be designated as reserved by a sign
showing the symbol of accessibility for the disabled. Spaces designated for
accessibility for vans shall have an additional sign reading "Van Accessible"
mounted below the symbol sign.
12. Hospitals. One (1) parking space for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor
area.
13. Hotels, Motels and Motor Hotels. One (1) parking space for each living or
sleeping unit, plus one (1) parking space for every two hundred (200) square feet
of assembly, banquet or restaurant area, and one (1) space for each employee
on the highest employment shift.
14. Libraries. One (1) parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor
area.
15. Manufacturing/Industrial Uses, Research and Testing Laboratories, Bottling
Plants. One (1) parking space for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor
area, or one (1) space for each person employed on the highest employment
shift, whichever is greater.
16. Medical/Dental Clinics. One (1) parking space for each two hundred fifty (250)
square feet of floor area or five (5) spaces for each practitioner, whichever is
greater.
17. Nursing, Convalescent and Other Similar Type Facilities. One (1) parking space
for every three (3) persons the home is licensed or designed to care for, plus .25
stalls guest parking per bed or unit.
18 - 6
CHAPTER 18 OFF-STREET PARKING ORD 2020.01.DOCX
18. Offices not Providing Customer Services or Sales on the Premises. One (1)
parking space for every three hundred (300) square feet of floor area.
19. Professional Offices for Attorneys, C.P.A.s, Architects, Engineers, etc. One (1)
parking space for every three hundred (300) square feet of floor area.
20. Retirement Facility/Assisted Living Center (where occupants do not drive). Offstreet
parking shall be provided at the rate of .50 parking stalls per living unit or
per occupant at maximum occupancy, whichever is greater.
21. Retirement Facility/Independent Living Center (where some occupants may still
drive). Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of one (1) parking stall per
living unit, plus .25 stalls guest parking per unit. Common use facility areas will
not be used in calculating parking requirements. At least half of the off-street
parking stalls must be covered.
22. Restaurants. One (1) parking space for each two and one half (2.5) seats.
23. Restaurants, Fast Food. One (1) parking space for each two (2) seats or one (1)
parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area when the
number of seats is unknown.
24. Schools. One (1) parking space for each administrator and faculty member, plus
one (1) space for each four (4) seats in an auditorium or assembly area.
25. Shopping Centers. One (1) parking space for every two hundred (200) square
feet of net floor area or as determined by the approving authority.
26. Sports Arenas, Auditoriums, Theaters or Other Similar Places of Public
Assembly. One (1) parking space for each four (4) seats of maximum of seating
capacity.
27. Taverns, Private Clubs, Lodges, Fraternal Organizations and All Other Similar
Dining and/or Drinking Establishments. As determined by Conditional Use Permit
procedure by the Planning Commission, but not less than one (1) parking space
for each two (2) seats or one (1) parking space for each one hundred (100)
square feet of floor area when the number of seats is unknown.
28. Wholesale Establishments and Warehouses. One (1) parking space for every
one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area or one (1) space for each
person employed on the highest employment shift, whichever is greater.
29. All Other Uses Not Listed Above. As determined by the approving authority
based on the recommendation of the City Planner, City Engineer, and/or nearest
comparable use standards.
B. In calculating the requirements of this Section, any fractional parking spaces shall be
rounded up to the next whole number.
18 - 7
CHAPTER 18 OFF-STREET PARKING ORD 2020.01.DOCX
C. Parking Spaces for the Disabled. All spaces for the disabled shall be located as near as
possible to the main public or primary entrance of a single building. In parking lots that
do not serve a single building, parking for the disabled shall be located on the shortest
accessible route of travel to an entrance designed for the disabled. In building with
multiple entrances for the disabled, such parking spaces shall be dispersed and located
closest to those entrances. Said parking stalls shall be designated as reserved by a sign
showing the symbol designating them for disabled persons. Such signs shall be located
so they cannot be obscured by a vehicle parking in the space.
14-18-108 SIZE OF PARKING STALLS
A. The dimensions of each off-street parking space for passenger vehicles shall be at least
nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet for diagonal or ninety degree spaces; or nine (9) feet by
twenty-four (24) feet for parallel spaces, exclusive of access drives or aisles. Parking
stalls that front onto a dedicated, improved landscape area or onto a sidewalk of
minimum six (6) foot width may be reduced in depth by a maximum of two (2) feet if the
City Engineer determines that a vehicle of standard clearance could protrude into the
area, as shown in Figure 18-1. In limited circumstances the approving authority may
reduce the parking depth of interior lot spaces to nineteen (19) feet if recommended by
the City Engineer.
B. The dimension of parking spaces for commercial vehicles shall be determined by the
approving authority.
C. Twenty-four (24) feet of on-site aisle space shall be located behind every parking space
which is accessed by a two-way aisle.
D. The following aisle widths shall be required where the parking spaces are accessed from
a one-way aisle:
1. Twenty-four (24) feet behind every ninety degree (90?) parking space.
2. Sixteen (16) feet behind every sixty degree (60?) parking space.
3. Fifteen (15) feet behind every forty-five degree (45?) parking space.
4. Fifteen (15) feet behind every thirty degree (30?) parking space.
E. Parking spaces for the disabled shall be at least nine (9) feet wide with a sixty (60) inch
aisle space adjacent to them. Spaces accessible to vans must have a ninety-six (96)
inch minimum aisle space.
14-18-109 ACCESS REQUIREMENTS
A. Any property, regardless of its use or zone designation, shall be subject to the following.
1. Any off-street parking area shall be accessed through an approved driveapproach,
also referred to as a “drive-access“ or ”curb-cut“, meeting city
construction standards. It is unlawful to drive a motor vehicle on any sidewalk,
18 - 8
CHAPTER 18 OFF-STREET PARKING ORD 2020.01.DOCX
park strip, or any other area behind the curb within a public right-of-way, with the
exception of an approved drive-approach.
2. The combined area of drive-approaches along any public street frontage shall not
exceed fifty-percent (50%) of the linear length of the street curb immediately
adjacent to a property, including required curb returns. A legal, non-conforming
flag lot shall be limited to one drive-approach which shall be the narrowest width
possible to comply with the minimum access requirements of this Title and the
Fire Code.
3. No off-street parking area shall be approved or constructed without a driveapproach
meeting City standards. Any drive-approach shall be located at least
five (5) feet from a side or rear property line, with the exception of approved,
shared drive-approaches.
4. Each drive-approach, drive access or driveway, shall be surfaced with asphalt,
concrete pavement or comparable material and shall be graded to dispose of all
surface water. All parking, driveways and grading plans shall be reviewed and
approved by the City Engineer.
B. Single Family and Two Family Residential Lots
1. Each residential lot shall be allowed not more than two drive accesses (curb
cuts), each of which shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet and a
maximum width of thirty (30) feet, as measured at the street property line. There
shall also be a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet between any drive access located
on the same property, as measured at the property line. Lots exceeding one (1)
acre in size with more than 150 feet of frontage on a public street may be allowed
one (1) additional curb cut provided the curb cut meets all other standards
related to size, maximum lot coverage and open space standards, minimum
separation from other lots, driveways and intersections.
2. Circular drives shall meet all of the minimum width and separation standards that
apply to drive accesses, and shall be constructed in conformance with the
requirements set forth in Figure 18-5 Minimum Circular Drive Design Standards
for All Single and Two Family Residential. Areas between the minimum interior
arc and the front property line shall be landscaped at all times, and shall not be
filled with cement, asphalt or any other paving material. In limited circumstances,
the City Engineer may allow a reduced circular driveway, as shown in Figure 18-
6 Minimum Circular Drive Design Standards for Limited Situations. Before
approving the construction of a reduced circular driveway, the City Engineer shall
determine that all of the following criteria are met:
a. It is not physically possible to construct a standard size circular driveway.
b. There is a clear safety hazard created by the configuration of the road,
sidewalk, or other element that is beyond the control of the property owner.
18 - 9
CHAPTER 18 OFF-STREET PARKING ORD 2020.01.DOCX
c. The property owner has not created the safety hazard or need for the
reduced circular driveway by his action or the action of previous property
owners.
d. There is no other reasonable solution to the safety hazard.
3. No drive access shall be closer than thirty (30) feet to any street intersection as
measured at the property line. In any instance where a dwelling has a drive
access on to a collector or arterial street, or in any instance where existing
conditions restrict visibility, the City Engineer may require that the drive access
be located further from the intersection; however, the location shall be the
minimum necessary to mitigate the hazard.
4. In any instance where a dwelling has a drive access on to a collector or arterial
street, or in any instance where existing conditions restrict visibility, the City
Engineer may prohibit vehicles from backing onto a public street. In addition, the
City Engineer may require that onsite improvements be made to allow a vehicle
to turn around and drive forward out on to a public street.
C. Multiple-Family Residential Developments
1. Length and Width of Driveways.
a. No driveway shall exceed six hundred (600) feet without providing a
second access.
b. Driveways which are one hundred fifty (150) feet or less in length shall
have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet with no parking allowed along
the driveway.
c. Driveways which are greater than one hundred fifty (150) feet in length
shall have a minimum width of thirty (30) feet. Driveways with only one
access and which are in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet shall also
have a seventy (70) foot diameter turnaround.
d. No more than twenty (20) units shall be allowed on any dead-end
driveway regardless of length.
e. A shared driveway and/or shared drive access between adjoining
properties may be allowed by the approving authority only if it is a
secondary access and only if each development has another access and
driveway that is unique to that development. Both property owners must
sign and record a cross access agreement benefiting both parties.
2. Number of Driveways Permitted. Not more than two (2) drive-accesses (curb
cuts) shall be allowed for each one hundred (100) feet of street frontage, except
for town-home style residential units approved and constructed after December
31, 2006, that front onto a public street that is not designated on the Street
18 - 10
CHAPTER 18 OFF-STREET PARKING ORD 2020.01.DOCX
Master Plan as a collector or arterial street and that does not exceed an average
daily traffic volume of one thousand (1,000) vehicles.
3. Intersection Proximity. No drive access shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any
street intersection as measured at the property line. Any proposed drive access
that is located within one hundred (100) feet of a State road, arterial street, or
collector street, shall also be reviewed and approved according to AASHTO and
other professional standards.
D. Non-Residential and Mixed-use Developments. In non-residential and mixed-use
developments, access shall be provided to meet the following requirements:
1. Width of Driveways. Each drive access shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet or
more than thirty-five (35) feet in width, measured at right angles to the center line
of the driveway, except as increased by the permissible curb return radii. The
drive access flare may not encroach upon a designated travel lane within the
public right-of-way and shall be designed according to standards approved by
Bountiful City.
2. Spacing of Drive Accesses. There shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet
between each drive access, and no drive access shall be closer than six feet to a
side property line unless there is a cross access agreement and it is approved by
the approving authority.
3. Intersection Proximity. No drive access shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any
street intersection as measured at the property line. Any proposed drive access
that is located within one hundred (100) feet of a State road, arterial street, or
collector street, shall also be reviewed and approved according to AASHTO and
other professional standards.
4. Landscaping Required. Landscaping shall be provided along the entire frontage
of the property to a minimum depth of ten (10) feet, except for permitted
driveways. Sprinkling systems shall be installed and permanently maintained
within the landscaped area. The landscaped area shall be surrounded by a
poured concrete curb extending six (6) inches above the paved surface.
5. Mixed-use developments that incorporate residential uses shall also meet the
access and driveway criteria for multiple-family residential development. Any
conflicting provisions between the two standards shall be resolved by the
approving authority.
E. Curb Radius Requirements. Maximum and minimum curb return radii permitted and
minimum driveway approach angles to the center line of the street shall be built to
Bountiful City standards. Any part of a curb radius shall be located within the portion of
right-of-way immediately adjacent to the property for which it is serving, as determined
by extending the side property line into the right-of-way at an angle perpendicular to, or
tangent to, the front property line. A curb radius shall not be located in such a way that it
encroaches on an adjoining property or the portion of the right-of-way that an adjoining
property is responsible for maintaining.
18 - 11
CHAPTER 18 OFF-STREET PARKING ORD 2020.01.DOCX
F. Location of Gasoline Pumps. Gasoline dispensing devices at automotive service
stations, convenience stores, or other similar businesses, shall be located a minimum
distance of ten (10) feet from a property line and so located that all parts of a vehicle
being serviced will be on the premises of the service pad. In addition, the location of
dispensing devices shall be in accordance with the following:
1. Dispensing devices shall be located not less than ten (10) feet from any building
which is less than one-hour fire resistive construction. Such dispensing devices
shall also be located so that the nozzle, when hose is fully extended, shall not
reach within five (5) feet of any building opening.
2. Dispensing devices shall be at least twenty (20) feet from all fixed sources of
ignition.
3. All dispensing devices shall be protected against physical damage from vehicles
by mounting them on a concrete island a minimum of six (6) inches in height.
Alternate methods of providing equivalent protection may be permitted when
approved by the Fire Marshal.
4. Apparatus dispensing Class I or Class II liquids into the fuel tanks of motor
vehicles of the public shall not be located in a bulk plan unless separated by a
fence or similar barrier from the area in which bulk operations are conducted.
5. Dispensing devices shall be secured to the island in an approved manner other
than piping and conduit.
14-18-110 OFF-STREET LOADING AREAS
A. Space Requirement. Every building or part thereof having a gross floor area of at least
five thousand (5,000) square feet and that is designed or used for a commercial or
industrial use that entails the delivery of materials or merchandise by motor vehicles,
shall provide and maintain on-site loading areas meeting the following minimum
requirements:
Gross Floor Area Number of Loading Spaces
Required
Less than 5,000 sq. ft. None
5,001 to 30,000 sq. ft. 1
30,001 to 70,000 sq. ft. 2
70,001 to 120,000 sq. ft. 3
Each additional 100,000 sq. ft.
over 120,000 sq. ft.
+1
B. Dimensions. Each loading space shall be not less than fourteen (14) feet in width and
twenty-five (25) feet in length.
18 - 12
CHAPTER 18 OFF-STREET PARKING ORD 2020.01.DOCX
C. Turning and Maneuvering Space. Sufficient room for turning and maneuvering of trucks
and other vehicles shall be provided on the site. Loading spaces shall be arranged on
the site in such a way as to allow normal movement of traffic in and around the loading
area.
D. Access and Location. Each loading space shall have unobstructed access from a street
or from an aisle or drive connecting with a street. No loading space may be located
within the minimum front or street yard setback, neither shall it be allowed to encroach
upon any public right-of-way, pedestrian walkway, minimum required landscape area or
any required parking area.
E. Screening. Such loading space may occupy any required side or rear yard and shall be
enclosed by a masonry wall matching the architecture of the structure to which it is
attached, or a solid landscaping barrier not less than six (6) feet in height, or both. If the
loading area is illuminated, lighting shall be deflected away from abutting residential lots
so as not to cause annoying glare.
F. All semi-trucks, commercial trailers, and all delivery vehicles in excess of twelve
thousand (12,000) pounds G.V.W, shall be parked and/or serviced only within an
approved loading area. Short term deliveries such as UPS, FedEx, etc., where the
vehicle is parked for less than thirty (30) minutes, may use general parking facilities.
14-18-111 DISPLAY OF VEHICLES OR OTHER MERCHANDISE FOR SALE OR RENT
Minimum setback for display of vehicles or other merchandise for sale or rent shall be ten (10)
feet. The ten (10) foot area shall be comprised of approved landscaping and shall not be used
for the display of merchandise.
14-18-112 STACKING LANES FOR DRIVE-UP WINDOWS
Uses which have drive-up service windows or devices shall provide on-site space for stacking of
vehicles waiting to reach the drive-up window or device in accordance with the following:
A. Restaurants and Fast Food Establishments: Six (6) stacking spaces for each service
window or device.
B. Banks: Four (4) stacking spaces for each service window or device.
C. All Other: Three (3) stacking spaces for each service window or device.
D. Each space shall measure nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet and have a height clearance
of fourteen (14) feet or as determined by the Fire Marshal. Such spaces shall not
interfere with other required off-street parking or traffic circulation.
18 - 13
CHAPTER 18 OFF-STREET PARKING ORD 2020.01.DOCX
FIGURE 18-1
Parking Stalls And Drive Aisles
18 - 14
CHAPTER 18 OFF-STREET PARKING ORD 2020.01.DOCX
FIGURE 18-1 (Continued)
Parking Stalls And Drive Aisles
18 - 15
CHAPTER 18 OFF-STREET PARKING ORD 2020.01.DOCX
FIGURE 18-2
Requirements For Dead-End Access Ways
18 - 16
CHAPTER 18 OFF-STREET PARKING ORD 2020.01.DOCX
FIGURE 18-2 (Continued)
Requirements For Dead-End Access Ways
FIGURE 18-3
Minimum Clearance
Around A Fire Hydrant
FIGURE 18-4
Minimum Turning Paths
18 - 17
CHAPTER 18 OFF-STREET PARKING ORD 2020.01.DOCX
19 - 1
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 19
SIGN REGULATIONS
14-19-101 PURPOSE AND SCOPE
14-19-102 APPLICABILITY AND EFFECT
14-19-103 DEFINITIONS
14-19-104 INTERPRETATION
14-19-106 RIGHT OF APPEAL
14-19-107 NONCOMPLYING SIGNS
14-19-108 PROHIBITED SIGNS
14-19-109 SIGNS ALLOWED IN ALL ZONES WITHOUT A PERMIT
14-19-110 FLAGS AND FLAGPOLES
14-19-111 SIGNS PERMITTED IN PROFESSIONAL OFFICE (P-O) AND HOSPITAL (H)
ZONES
14-19-112 SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE GENERAL COMMERCIAL (C-G) ZONE WITH A
PERMIT
14-19-113 SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE HEAVY COMMERCIAL (C-H) ZONE WITH A
PERMIT
14-19-114 SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (C-N) ZONE
WITH A PERMIT
14-19-115 SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE DOWNTOWN (DN) ZONE WITH A PERMIT
14-19-116 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL RESIDENTIAL ZONES
14-19-117 TEMPORARY SIGNAGE
14-19-118 SIGN PERMIT PROCESS
14-19-119 SAFETY AND LOCATION STANDARDS FOR PERMANENT SIGNS
14-19-120 MEASUREMENT OF REGULATED SIGN AREA
14-19-121 ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER STANDARDS
14-19-101 PURPOSE AND SCOPE
A. The type, location and design of signs can either enhance or degrade a community, and
therefore the City has a compelling interest to regulate the time, place, and manner in
which signs are erected. The purpose of this Sign Code is to:
1. Encourage the effective and innovative use and design of signs as a means of
communication.
2. Maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment in order to attract sources of
economic and business development and growth.
3. Coordinate the type, placement, scale, compatibility, and aesthetics of signs
within the different zones by recognizing the commercial communication
requirements of the business community.
4. Improve pedestrian and traffic safety through the prevention of visual
obstructions and distractions.
5. Minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private
property.
19 - 2
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
6. Promote both renovation and proper maintenance of signs.
7. Enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations.
B. This Code does not regulate official traffic or government signs; the copy and message
of permitted signs; window signs and displays not intended to be viewed from a public
right-of-way; religious symbols; commemorative plaques; display of street numbers; or
any display or construction not defined as a sign.
C. It is not the intent of this Code to regulate the content of political speech.
14-19-102 APPLICABILITY AND EFFECT
A. A sign shall be erected, placed, established, painted, created or maintained in Bountiful
City only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and other
requirements of this Chapter.
B. The effect of this Chapter as more specifically set forth herein, is:
1. To establish a regulatory process addressing the time, place and manner in
which signs are permitted.
2. To provide standards for temporary signs.
3. To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this Chapter.
4. To provide for enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter.
14-19-103 DEFINITIONS
All definitions have been moved to Chapter 3
14-19-104 INTERPRETATION
When interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, the sign regulations contained
herein are declared to be the maximum allowable for the purposes set forth.
14-19-105 ENFORCEMENT
A. Any sign not expressly allowed by this Code is prohibited.
B. The erection of a prohibited sign, or permitting the continued existence of a prohibited
sign in violation of this Code, is a class C misdemeanor. Each day of violation is a
separate offense.
C. There are certain situations where a sign poses or may pose an immediate public safety
hazard. The following signs shall be deemed unlawful and hazardous to the public
safety, and are declared to be a public nuisance. Any employee of the City is authorized
to immediately abate, remove, or otherwise remedy the following signs:
19 - 3
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
1. Any sign or related structure which interferes with the safe view of drivers
entering a public right-of-way from any driveway or property.
2. Any sign that extends over any pedestrian or vehicular travel area, unless
specifically authorized by the City.
3. Any sign which interferes with the use of any fire escape, exit, required stairway,
door ventilator or window.
4. Any sign which has less horizontal or vertical clearance from communication
lines and/or energized electrical power lines than required by adopted safety
standards, according to the provisions of City Code and the Bountiful Light and
Power Department.
5. Any sign that is located on or that encroaches upon publicly owned land, a public
right-of-way, or a public easement, except signs owned and erected by
permission of an authorized public agency or that are specifically authorized
herein.
D. Any sign placed in the public right-of-way without City approval is declared to be a public
nuisance and may be summarily removed by any employee of the City.
E. The Planning Director and any designated representatives shall be vested with the duty
of enforcing this title, and in performance of such duty shall be empowered and directed
to:
1. Issue a permit to construct, alter, or repair a sign which conforms to the
provisions of this Chapter. The expiration date of such permit shall be one
hundred eighty (180) days.
2. Ascertain that a sign is constructed and maintained in conformance with the
provisions of this Title, which includes the following actions:
a. Initial Inspection After Construction. The Planning Director or the Building
Official may make an initial inspection upon the completion of
construction, erection, re-erection, or remodeling of any sign for which a
permit has been issued and an inspection request is made. This shall
include the inspection of temporary signs using electrical connection.
b. Re-Inspection (when necessary). The Planning Director or an authorized
representative may re-inspect any sign for which a permit was issued but
which did not pass a previous inspection.
3. Institute any appropriate action or proceeding where any sign is unlawfully
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained,
or in any case where any sign is used in violation of this Title or any other City
Code. Such actions include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Issuance of Notices of Violations and Information. The Planning Director
or authorized representative may issue a written notice of violation to the
person having charge or control over, or that benefit from any sign found
19 - 4
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
to be unsafe or dangerous or in violation of this Chapter. Such official
may swear to information against violators.
b. Abatement and Removal of Unsafe or Dangerous Signs. If an unsafe or
dangerous sign is not repaired or made safe within five (5) working days
after giving said notice, the Planning Director may at once abate and
remove said sign, or in the alternative, use all available legal means to
have the sign removed. If the City or its agent removes the sign, the
person having charge or control over, or that benefits from the sign shall
pay to Bountiful City the costs incurred in such removal within 30 calendar
days after written notice is provided.
c. Abatement and Removal of Unlawful Signs.
i. If a permanent sign is installed without a permit or is otherwise
unlawful or prohibited as defined by this chapter, and is not made
conforming within thirty (30) calendar days after written notice has
been given, the Planning Director may at once abate and remove
said sign, or in the alternative, use all available legal means to
have the sign removed, including but not limited to criminal or civil
court action with the appropriate court. The person responsible for
and/or property owner allowing any such unlawful posting shall be
liable for the cost incurred in the removal thereof and the City is
authorized to effect the collection of said cost from them.
ii. If a temporary sign posted upon private property has been
installed without a permit or is otherwise unlawful as defined by
this Title, it shall be removed or made conforming within seventy
two (72) hours of written notice of the violation. If it has not been
made conforming within seventy two (72) hours, either through
removal of the temporary sign or by obtaining a temporary sign
permit, the Planning Director may at once abate and remove said
temporary sign, or in the alternative, use all available legal means
to have the sign removed, including but not limited to criminal or
civil court action with the appropriate court. The person
responsible for and/or property owner allowing any such unlawful
posting shall be liable for the cost incurred in the removal thereof
and the City is authorized to effect the collection of said cost from
them.
iii. Any sign that the City removes for encroachment into a public
right-of-way or easement, or that is located on public property
without the City’s permission shall be held for a maximum period
of fourteen (14) days before being destroyed. In no case shall the
failure to remove a sign constitute an approval by the City of the
unlawful placement of the sign.
d. Legal Action. Initiate legal action through the City Attorney’s Office.
4. Abate and Remove Non-Maintained or Abandoned Sign or Sign Identifying a
Discontinued Use. The Planning Director may require that each non-maintained
19 - 5
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
or abandoned sign, or sign identifying a discontinued use be removed from the
building or premises within forty-five (45) calendar days after providing written
notice to the owner or persons benefiting from the sign.
14-19-106 RIGHT OF APPEAL
Any person who has been ordered to alter or remove any permanent sign, or any person whose
application for a sign permit has been denied because of a conflict with any regulation stated
herein, may appeal the decision as set forth in section 14-2-106 of this Title.
14-19-107 NONCOMPLYING SIGNS
A. Regulation, containment, and elimination. In order to minimize confusion and unfair
competitive disadvantage to those businesses which are required to satisfy the current
Sign Code standards, the City intends to apply firm regulation of existing nonconforming
signs with a goal of their eventual elimination. This goal shall be achieved by strictly
construing limits on change, expansion, alteration, abandonment, and restoration.
Excluding normal maintenance and repair, a noncomplying sign shall not be moved,
altered, or enlarged unless it is brought into compliance with this Chapter. The following
exceptions shall be permitted:
1. A face change in a noncomplying sign that does not encroach onto a public rightof-
way or easement, and that is not deemed a public safety hazard by the
Planning Director or City Engineer.
2. A copy change in a noncomplying permanent sign which was originally approved
by the City with a changeable copy feature.
B. Abandonment. Within forty-five (45) calendar days after vacation of an existing business,
a noncomplying sign shall be removed unless the property owner informs the City in
writing of his intention to re-use the sign. The property owner shall be allowed one (1)
year to establish a new use on the site. If the property owner does not take action within
fourteen (14) days of written notice of violation, or if the signs are not re-used within the
one (1) year period, the City may abate the signs and recover any and all costs. An
abandoned sign shall not regain any legal noncomplying status later, even if the original
business reoccupies the property.
14-19-108 PROHIBITED SIGNS
A. Prohibited Sign Devices. Any sign not specifically allowed by this Chapter is prohibited.
In addition, the following sign devices are prohibited anywhere in the City, unless
specifically permitted herein:
1. A hot or cold air balloon, or inflatable, with the following exceptions:
a. Temporary signs, as allowed by this Title,
b. As part of a grand opening period, not to exceed thirty (30) days.
19 - 6
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
2. Animated signs are prohibited throughout the City, except in the Heavy
Commercial (C-H) Subzone where they are allowed subject to the restrictions set
forth in Section 14-19-113.
3. Any statuary bearing the likeness or suggestion of any product or logo.
4. Any roof sign.
5. Any snipe sign.
6. Any temporary sign except as allowed in this Title.
7. Any bus bench sign.
8. Any truck, trailer, or other vehicle, conspicuously, or regularly parked onpremises
or off-premises with an advertising message or logo displayed to attract
attention to a business, product or promotion. The Planning Director or
representative may require a business to remove such truck, trailer, or other
vehicle if in his opinion the vehicle is being utilized for advertising purposes.
9. Any Graffiti.
10. Any beacon or spotlight directed into the night sky except as part of an approved
promotional period as a temporary sign.
11. Any off-premises sign (includes billboards), off-premises directional sign, or offpremises
development sign, except as allowed herein.
B. Hand-bills, signs on public places and objects.
1. No person shall place or maintain any hand-bill, sign, or other depiction in or
upon any City owned real or personal property.
2. Any hand-bill, sign, or other depiction found posted upon any public property
contrary to the provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and may be summarily removed by the City. The person responsible for
any such unlawful posting shall be liable for the cost incurred in the removal
thereof and the City is authorized to recover said cost by any legal means.
3. Nothing in this section shall apply to the installation of a sign for which the City
has granted a written permit.
C. Unsafe Signs. No sign shall be permitted which is for any reason a threat to public safety
in the reasonable opinion of the City Engineer, or which by its location impairs the view
of a driver traveling on, exiting from, or entering upon, a public street, or which is
otherwise unsafe for vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Any such sign is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance and may be summarily removed by the City.
14-19-109 SIGNS ALLOWED IN ALL ZONES WITHOUT A PERMIT
The following signs are allowed in any zone, except on public property, without a sign permit:
19 - 7
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
A. One (1) on-premises directional sign whose sole purpose is to provide direction or
instruction, and which does not exceed five (5) square feet in area or four (4) feet in
height.
B. The flag of any nation or political subdivision. No flag shall exceed thirty two (32) square
feet in size. Not more than one (1) flag of each entity shall be flown at a time. Large flags
flown in high wind may be deemed a noise and/or public safety nuisance and are subject
to removal.
C. Any regulatory sign.
D. Any sign of twelve (12) square feet or less located in a residential single-family zone,
located in accordance with the provisions of the particular zone.
E. Any sign of twenty-four (24) square feet or less located in a residential multi-family zone,
located in accordance with the provisions of the particular zone.
F. Any holiday decoration that does not bear any commercial logo or message shall not be
considered a sign.
G. An approved sign with changeable copy area shall not require a permit to change the
copy area.
H. A political sign may be posted on any private property at any time, in accordance with
provisions of this section and the temporary sign provisions of this Title.
14-19-110 FLAGS AND FLAGPOLES
1. Flags greater than 32 square feet in size, and flagpoles greater than 50 feet in height, are
prohibited in all zones except as provided in this section.
2. In Commercial-General (C-G) and Commercial-Heavy (C-H) zones only, and on municipal
property in all zones, flags more than 32 square feet and up to 1800 square feet in size, and
flagpoles more than 50 feet and up to 120 feet in height, may be granted as a conditional
use.
a. A conditional use permit under subsection (b) may be granted if the following
conditions are met:
i. The property or business where it is located must be three acres or
greater in size;
ii. The property or business where it is located must have a minimum total
street frontage of at least five hundred (500) feet; and
iii. A second flagpole cannot be located within one thousand feet (1,000) feet
of an existing flagpole.
b. Every conditional use permit granted hereunder is subject to the following
regulations:
19 - 8
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
i. only be the flag of the United States shall be flown except that a second
flag up to 375 square feet in size may be flown on the same pole,
subordinate to the American Flag;
ii. the flag must be maintained in good condition or it cannot be flown;
iii. in the event of a high wind the City Engineer may, in the reasonable
exercise of discretion, order that the flag be taken down immediately until
the wind subsides;
iv. the flagpole is subject to the abandoned Sign Code of Title 14;
v. The second flag authorized herein shall not be flown without the flag of
the United States. The second flag shall be only the Utah state flag or an
on-premise business identification flag. If the American flag is flown at
half staff the second flag shall not be flown.
vi. There may only be one flagpole per property or business;
vii. Lighting shall be restricted as much as possible and shall not create a
light problem for traffic, other businesses, or residents;
viii. The flagpole shall be maintained in such a manner that it does not create
an unreasonable noise from the flag, chain, rope or other mechanisms or
parts.
3. Additional conditions may be imposed to mitigate any adverse affects relating to the
viewscape, noise, location upon the property, lighting, traffic, visibility and other issues
related to the flag and flagpole.
4. A sign permit and a building permit are required for any such flagpole.
14-19-111 SIGNS PERMITTED IN PROFESSIONAL OFFICE (P-O) AND HOSPITAL (H)
ZONES
A. The following sign types are permitted in Professional Office (P-O) and Hospital (H)
Zones with a permit:
1. Signs allowed. Each lot or parcel shall be allowed a permit for one (1) monument
sign per street frontage, and any wall and accessory signs as permitted.
2. Monument Sign. A lot or parcel with less than one hundred (100) linear feet of
frontage shall be allowed one (1) monument sign of up to thirty-two (32) square
feet with a maximum height of four (4) feet. A lot or parcel with one hundred
(100) linear feet of frontage or greater shall be allowed one monument sign of up
to sixty-four (64) square feet with a maximum height of six (6) feet, or two (2)
monument signs of up to thirty-two (32) square feet each with a maximum height
of four (4) feet. Such sign shall be located at least five (5) feet from any property
line, in an area of landscaping equal or greater than the area of the sign, and on
a landscaped berm not to exceed two (2) feet in height as measured at the
adjacent sidewalk or top back of curb.
19 - 9
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
3. Freestanding or Pole Sign. A pole sign or other free-standing sign shall be
expressly prohibited.
4. Wall signs. Sign area of up to ten percent (10%) of the primary facade with a
maximum of sixty-four (64) square feet, with secondary signs allowed on two (2)
additional faces not to exceed five percent (5%) of that wall surface with a
maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet. No sign shall extend above the roof line
of the building. Sign permit required.
5. Canopy or awning signs. Sign copy, including logo, shall not exceed twelve (12)
square feet or fifty percent (50%) of awning face area whichever is less. No
flashing or intermittent illumination permitted. Awning signs shall be considered
wall signs for area calculation and location purposes.
6. Changeable copy signs. Any changeable copy sign is expressly prohibited
except on parcels of ground three (3) acres or larger within the Hospital (H) zone.
Where permitted, one (1) changeable copy sign, not to exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet, shall be allowed along each frontage of one hundred (100) linear
feet or greater.
7. On-Premises Development Identification Signs. Each lot or parcel of commercial
or industrial property shall have not more than one (1) sign per public or private
street frontage identifying future site development. The sign shall not be erected
before the proposed development has been submitted for site plan review and
must be removed before final inspection or before permanent signs are installed.
The sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height, and the maximum size shall
be determined by the lot or parcel size as follows:
Less than Two (2) acres: Sixty four (64) square feet.
Two (2) acres or larger: One hundred twenty eight (128) square feet.
B. Other Approvals.
1. Any site plan application for a new multi-tenant center or building shall include a
proposal for all on-premises signs.
2. In cases with parcels of land of five (5) acres or larger, and with frontage of three
hundred (300) feet or more, a proposal for the overall design and placement of all
on-premises signs shall be submitted. Such signs may vary from the regulations
set forth herein and shall be considered as a conditional use for existing projects,
or as a condition of site plan approval for new projects. This provision does not
grant the applicant any expectation of approval of any sign that differs from the
requirements of this Title; rather it allows the City the ability to approve signing
schemes appropriate to the scale and impact of a project. The approving body
must determine that the proposed sign exceptions are not in conflict with the
purpose and intent of this Chapter, are in harmony with the general plan and
surrounding development, and are appropriate to the scale and impact of the
project.
19 - 10
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
14-19-112 SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE GENERAL COMMERCIAL (C-G) ZONE
A. The following sign types are allowed in the General Commercial (C-G) Zones with a
permit:
1. Each parcel of property shall be allowed either monument signs or one (1)
freestanding (pole) sign on each street frontage, and any wall and accessory
signs as permitted.
2. Monument Sign. Monument signs shall meet the following requirements:
a. A lot or parcel with less than one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage
shall be allowed one (1) monument sign of up to thirty-two (32) square
feet with a maximum height of four (4) feet.
b. A lot or parcel with one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage or greater
shall be allowed one (1) monument sign of up to sixty-four (64) square
feet with a maximum height of six (6) feet, or two (2) monument signs of
up to thirty-two (32) square feet each with a maximum height of four (4)
feet.
c. Such sign shall be located at least five (5) feet from any property line, in
an area of landscaping equal to or greater than the area of the sign, and
on a landscaped berm not to exceed two (2) feet in height as measured at
the adjacent sidewalk or top back of curb.
3. Freestanding or Pole Signs. Freestanding or pole signs shall meet the following
requirements:
a. Minimum one hundred (100) linear feet of street frontage for pole signs.
b. Maximum height of fifteen (15) feet.
c. Minimum ground clearance of eight (8) feet from street grade to bottom of
sign.
d. Minimum setback of five (5) feet from any public right-of-way or any
property line.
e. Maximum pole width of two (2) feet.
f. Minimum setback of ten (10) feet from any residential use or zone.
g. Signs shall be engineered to withstand one hundred (100) mph wind
loads.
h. Sign structure, excluding pole and base, shall not exceed sixty four (64)
sq. ft. for each side of a double faced sign, or sixty four (64) sq ft total
sign area on multi-faced signs.
4. Wall signs. Wall signs shall meet the following requirements:
19 - 11
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
a. Maximum sign area of twenty percent (20%) of the primary facade of the
building. Secondary signs allowed on three (3) additional facades not to
exceed five percent (5%) of those facades.
b. No sign, nor part of any sign, shall extend more than two (2) feet above
the highest point of a flat roof or mansard roof.
c. Corner parcels may have a maximum of twenty percent (20%) sign area
on both facades facing a public street.
5. Canopy or awning signs. Canopy or awning signs shall meet the following
requirements:
a. Sign copy, including logo, not to exceed twelve (12) square feet or fifty
percent (50%) of awning face area whichever is less.
b. No flashing or intermittent illumination permitted.
c. Awning signs are considered wall signs for area calculation and location
purposes.
6. Projecting signs. Projecting signs shall meet the following requirements:
a. Project not more than two (2) feet from the face of a wall and shall not
project over any public right of way.
b. Mounted no higher than fifteen (15) feet above the finished grade and
allow no less than ten (10) feet of clearance between the bottom of the
sign and the finished grade.
c. The area of the sign shall be included in the total square footage allowed
for flat and wall signs on the side of the building on which it is mounted.
7. Changeable copy signs. Changeable copy signs shall meet the following
requirements:
a. Manual changeable copy signs are allowed but are limited to not more
than fifty percent (50%) of any sign area.
b. Electronic reader boards and panels are prohibited.
8. Window Signs. Window signs shall meet the following requirements:
a. Window signs which are intended to be visible from the public right-ofway
and are painted on or temporarily affixed to the window surface shall
cover no more than twenty five (25%) of the entire surface area of a
group of windows and,
b. Shall not be affixed as to block clear view of exits or entrances or to
create a safety hazard.
19 - 12
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
c. This applies also to inside illuminated signs (e.g., neon, etc.) which are
within 18 inches of the window surface. No sign permit required. All
window signs will be counted as part of the total allowed sign area for wall
signs.
10. Gas Stations Signs. Signs for canopies over gas islands are allowed and shall
meet the following requirements:
a. Sign copy shall be a maximum of thirty (30%) of the face of the canopy.
b. The height to the top of the canopy fascia shall not exceed twenty (20)
feet from grade, and no canopy fascia shall exceed four (4) feet in height.
c. Individual letters, logos, or symbols shall not exceed four (4) feet in height
or project out from the fascia or wall more than six (6) inches.
11. Menu Boards. Menu boards shall meet the following requirements:
a. For drive-in restaurants, they shall be reviewed and approved by the
Planning Department. The following shall apply although the Planning
Commission may approve them at different locations depending upon
circumstances:
b. Only two (2) menu boards are allowed per site and must be located
outside of the front landscaped setback area.
c. Maximum area shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet per sign and
eight (8) feet in height.
12. On-Premises Development Identification Signs. On-premises development
identification signs shall meet the following requirements:
a. Each lot or parcel of commercial or industrial property shall have no more
than one (1) sign per public or private street frontage identifying future
site development.
b. The sign shall not be erected before the proposed development has been
submitted for site plan review.
c. The sign shall be removed before final inspection or before permanent
signs are installed.
d. The sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height, and the maximum
size shall be determined by the lot or parcel size as follows:
Less than two (2) acres: Sixty four (64) square feet
Two (2) acres or larger: One hundred twenty eight (128) square feet
19 - 13
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
B. Other Approvals.
1. All new multi-tenant centers/ buildings must submit a proposal for all on-premises
signs to the Planning Commission for design and placement approval.
2. In cases with parcels of land of five (5) acres or larger, and with frontage of three
hundred (300) feet or more, a proposal for the overall design and placement of all
on-premises signs shall be submitted. Such signs may vary from the regulations
set forth herein and shall be considered as a conditional use for existing projects,
or as a condition of site plan approval for new projects. This provision does not
grant the applicant any expectation of approval of any sign that differs from the
requirements of this Title; rather it allows the City the ability to approve signing
schemes appropriate to the scale and impact of a project. The approving body
must determine that the proposed sign exceptions are not in conflict with the
purpose and intent of this Chapter, are in harmony with the general plan and
surrounding development, and are appropriate to the scale and impact of the
project.
14-19-113 SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE HEAVY COMMERCIAL (C-H) ZONE
A. The following sign types are allowed in the Heavy Commercial (C-H) Zones with a
permit:
1. Each parcel of property shall be allowed either monument signs or one (1)
freestanding (pole) sign on each street frontage, and any wall and accessory
signs as permitted.
2. Monument Sign. Monument signs shall meet the following requirements:
a. A lot or parcel with less than one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage
shall be allowed one (1) monument sign of up to thirty-two (32) square
feet with a maximum height of four (4) feet.
b. A lot or parcel with one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage or greater
shall be allowed one (1) monument sign of up to sixty-four (64) square
feet with a maximum height of six (6) feet, or two (2) monument signs of
up to thirty-two (32) square feet each with a maximum height of four (4)
feet.
c. Such sign shall be located at least five (5) feet from any property line, in
an area of landscaping equal to or greater than the area of the sign, and
on a landscaped berm not to exceed two (2) feet in height as measured at
the adjacent sidewalk or top back of curb.
3. Freestanding or Pole Signs. Freestanding or pole signs shall meet the following
requirements:
a. A lot or parcel with at least one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage shall
be allowed one (1) freestanding sign of up to Sixty (60) square feet for the
first one hundred (100) feet of lineal street frontage plus one (1) square
19 - 14
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
foot for each lineal foot of frontage over one hundred (100), to a
maximum of one hundred twenty (120) square feet total.
b. Double faced signs shall be allowed the maximum area on each side.
c. Multi-faced signs shall be allowed only a combined sign face total equal
to the maximum area allowed.
d. Maximum height of thirty (30) feet.
e. Minimum ground clearance of seven (7) feet from sign grade to bottom of
sign.
f. Maximum pole width of two (2) feet.
g. Minimum setback of five (5) feet from any public right-of-way and/or street
property line.
h. Minimum setback of ten (10) feet from any residential use or zone.
i. Signs shall be engineered to the standards of the adopted version of the
International Building Code.
1) Freestanding Freeway-Oriented Signs. A freestanding sign located
immediately adjacent to the I-15 corridor or Frontage Road shall meet all
the criteria of this section except that it shall not exceed forty (40) feet in
height nor have a pole and/or pole cover that exceed four (4) feet in
width.
4. Wall signs. Wall signs shall meet the following requirements:
a. Maximum sign area of twenty percent (20%) of the facade of the building
facing the main public street with secondary signs allowed on two (2)
additional faces not to exceed five percent (5%) of that wall surface.
b. No sign, nor part of any sign, shall extend more than two (2) feet above
the highest point of a flat roof or mansard roof. Corner parcels may have
a maximum of twenty percent (20%) sign area on both facades facing a
public street.
5. Canopy or awning signs. Canopy or awning signs shall meet the following
requirements:
a. Sign copy, including logo, not to exceed twelve (12) square feet or fifty
percent (50%) of awning face area whichever is less.
b. No flashing or intermittent illumination permitted.
c. Awning signs are considered wall signs for area calculation and location
purposes.
19 - 15
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
6. Projecting signs. Projecting signs shall meet the following requirements:
a. Project not more than two (2) feet from the face of a wall and shall not
project over a public right-of-way.
b. Be mounted no higher than fifteen (15) feet above the finished grade and
allow no less than ten (10) feet of clearance between the bottom of the
sign and the finished grade.
c. Be included in the total square footage allowed for flat and wall signs on
the side of the building on which it is mounted as measured under Section
14-19-117 of this Chapter.
7. Changeable copy signs. Manual changeable copy signs shall meet the following
requirements:
a. Manual changeable copy signs shall be limited to fifty (50%) of the total
sign area.
b. Electronic changeable copy signs shall be limited to fifty (50%) or thirtytwo
(32) square feet of the total sign area, whichever is less.
c. Electronic changeable copy signs located on properties immediately
abutting the I-15 corridor or frontage road shall be limited to fifty (50%) or
sixty four (64) square feet of the total sign area, whichever is less, and
that the sign shall be reduced in brightness by fifty percent (50%)
between the hours of eleven (11) p.m. and six (6) a.m.
8. Window Signs. Window signs shall meet the following requirements:
a. Window signs which are intended to be visible from the public right-ofway
and are painted on or temporarily affixed to the window surface shall
cover no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the entire surface area of
a group of windows.
b. Shall not be affixed as to block clear view of exits or entrances or to
create a safety hazard.
c. This applies also to inside illuminated signs (e.g., neon, etc.) which are
within eighteen (18) inches of the window surface. No sign permit
required.
d. All window signs will be counted as part of the total allowed sign area for
wall signs.
9. Gas Stations Signs. Signs for canopies over gas islands are allowed as follows:
a. Sign copy shall be a maximum of thirty percent (30%) of the face of the
canopy.
19 - 16
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
b. The height to the top of the canopy fascia shall not exceed twenty (20)
feet from grade, and no canopy fascia shall exceed four (4) feet in height.
c. Individual letters, logos, or symbols shall not exceed four (4) feet in height
or project out from the fascia or wall more than six (6) inches.
10. Menu Boards. Menu boards for drive-in restaurants shall be reviewed and
approved by the Planning Department at site plan review. The following shall
apply although the Planning Commission may approve them at different locations
depending upon circumstances:
a. Only two (2) menu boards are allowed per site and shall be located
outside of the front landscaped setback area.
b. Maximum area shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet per sign and
eight (8) feet in height.
11. On-Premises Development Identification Signs. On-premises development
identification signs shall meet the following requirements:
a. Each lot or parcel of commercial or industrial property shall have not more
than one (1) sign per public or private street frontage identifying future
site development.
b. The sign shall not be erected before the proposed development has been
submitted for site plan review and must be removed before final
inspection or before permanent signs are installed.
c. The sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height, and
d. The maximum size shall be determined by the lot or parcel size as
follows:
Less than two (2) acres: Sixty four (64) square feet.
Two (2) acres or larger: One hundred twenty eight (128) square feet.
12. Animated Sign. The only type of animated sign permitted is an electronic reader
board or panel, subject to the height, area, and other restrictions of this Chapter.
B. Other Approvals.
1. All new multi-tenant centers/ buildings shall submit a proposal for all on-premises
signs to the Planning Commission for design and placement approval.
2. In cases with parcels of land of five (5) acres or larger, and with frontage of three
hundred (300) feet or more, a proposal for the overall design and placement of all
on-premises signs shall be submitted. Such signs may vary from the regulations
set forth herein and shall be considered as a conditional use for existing projects,
or as a condition of site plan approval for new projects. This provision does not
grant the applicant any expectation of approval of any sign that differs from the
requirements of this Title; rather it allows the City the ability to approve signing
19 - 17
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
schemes appropriate to the scale and impact of a project. The approving body
must determine that the proposed sign exceptions are not in conflict with the
purpose and intent of this Chapter, are in harmony with the general plan and
surrounding development, and are appropriate to the scale and impact of the
project.
14-19-114 SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL (C-N) ZONE
A. The following sign types are allowed in the Neighborhood Commercial (C-N) Zones with
a permit:
1. Each parcel of property shall be limited to monument signs and any wall and
accessory signs as permitted.
2. Monument Sign. Monument signs shall meet the following requirements:
a. A lot or parcel with less than one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage
shall be allowed one (1) monument sign of up to thirty-two (32) square
feet with a maximum height of four (4) feet.
b. A lot or parcel with one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage or greater
shall be allowed one monument sign of up to sixty-four (64) square feet
with a maximum height of six (6) feet, or two (2) monument signs of up to
thirty-two (32) square feet each with a maximum height of four (4) feet.
c. Such sign shall be located at least five (5) feet from any property line, in
an area of landscaping equal or greater than the area of the sign, and on
a landscaped berm not to exceed two (2) feet in height as measured at
the adjacent sidewalk or top back of curb.
3. Wall signs. Wall signs shall meet the following requirements:
a. Maximum sign area of fifteen (15%) of the primary facade of the building.
b. A corner property may have signs on the facade facing the secondary
street, with a maximum sign area of five (5%) of that facade.
c. No portion of the sign shall extend more than two (2) feet above the
highest point of a flat roof or mansard roof.
4. Canopy or awning signs. Canopy or awning signs shall meet the following
requirements:
a. Sign copy, including logo, not to exceed twelve (12) square feet or fifty
percent (50%) of awning face area whichever is less.
b. No flashing or intermittent illumination permitted.
c. Awning signs are considered wall signs for area calculation and location
purposes.
19 - 18
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
5. Projecting signs. Projecting signs shall meet the following requirements:
a. Project not more than Two (2) feet from the face of a wall and shall not
project over any public right-of-way.
b. Mounted no higher than fifteen (15) feet above the finished grade and
allow no less than ten (10) feet of clearance between the bottom of the
sign and the finished grade.
c. The area of the sign shall be included in the total square footage allowed
for flat and wall signs on the side of the building on which it is mounted.
6. Changeable copy signs. Changeable copy or electric message center signs are
not permitted.
7. Window Signs. Window signs shall meet the following requirements:
a. Signs which are intended to be visible from the public right-of-way and
are painted on or temporarily affixed to the window surface shall cover no
more than twenty five percent (25%) of the entire surface area of a group
of windows
b. Shall not be affixed as to block clear view of exits or entrances or to
create a safety hazard.
c. Neon and other illuminated signs are not permitted in windows.
8. Gas Stations Signs. Signs for canopies over gas islands are allowed as follows:
a. Sign copy shall be a maximum of thirty percent (30%) of the face of the
canopy.
b. The height to the top of the canopy fascia shall not exceed twenty (20)
feet from grade, and no canopy fascia shall exceed four (4) feet in height.
c. Individual letters, logos, or symbols shall not exceed four (4) feet in height
or project out from the fascia or wall more than six (6) inches.
9. Menu Boards. Menu boards for drive-up windows are to be reviewed and
approved by the Planning Department. The following shall apply:
a. Only two (2) menu boards are allowed per site and shall be located
behind the front landscaped setback area.
b. Maximum area shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet per sign and
eight (8) feet in height.
10. On-Premises Development Identification Signs. On-premises development
identification signs shall meet the following requirements:
19 - 19
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
a. Each lot or parcel of commercial or industrial property shall not have more
than one (1) sign per public or private street frontage identifying future
site development.
b. The sign shall not be erected before the proposed development has been
submitted for site plan review and must be removed before final
inspection or before permanent signs are installed.
c. The sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height, and the maximum
size shall be determined by the lot or parcel size as follows:
Less than two (2) acres: Sixty four (64) square feet.
Two (2) acres or larger: One hundred twenty eight (128) square feet.
14-19-115 SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE DOWNTOWN (DN) ZONE
A. The following sign types are allowed in the Downtown (DN) Zones with a permit:
1. Each parcel of property shall be allowed monument signs and any wall and
accessory signs as permitted.
2. Monument Sign. Monument signs shall meet the following requirements:
a. A lot or parcel with less than one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage
shall be allowed one (1) monument sign of up to thirty-two (32) square
feet with a maximum height of four (4) feet.
b. A lot or parcel with one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage or greater
shall be allowed one monument sign of up to sixty-four (64) square feet
with a maximum height of six (6) feet, or two (2) monument signs of up to
thirty-two (32) square feet each with a maximum height of four (4) feet.
c. Such sign shall be located at least five (5) feet from any property line, in
an area of landscaping equal or greater than the area of the sign, and on
a landscaped berm not to exceed two (2) feet in height as measured at
the adjacent sidewalk or top back of curb.
3. Block Directory Signs.
a. The City may erect, or permit to be erected, a sign or sign structure at
each corner of Main Street within the Downtown Zone that indicates the
businesses located within the physical block on which the sign is located.
b. The design, size, and location of these signs shall be determined by the
Planning Commission.
c. The City Council, or its agent, may charge a fee to recover only the cost
of installing, maintaining, and updating the signs.
4. Wall signs. Wall signs shall meet the following requirements:
19 - 20
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
a. Maximum sign area of twenty percent (20%) of the primary facade of the
building with secondary signs allowed on two (2) additional facades not to
exceed five percent (5%) of those facades.
b. No sign, nor part of any sign, shall extend more than two (2) feet above
the highest point of a flat roof or mansard roof. Corner parcels may have
a maximum of twenty percent (20%) sign area on both facades facing a
public street.
5. Canopy or awning signs. Canopy or awning signs shall meet the following
requirements:
a. Sign copy, including logo, not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the awning
face area.
b. No flashing or intermittent illumination permitted.
c. Awning signs are considered wall signs for area calculation and location
purposes.
d. Properties fronting on Main Street may have an awning and/or awning
sign that projects up to six (6) feet over the Main Street right-of-way, as
long as all of the following are met:
i. The awning is at least five (5) feet horizontally from the improved
edge of any vehicle traffic lane or parking stall.
ii. There is a minimum clearance of at least seven (7) feet between
the sidewalk and any part of the awning.
6. Projecting signs on Main Street. Properties fronting on Main Street may have
awnings and/or awning signs that project up to six (6) feet over the Main Street
right-of-way, as long as all of the following are met:
a. Any part of the sign is at least five (5) feet horizontally from the improved
edge of any vehicle traffic lane or parking stall
b. There is a minimum vertical clearance of at least ten (10) feet between
the sidewalk and any part of the sign.
c. The awnings are maintained in a safe manner. Any awning that is
deemed unsafe by the City Engineer is declared to be a public nuisance
and may be summarily removed.
7. Projecting signs not on Main Street. Projecting signs not along Main Street shall
be allowed and shall meet the following requirements:
a. Project not more than four (4) feet from the face of a wall and shall not
project over any public right of way.
19 - 21
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
b. Mounted no higher than fifteen (15) feet above the finished grade and
allow no less than ten (10) feet of clearance between the bottom of the
sign and the finished grade.
c. The area of the sign shall be included in the total square footage allowed
for flat and wall signs on the side of the building on which it is mounted.
8. Changeable copy signs. Manual changeable copy signs are allowed but are
limited to not more than fifty percent (50%) of any sign area. Electronic reader
boards and panels are prohibited.
9. Window Signs. Window signs shall meet the following requirements:
a. Window signs which are intended to be visible from the public right-ofway
and are painted on or temporarily affixed to the window surface shall
cover no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the entire surface area of
a group of windows.
b. Shall not be affixed as to block clear view of exits or entrances or to
create a safety hazard.
c. This applies also to inside illuminated signs (e.g., neon, etc.) which are
within eighteen (18) inches of the window surface.
d. No sign permit required.
e. All window signs will be counted as part of the total allowed sign area for
wall signs.
10. Gas Stations Signs. Signs for canopies over gas islands are allowed as follows:
a. Sign copy, corporate logos, etc. shall be a maximum of ten percent (10%)
of one (1) face of the canopy.
b. The height to the top of the canopy fascia shall not exceed twenty (20)
feet from grade, and no canopy fascia shall exceed four (4) feet in height.
c. Individual letters, logos, or symbols shall not exceed four (4) feet in height
or project out from the fascia or wall more than six (6) inches.
11. Menu Boards. Menu boards for drive-up windows are to be reviewed and
approved by the Planning Department. The following shall apply:
a. Only two (2) menu boards are allowed per site and must be located
behind the front landscaped setback area.
b. Maximum area shall not exceed sixty-four64 square feet per sign and
eight (8) feet in height.
12. On-Premises Development Identification Signs. Each lot or parcel of commercial
or industrial property shall have not more than one (1) sign per public or private
19 - 22
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
street frontage identifying future site development. The sign shall not be erected
before the proposed development has been submitted for site plan review and
must be removed before final inspection or before permanent signs are installed.
The sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height, and the maximum size shall
be determined by the lot or parcel size as follows:
Less than two (2) acres: Sixty four (64) square feet.
Two (2) acres or larger: One hundred twenty eight (128) square feet.
B. Other Approvals.
1. All new multi-tenant centers/buildings shall submit a proposal for all on-premises
signs to the Planning Commission for design and placement approval.
2. In cases with parcels of land of three (3) acres or larger, and with frontage of two
hundred (200) feet or more, a proposal for the overall design and placement of all
on-premises signs shall be submitted. Such signs may vary from the regulations
set forth herein and shall be considered as a conditional use for existing projects,
or as a condition of site plan approval for new projects. This provision does not
grant the applicant any expectation of approval of any sign that differs from the
requirements of this Title; rather it allows the City the ability to approve signing
schemes appropriate to the scale and impact of a project. The approving body
must determine that the proposed sign exceptions are not in conflict with the
purpose and intent of this Chapter, are in harmony with the general plan and
surrounding development, and are appropriate to the scale and impact of the
project.
14-19-116 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Allowable Signs. The following signs are permitted in Residential Zones. Home occupation
signs shall be in conformance with the standards set forth in section 14-17-105 Home
Occupation Requirements.
A. Temporary Sign: One temporary sign not to exceed twelve (12) square feet.
B. Identification Signs for Institutional Uses such as Public Buildings, Private Schools and
Churches: One monument or one wall mounted identification sign will be allowed for
public buildings, private schools and churches. Monument identification signs shall not
exceed 40 square feet in area and shall not exceed 6 feet in height including a maximum
3 foot high base (not included in the sign area). Monument signs shall be placed a
minimum of 5 feet from all property lines on a landscaped berm not to exceed two (2)
feet in height as measured at the adjacent sidewalk or top back of curb and shall not be
located in a vision clearance area as defined in this Title. There shall be at least 2
square feet of landscaped area for each square foot of sign area. Wall mounted signs
shall not exceed 24 square feet and shall not be located higher than the eave of the
building.
C. Parks and Publicly Owned Golf Courses: May have signs as approved by the Bountiful
City Council.
19 - 23
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
14-19-117 TEMPORARY SIGNAGE
A. PURPOSE. Permanent signs permitted by this Chapter are intended to allow adequate
and reasonable location of signs for local businesses. However, the City realizes that
from time to time it is necessary for a business to advertise special events and other
commercial messages. To help businesses address this issue, the following regulations
have been established for temporary banners and signs.
B. Any temporary sign shall be subject to the following:
1. A temporary sign shall be located on-premises only, except for an A-Frame sign
which may be located in a parkstrip immediately in front of the premises in
accordance with the provisions of this Title.
2. A temporary sign shall not be located within five (5) feet of any public sidewalk or
any public right-of-way, except for an A-Frame sign which may be located in a
parkstrip immediately in front of the premises in accordance with the provisions
of this Title.
3. A temporary sign shall not shall not be illuminated, flash, blink, spin, rotate, block
traffic visibility of vehicles entering onto a public street or cause a public nuisance
of any kind.
4. A temporary sign shall not be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any
residential zone or use.
5. A temporary sign shall not be located within a clear-view area as set forth in this
Title.
6. For any single or two tenant property, the following shall apply:
a. Any tenant with less than ten thousand (10,000) sq. ft. of building area
shall not display more than one (1) temporary sign at any time. The
maximum area of any temporary sign shall be thirty-two (32) sq. ft.
b. Any tenant with greater than ten thousand (10,000) sq. ft. of building area
shall not display more than two (2) temporary signs at any time. The
maximum combined area of the two (2) signs shall be forty-eight (48) sq.
ft.
c. Where a property abuts two (2) streets, one (1) additional sign, oriented
to the other abutting street, shall be permitted.
7. For any multi-tenant property, the following shall apply:
a. Any business with less than ten thousand (10,000) sq ft of building area
shall not display more than one temporary sign at any time. The
maximum area of any sign shall be twenty-four (24) sq ft. However, in no
instance shall there be displayed more than three (3) temporary signs per
one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage.
19 - 24
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
8. A temporary sign shall be a banner, wall sign, A-Frame sign, or a pedestal type
sign. No other type of sign is permitted.
9. The following items are not lawful temporary signs: a portable reader board, any
type of electric sign, a sign attached to another sign or sign structure, a balloon, a
streamer, an inflatable device, and/or a vehicle or trailer with any graphics or
advertisements.
10. A temporary sign shall be substantially constructed and adequately weighted,
anchored, or attached to the ground to protect the public and property.
11. No permit shall be required for a temporary A-Frame sign that is removed at the
end of each business day.
12. An A-Frame sign shall be designed, constructed, and installed such that it will lay
flat if it is contacted by any object.
13. Any temporary sign, other than an A-Frame sign, shall be posted not more than
one (1) time each business quarter, for a maximum of thirty (30) concurrent days.
14. No temporary sign shall be taller than six (6) feet in height.
15. Zones
16. Permit required.
14-19-118 SIGN PERMIT PROCESS
A. No person shall erect, install, or paint any sign, or change the face of any sign, whether
it be temporary or permanent in nature, without obtaining a sign permit from the Planning
Department except as outlined in this Code. This includes new signs, signs to be added
to existing buildings or uses, and existing signs that are to be enlarged, changed, or
otherwise altered.
B. Any sign shall be constructed of low maintenance, weather resistant materials.
C. The approval for a sign or sign application shall be based on the following criteria and
standards:
1. Conformance to the provisions of this Chapter and all other ordinances and
standards of the City.
2. The impact upon the health, safety, and welfare, of community.
3. The effect of the sign upon ingress, egress, internal traffic circulation, off-street
parking facilities, loading and service areas and pedestrian ways.
4. Compatibility with surrounding structures and signs.
19 - 25
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
5. Concealment of all mechanical equipment, appurtenances, and utilities, from
view. Electrical boxes, wires, or switches, and other related devices shall be an
integral part to the sign design.
6. The location of the sign upon the premises.
7. The location of existing signs, if any, upon the premises, or in the immediate
area.
D. The Planning Department, Administrative Committee, Planning Commission or City
Council shall have the function, duty, and power to approve, disapprove, or approve a
sign permit with conditions, as dictated by this Title.
E. A sign permit shall be reviewed and approved as follows:
1. New Developments. Preliminary plans for signs in new developments must first
be approved by the Planning Commission during the site plan approval process.
A sign permit shall be issued only after it is determined that the proposed sign
complies with the approved sign plan and with the provisions of this Chapter.
2. Existing Developments. Issuance of any sign permit for an existing development
or where ownership of a legal existing business changes and necessitates a new
sign, the permit may be approved by the Planning Department provided that the
sign meets the requirements of this Chapter.
F. An application for a sign permit shall be filed with the Planning Department on a form
provided. It shall include:
1. All required fees.
2. Clear and complete graphics and written information adequate to show
compliance with all applicable requirements of this Chapter.
G. The Planning Director or his designee shall review any permit application submittal for
compliance. If any part of the submittal requires review and/or approval by any land use
authority other than the Planning Director, the applicant shall submit the plans to that
body and receive its approval prior to the issuance of a sign permit. Any permit which
meets the requirements and criteria of this Title shall be approved. A permit which does
not meet the requirements and criteria of this Title shall be returned to the applicant.
H. The decision of the Planning Director may be appealed as set forth in Section 14-2-106
of this Title.
I. At least two (2) copies of the following specific information shall be provided in writing for
the sign types indicated:
1. Monument and Freestanding or Pole Signs.
a. A site plan showing the location of any and all signs, including existing
and proposed. The site plan shall include:
19 - 26
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
i. The location of any buildings on the property and within fifty (50)
feet on adjacent properties,
ii. Property lines and dimensions,
iii. The required setback from property lines, public-rights of-way,
intersections, easements, and driveways,
iv. Any required landscaping.
b. An accurately dimensioned, scaled drawing showing height, color, square
foot dimensions, landscaping, sign composition, type of illumination and
how the sign will appear from the street.
c. Details of sign construction including an electrical plan and foundation
scheme. If the sign constitutes a structure or otherwise falls under the
jurisdiction of the International Building Code, then the foundation plan
shall be stamped and signed by a Licensed Utah Professional Engineer.
2. Wall Signs.
a. A scaled drawing showing square foot dimensions of the building and the
sign, the sign composition and the type of illumination (if applicable).
b. A profile drawing of how the sign will appear from the street/parking area
and on the building.
c. Details of sign construction and attachment, including an electrical plan (if
applicable).
3. Temporary signs requiring permits.
a. A site plan showing the location of any and all signs, including existing
and proposed. The site plan shall include:
i. The location of any buildings on the property and within fifty (50)
feet on adjacent properties,
ii. Property lines and dimensions,
iii. The required setback from property lines, public rights-of-way,
intersections, easements and driveways,
iv. Any required landscaping.
b. Length of period for display and the type of request.
J. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED. The following additional information shall be
required with all sign permit applications:
19 - 27
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
1. A current Bountiful City business license or a completed business license
application, where applicable.
2. Business address and phone number.
3. Property owner address of and phone number.
4. General and/or electrical contractor’s license number.
5. Value of the sign.
14-19-119 SAFETY AND LOCATION STANDARDS FOR PERMANENT SIGNS
A. Any sign erected in Bountiful City shall comply with the provisions of the current National
Electrical Code, International Building Code, the Bountiful City Code and this Code
effective at the time the permit is issued.
B. Any permanent sign shall be engineered to demonstrate conformance with the
applicable provisions of the current International Building Code and, where required by
this Code or by the Chief Building Official, shall be accompanied by a drawing stamped
by a structural engineer licensed by the State of Utah attesting to the adequacy of the
proposed construction of the sign and any supporting device.
C. No sign, fixture, or device involving electrical wiring or connections shall be erected or
installed in Bountiful City except by a licensed and bonded contractor.
D. All permanent signs must be built of durable and permanent materials.
E. Permanent power sources for signs must be concealed underground or within a
structure and away from public view and immediate access.
F. No sign or other advertising structure shall be erected which in any manner may be
confused with a public necessity sign, official traffic sign or signal, or which bears words
normally used in such signs, i.e., stop, go slow, caution, danger, warning, turn here, turn,
etc.
G. No sign or any advertising structure shall be erected which by reason of its size,
location, shape, content, coloring, or manner of illumination might be confused as a
traffic control device.
H. No sign shall have lighting which impairs the vision of anyone traveling upon a public
right-of-way or distracts any driver or pedestrian so as to create a public nuisance.
I. No sign, except for a regulatory sign, shall be located within a clear-view area, as set
forth in section 14-16-108 of this Title.
J. There are certain situations where a sign poses or may pose an immediate public safety
hazard. The following signs are deemed unlawful and hazardous to the public safety,
and any employee of the City is authorized to immediately abate, remove or otherwise
remedy them:
19 - 28
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
1. Any sign or related structure which interferes with the safe view of drivers
entering a public right-of-way from any driveway or property.
2. Any sign that extends over any pedestrian or vehicular access area, unless
specifically authorized by the City.
3. Any sign which interferes with the use of any fire escape, exit, required stairway,
door ventilator, or window.
4. Any sign which has less horizontal or vertical clearance from communication
lines and/or energized electrical power lines, according the provisions of this Title
and the standards of the Bountiful Light and Power Department.
5. Any sign that is located on publicly owned land, inside street rights-of-way, or on
public easements, except signs owned and erected by an authorized public
agency or that are specifically authorized herein.
K. Every sign shall be maintained and kept in good repair, including without limitation, the
repair of glass, plastic, or other sign face material which is missing, broken, damaged, or
deteriorated and the repair of any pole, frame, support or similar structure which is
broken, damaged, or deteriorated.
L. Every sign shall be maintained as originally approved in its sign permit. This applies to
all components of the sign including the sign copy, except:
1. Portions of changeable copy on approved signs.
2. Changes of copy area only on legally conforming signs. All non-complying signs,
and any change to the cabinet, pole, structure, or any other sign element
requires a sign permit.
M. The maintenance, renovation, or repair of a sign may require a building permit under the
current International Building Code.
N. Whenever the use of any sign, as determined by the discontinuance of the permitted use
for which the sign was used, or the use of the sign frame or sign supporting structure
has been discontinued for a period of 45 consecutive days, such sign, sign frame, or
sign supporting structure shall be removed immediately.
O. All free-standing or monument signs installed in Bountiful City must be incorporated into
a landscape design or planter box. Exceptions to this rule must be approved by the
Planning Commission.
P. All on-premises freestanding signs shall have the structural supports covered or
concealed with pole covers (pylon covers). The actual structural supports shall not be
exposed for the safety and welfare of any person near the said sign.
Q. All permanent signs shall be permanently mounted on foundations and footings which
conform to the International Building Code.
19 - 29
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
R. The light from the illumination of any sign shall be carefully directed so that the light is
not obtrusive or a nuisance to traffic or adjacent properties; particularly in residential
neighborhoods.
S. All buildings shall be identified with a numbered or lettered street address in addition to
optional business identification. The letters or numbers shall be at least four (4) inches in
height as required by the Fire Marshall.
T. Any internally illuminated pole or wall sign, including any electronic reader board or
panel, shall be installed with an automatic shutoff timer.
19 - 30
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
14-19-120 MEASUREMENT OF REGULATED SIGN AREA
A. Flat or Wall Signs
1. Sign copy mounted or painted on a
background panel or area distinctively
painted, textured, or constructed as
background for the sign copy shall be
measured as that area contained within the
outside dimensions of the background
panel or surface.
2. Sign area for copy mounted as individual
letters and/or graphics against a wall or
fascia of a building or other structure that
has not been painted, textured, or otherwise
altered to provide a distinctive
background for the sign copy shall be
measured as the area enclosed by the
smallest single rectangle that will enclose
all sign copy.
3. For sign copy mounted or painted on an
illuminated sign or architectural element of
a building, the entire illuminated surface or
illuminated architectural element which
contains sign copy shall be counted as sign
area.
19 - 31
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
B. Monument Signs.
1. The regulated area of a monument sign
shall include all parts of the sign or structure
that contains identification (words of
symbols) and information.
2. The height of a ground sign shall be the
distance from the highest point of the sign to
the height of the street or sidewalk.
C. Multiple Face Signs. (including but not
limited to freestanding or monument signs):
1. Single Panel. Measure the area of the
single face only.
2. Double Panel. If the interior angle between
the top two (2) faces is thirty (30) degrees or
less, the area to be measured will be the
area of one face only. If the angle between
the two sign faces is greater than thirty (30)
degrees, the sign area to be measured will
be the sum of the areas of the two (2) faces.
19 - 32
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
D. The regulated area of freestanding signs
shall include all parts of the sign or structure
that contains identification (words or
symbols) and information.
1. The height of a freestanding sign shall be
the vertical distance measured from the
highest point of the sign to the grade of the
adjacent street, curb, or sidewalk, or the
crown of the street when there is no curb or
sidewalk.
2. For spherical, freeform, sculptural, or other
non-planer signs, the sign area shall be the
sum of the areas of the four vertical sides of
the smallest polyhedron that will encompass
the sign structure.
19 - 33
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
14-19-121 ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER STANDARDS
A. An electronic message center is not allowed in any zone except as set forth in this
Chapter.
B. An electronic message center in any zone shall meet the following criteria:
1. An electronic message center shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
2. An electronic message center is prohibited if it exceeds more than 50% of the
total sign area.
3. An electronic message center shall only be constructed as part of a permitted
freestanding (pole), wall or monument sign.
4. An electronic message center shall be located only on a single or double-sided
planer sign, and not on a multiple face or other non-planer sign.
5. An electronic message center shall not be constructed in a location that
interferes with a regulatory device, as determined by the City Engineer.
6. An electronic message center shall be equipped with a sensor or other device
that automatically determines the ambient illumination and must be programmed
to automatically dim according to ambient light conditions.
7. Where allowed as a conditional use, conditions may be imposed by the planning
commission regarding hours of sign operation, sign height, sign size and/or
setbacks from property lines to mitigate impacts on nearby residential properties,
to protect critical viewsheds as established in the General Plan, or to prevent
potential traffic hazards.
8. An electronic message center shall only be constructed in a location and in a
manner permitted by this Title.
C. An electronic message center in any zone, with the exception of an electronic message
center located on Hwy 89, shall be operated at all times in accordance with the following:
1. An electronic message center shall only display static images or scrolling text.
2. An electronic message center shall not display video images, or scintillating
images.
3. The minimum display duration shall be four (4) seconds.
4. The maximum image transition duration shall be three (3) seconds.
5. A transition shall be from one image to another either by fading or dissolving to
the next image, without the use of flashing, animation, or movement.
6. No image shall be shown on, or with, a white background.
19 - 34
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
7. The illuminance of an electronic message center shall not increase ambient
lighting conditions by more than 0.3 footcandles when measured perpendicular to
the electronic message center face at a distance set forth below:
Area of Sign (sq ft.) Measurement Distance
(ln ft.)
10 32
15 39
20 45
25 50
30 55
35 59
40 63
45 67
50 71
55 74
60 77
65 81
70 84
75 87
80 89
85 92
90 95
95 97
100 100
8. An electronic message center shall not exceed 7,000 nits during daylight hours.
9. An electronic message center shall not exceed 18,000 nits during evening and
nighttime hours.
D. An electronic message center is allowed only on a commercial property in the following
locations within the Heavy Commercial (CH), General Commercial (CG), Mixed-Use
(MXD), and Downtown (DN) zoning designations:
Table 14-19-121 D. Electronic Message Center Location, Style, and Approval Process
P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use X = Not Allowed
Zone Location Pole Monument Wall
CH, CG Hwy 89 P P P
CG, DN 500 South Street – West of 100 East St. C P C
CH, CG, DN 400 North St. – West of Main St. C C C
CH, CG 2600 South – West of 500 West St. C P C
CG, MXD Orchard Drive X C X
E. An electronic message center shall not be located on any property that does not directly
front on a street or public right-of-way set forth in section D above.
19 - 35
Chapter 19 Sign Ordinance Ord 2020.01.docx
F. An electronic message center shall only be oriented toward a street or public right-ofway
set forth in Section D, above, and in no other direction.
G. An electronic message center, and any sign containing an electronic message center,
shall be constructed or modified without a permit, unless specifically exempted by this
title.
H. A temporary sign of any kind is not allowed on any parcel or lot with an electronic
message center.
I. If otherwise permitted under §14-19-121, and subject to such conditions that may be
established in the conditional use permit process, pole signs legally existing in the
Downtown (DN) zone on November 30, 2011, may incorporate an electronic message
center, if the entire sign and supporting structure are brought into compliance with the
standards for a pole sig within the General Commercial (CG) zone.
20 - 1
Chapter 20 Subdivisions Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 20
SUBDIVISIONS
INDEX
PART 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
PART 2 SUBDIVISION APPROVAL PROCEDURE
PART 3 SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
PART 4 AMENDING OR VACATING A SUBDIVISION PLAT
PART 5 COMMERCIAL, CONDOMINIUM, AND PUD PLATS
20 - 2
Chapter 20 Subdivisions Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 20
SUBDIVISIONS
PART 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
14-20-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS
14-20-102 APPLICABILITY OF THIS TITLE
14-20-103 DEFINITIONS
14-20-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. The underlying purpose and intent of this Subdivision Code is to promote the health,
safety, convenience, good order, aesthetics and general welfare of the present and
future inhabitants of the City. Any proposed subdivision and its ultimate use shall be in
the best interest of the public and shall be in harmony with good neighborhood
development of the area concerned and of the City as a whole.
B. In cases where unusual topographical or other exceptional conditions exist, variations
from this Subdivision Code may be made by the City Council, after recommendation
from the City Planning Commission.
C. The most recent copy of the Bountiful Street Master Plan, as approved by the Bountiful
City Council, is hereby adopted by reference as a part of this Code. No subdivision that
conflicts with the Bountiful Street Master Plan shall be approved by the City unless the
subdivision or the Plan is amended in such a manner that they are brought into
harmony.
D. It is unlawful to:
1. Record in the office of the Davis County Recorder a subdivision plat
which includes land wholly or partially located within the city limits of
Bountiful prior to its having obtained final approval from the City Council
and being fully executed as required herein;
2. Record a deed or other instrument dividing or subdividing, or purporting to divide
or subdivide, land within Bountiful City when the division or subdivision of land
has not been approved by Bountiful City in accordance with the Bountiful Land
Use Code.
3. Sell lots contained within a subdivision prior to the time it is recorded in
the office of the Davis County Recorder; or
4. Represent to another that a subdivision is either recorded with the Davis
County Recorder or approved by the Bountiful City Council when it is not
recorded or approved; or
5. Violate any of the provisions of this Subdivision Code.
20 - 3
Chapter 20 Subdivisions Ord 2020.01.docx
14-20-102 APPLICABILITY OF THIS TITLE
A. Unless exempted from subdivision requirements by State law, this Subdivision Code
applies to any property that is divided or proposed to be divided into two or more lots
which are located wholly or partially within the city limits of Bountiful, Utah.
B. No person shall subdivide property except in compliance with this chapter, Bountiful City
Land Use Code, and any other applicable law.
14-20-103 DEFINITIONS
A. The definitions of terms set forth in the Utah Municipal Land Use Development and
Management Act (§10-9a-101, et. Seq., of the Utah Code) are hereby adopted.
B. See Chapter 3 of this Title for the following definitions:
“SUBDIVIDER”
“PROPERTY”
“MASTER STREET PLAN”
“MAJOR STREET”
“COLLECTOR STREET”
“MINOR STREET”
“UTILITIES”
“PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENT”
20 - 4
Chapter 20 Subdivisions Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 20
SUBDIVISIONS
PART 2 – SUBDIVISION APPROVAL PROCEDURE
14-20-201 APPROVAL WITHIN THE RESIDENTIAL FOOTHILL SUBZONE
14-20-202 SUBMISSION OF A PRELIMINARY PLAT
14-20-203 SUBDIVISION PLAN APPROVAL PROCEDURE
14-20-204 SUBMISSION OF FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT
14-20-201 APPROVAL WITHIN THE RESIDENTIAL FOOTHILL ZONE
Subdivisions which are proposed within the Residential Foothill Subzone of the City must
comply with the approval requirements of the Bountiful Land Use Code. Such subdivisions must
also comply with other requirements stated therein for preliminary and final approval, in addition
to the requirements set forth in this Subdivision Code.
14-20-202 SUBMISSION OF A PRELIMINARY PLAT
A. The subdivider of a proposed subdivision shall submit to the Bountiful City Engineer a
preliminary subdivision plan containing the following information:
1. The name and address of the subdivider and the engineer or surveyor
preparing the plat.
2. The proposed name of the subdivision.
3. The legal description of the proposed subdivision.
4. A scaled drawing (not smaller than one hundred (100) feet to one (1)
inch) of the subdivision, illustrating the boundaries, lot lines, streets,
easements, all areas to be dedicated to the public, and other important
features to be contained within the subdivision, with sufficient information
to locate accurately the property shown in the plan.
5. The location, width, and other dimensions of all existing or platted streets,
and other important features actually existing within the subdivision, such
as water courses, buildings, power lines, storm drains, water and sewer
lines, exceptional topography and any other notable features.
6. Existing sanitary sewers, storm drains, water supply mains and culverts
within the subdivision, if any, shall be shown on the plat.
7. A north point and date.
8. The plat shall show existing and proposed contours of the entire proposed
development at two (2)-foot intervals for average slopes less than ten percent
(10%) grade, and five (5)-foot intervals for averages slopes over ten percent
(10%) grade.
20 - 5
Chapter 20 Subdivisions Ord 2020.01.docx
9. For developments in the Residential Foothill Subzone, the subdivider shall
submit a plat or detail drawings of each lot, drawn at a scale no greater than
1"=10', with contours at two (2) foot intervals, showing precisely for each lot the
following:
(i) The “usable land” as defined in this Title, and
(ii) The “minimum building pad” as defined in this Title.
10. All information required by §10-9a-603 of the Utah State Code.
B. The subdivision plat shall be furnished to the City Engineer by the subdivider in such a
number of copies as the City Engineer shall reasonably require.
C. If the subdivision being submitted is only one phase of a larger development, then the
entire intended subdivision shall be submitted to the City Engineer. It shall illustrate the
total subdivision intended, including the street system envisioned for the entire area.
14-20-203 SUBDIVISION PLAN APPROVAL PROCEDURE
A. The approval process for subdivisions shall consist of review by the City Engineer,
preliminary review by the Planning Commission and preliminary approval by the City
Council, and final review by the Planning Commission and final approval by the City
Council.
B. Upon receipt of a preliminary subdivision plan, the City Engineer shall review it for
compliance with this Code. When all requirements have been met, the City Engineer
shall place the proposed subdivision for consideration of preliminary approval by the
Planning Commission. The City Engineer shall make a recommendation to the Planning
Commission for preliminary approval, for approval with stated conditions or for
disapproval for stated reasons.
C. The City Engineer shall distribute copies of the preliminary plan of the proposed
subdivision to the Planning, Fire, Power and Water Departments of the City for their
review and recommendations.
D. The Planning Commission shall review the subdivision and make a recommendation to
the City Council for preliminary approval, approval with stated conditions or for
disapproval for stated reasons.
E. The City Council shall review the subdivision for preliminary approval and shall approve
it, approve it with stated conditions, or disapprove it with stated reasons.
14-20-204 SUBMISSION OF FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT
A. After receiving preliminary approval, the subdivider shall prepare and submit to the City
Engineer a final subdivision plat, and in such a number of copies as the City Engineer
shall reasonably require.
B. A final subdivision plat shall meet the following requirements:
20 - 6
Chapter 20 Subdivisions Ord 2020.01.docx
1. It shall consist of a sheet of approved tracing linen or Mylar, to the outside
or trim line dimension of nineteen (19) by thirty (30) inches.
2. The borderline of the plan shall be drawn in heavy lines, leaving a space
of at least one-half inch margin on all four sides.
3. The top of the drawing must face either north or west, whichever best
accommodates the drawing.
4. All lines, dimensions and markings shall be made on the tracing linen with
approved waterproof black India drawing ink.
5. The plat shall be made to a scale large enough to clearly show all detail,
and in any case not smaller than one hundred feet to the inch.
6. Workmanship on the drawings shall be neat, clean-cut and readable.
7. The plat shall contain all of the information and signature blocks required
in this Code.
C. A final subdivision plat shall contain the following information:
1. The proposed name of the subdivision.
2. The legal description of the proposed subdivision.
3. A scaled drawing (not smaller than one hundred (100) feet to one inch) of
the subdivision, illustrating the boundaries, lot lines, streets, easements,
usable land and minimum building pad locations, when required, all areas
to be dedicated to the public, and other important features to be
contained within the subdivision, with sufficient information to locate
accurately the property shown in the plat.
4. A north point and date.
5. Signature blocks for every owner of an interest in the property, utilities
supervisors, the City Planning Director (who shall sign for the Planning
Commission), the City Engineer, the City Attorney and the Mayor and City
Recorder. All signatures by owners or other holders of interest in the
property shall be notarized, in the following or similar language: "This
instrument was acknowledged before me this (date) by (person
acknowledging, title or representative, capacity, if any)."
6. An owner's dedication to the public of all public ways and rights given in
the subdivision, in the following or similar language: "We, the undersigned
owners of the above-described land, having caused the same to the
subdivided into lots and streets to be known as ___________ subdivision,
do hereby dedicate for the perpetual use of the public all parcels of land
shown on this plat as intended for public use, and do warrant to the City
that the same are free of all encumbrances that could interfere with their
use as herein dedicated."
20 - 7
Chapter 20 Subdivisions Ord 2020.01.docx
7. A consent to dedication signed by all other holders of an interest in the
property, including trust deed holders, in the following or similar language:
"We, the undersigned holders of a trust deed on the above-described
land, which is dated __________ and recorded at Book ______ on Page
______ of the records of Davis County, do hereby consent to the creation
of this subdivision, and do hereby consent to the Owner's Dedication
stated on this plat, and do hereby join in the dedication to the perpetual
use of the public all parcels shown as intended for public use."
8. A Certificate of Survey from a registered land surveyor.
9. For subdivisions within the Residential Foothill Zone:
(i) A statement on the face of the plat by the subdivider certifying to the City
and to the public that all lots within the subdivision contain a minimum
building pad as defined in the Bountiful City Code, and
(ii) A statement on the face of the plat that slopes of thirty percent (30%) or
greater are not usable and may not be disturbed excavated or used for
construction.
10. A six (6) inch by three (3) inch space in the lower right corner of the
drawing for recording information.
D. In order to obtain final approval, the subdivider must:
1. Submit a subdivision plat as described herein;
2. Comply with any stated conditions attached to the preliminary approval;
3. Submit to the City a reliable title report reflecting the exact description of
the subdivision, and stating all matters of record affecting title to that land;
4. Submit finished engineering construction drawing for all site
improvements including, but not limited to, streets, sewer, water,
irrigation, storm drainage, erosion and landscaping.
5. Pay all required fees as shall be required by resolution of the City Council.
E. After receiving from the subdivider the information necessary for final approval, the City
Engineer shall review it for compliance with this Code. When all requirements have been
met, the City Engineer shall place the proposed subdivision for consideration of final
approval by the Planning Commission. The City Engineer shall make a recommendation
to the Planning Commission for final approval, for approval with stated conditions, or for
disapproval for stated reasons.
F. The Planning Commission shall review the subdivision and make a recommendation to
the City Council for final approval, approval with stated conditions, or for disapproval for
stated reasons. These are recommendations only to the City Council, which may adopt,
reject or modify any recommendation from the Planning Commission.
20 - 8
Chapter 20 Subdivisions Ord 2020.01.docx
G. The City Council shall review the subdivision for final approval and shall approve,
approve with stated conditions or disapprove with stated reasons.
H. No conditionally approved subdivision shall be recorded at the office of the Davis County
Recorder until all the conditions upon which approval was granted, which are intended to
be accomplished prior to recording, have been fulfilled.
I. Unless a subdivision shall receive final approval from the City Council within one (1) year
after obtaining preliminary approval, the preliminary approval shall expire. The
subdivision must thereafter be re-submitted as if it had never previously been
considered.
J. A subdivision which has been granted final approval by the City Council must be
delivered to the office of the Davis County Recorder for recording within one year of the
date of approval unless extended by the City Council, for good cause shown, for an
additional period of time of up to one (1) year. If it is not so delivered within one year or
within any additional period of time approved by the City Council, the approval shall
expire. The subdivision must thereafter be re-submitted as if it had never previously
been considered.
20 - 9
Chapter 20 Subdivisions Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 20
SUBDIVISIONS
PART 3 – SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
14-20-301 RELATION TO ADJOINING STREET SYSTEM
14-20-306 LENGTH AND WIDTH OF BLOCKS
14-20-307 LOTS
14-20-308 IMPROVEMENTS
14-20-310 NATURAL HAZARDS
14-20-311 NATURAL VEGETATION
14-20-312 UTILITIES
14-20-301 RELATION TO ADJOINING STREET SYSTEM
A. All subdivisions must be in compliance with the Master Street Plan.
B. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall provide for the continuation of the
existing streets in adjoining areas (or their proper protection where adjoining land is not
subdivided), and shall be constructed to the standards set forth in Title 6, Public Works
and Property.
14-20-306 LENGTH AND WIDTH OF BLOCKS
The maximum length of blocks shall be eight hundred (800) feet, and the width shall be
sufficient to allow two tier lots where physically possible.
14-20-307 LOTS
A. The meaning of the term “Lot” is set forth in Chapter 3, Definitions, of this Title.
B. Any lot, regardless of how it is created, shall meet all of the following:
1. The arrangement, design and shape of a lot shall provide a satisfactory site for
building a structure, shall be properly related to topography, and shall conform to
the requirements of this Title.
2. A lot shall be generally rectangular in shape and shall not contain peculiarly or
irregularly shaped elongations, except where dictated by existing, physical
constraints of the land.
3. A lot shall conform to the minimum requirements of the Bountiful City Land Use
Code for the zone in which it is located.
4. Each lot shall abut a public street meeting the minimum requirements of Bountiful
City. Interior lots having frontage on two streets are prohibited. An approved
planned unit development plat is exempt from these provisions.
20 - 10
Chapter 20 Subdivisions Ord 2020.01.docx
5. Any remnant of land remaining after subdividing shall be added to an approved,
adjacent lot, rather than becoming an outstanding parcel of land.
6. A lot shall not be created by any means that does not meet the minimum
requirements for a building lot according to the provisions of this Title.
14-20-308 IMPROVEMENTS
A. The owner of any land and his agent shall be required to install or guarantee the
installation of all public improvements as set forth in Title 6 Public Works and Property.
14-20-310 NATURAL HAZARDS
Construction of permanent structures shall not be permitted in areas subject to hazards such as
floods, landslides, etc.
14-20-311 NATURAL VEGETATION AND GRADING
No property shall be grubbed, cleared, or otherwise disturbed except in accordance with an
approved landscaping permit, excavation permit, or building permit. Natural vegetation shall be
removed only when absolutely necessary for the construction of buildings, streets, and filled
areas. A landscaping permit, excavation permit, or building permit shall not be issued until the
final plans for development are approved by the Land Use Authority.
14-20-312 UTILITIES
All utilities shall be placed underground.
20 - 11
Chapter 20 Subdivisions Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 20
SUBDIVISIONS
PART 4 – AMENDING OR VACATING A SUBDIVISION PLAT
14-20-501 AMENDING OR VACATING A RECORDED SUBDIVISION, PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT OR CONDOMINIUM PLAT
14-20-502 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
14-20-501 AMENDING OR VACATING A RECORDED SUBDIVISION, PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT OR CONDOMINIUM PLAT
A. No subdivision, planned unit development or condominium plat which has been recorded
with the Davis County Recorder according to law may be altered, amended or vacated,
in whole or in part, until the proposed alteration, amendment or vacation has been
approved in an ordinance adopted by the City Council.
B. Vacating or amending existing single family residential subdivision plats for the purpose
of re-subdividing existing subdivision lots into more lots is prohibited where the lot size in
the original subdivision is determined by the average slope, with steeper ground
requiring larger lots, and the re-subdivision will have the effect of evading the original
slope and size requirements.
1. A petition, which may be in letter form, stating that an amendment,
vacation, or other alteration to an existing subdivision, planned unit
development or condominium plat is being requested. The petition shall
include the following information:
(i) The name and address of all owners of record of the land
contained in the entire original plat;
(ii) The name and address of all owners of record of land
adjacent to any street that is proposed to be vacated,
altered or amended, whether in or out of the original
subdivision;
(iii) The signature of each of those owners who consents to
the petition; and
(iv) Any other information that may be required by State or City
law.
2. A plat showing the proposed amendment or vacation, which shall:
(i) Be titled as an amended plat of the original subdivision;
(ii) Describe and illustrate all proposed changes;
(iii) Show a tie in to the unchanged portion of the original plat;
20 - 12
Chapter 20 Subdivisions Ord 2020.01.docx
(iv) Contain all necessary signature blocks, including one (1)
for every owner of property who has any interest in the
land being amended or vacated; and
(v) Such other information or items as shall reasonably be
required by the City.
3. A reliable title report reflecting the exact description of the land being
amended or vacated, and stating all matters of record affecting title to that
land.
C. Prior to consideration by the City Council, the proposed alteration, amendment or
vacation shall be reviewed by the Bountiful Planning Commission for their
recommendation of approval, approval with stated conditions, or disapproval for reasons
stated.
D. The hearing concerning the proposed amendment or vacation shall be considered upon
the criteria set forth in the Utah Code and in City Code.
14-20-502 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
Notice of the proposed amendment or vacation shall be given as provided by State law.
20 - 13
Chapter 20 Subdivisions Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 20
SUBDIVISIONS
PART 5 – COMMERCIAL, CONDOMINIUM, AND PUD PLATS
14-20-601 MINIMUM NUMBER OF UNITS
14-20-602 ESTABLISHMENT OF PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATION
14-20-603 CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION PLAT
14-20-604 PUD SUBDIVISION PLAT
14-20-605 COMMERCIAL SUBDIVISION PLAT
14-20-601 MINIMUM NUMBER OF UNITS
Any condominium or planned unit development (PUD) plat shall have a minimum of four (4)
legal units or lots.
14-20-602 ESTABLISHMENT OF PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATION
It is the duty of the owners who sign a commercial, condominium, or PUD subdivision plat to
establish a property owners association responsible for the maintenance and ownership of any
common area and any shared easement area, and to record all necessary documents to
effectuate such property owners association with the Davis County Recorder.
14-20-603 CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION PLAT
Any legally existing multi-family development that meets the minimum requirements of this
Chapter may be platted as a condominium development. One (1) or more single-family
detached dwellings shall not be platted as a condominium development.
14-20-604 PUD SUBDIVISION PLAT
A. Any legally existing multi-family development that meets the minimum requirements of
this Chapter and that does not have vertically stacked units may be platted as a PUD
subdivision plat.
B. Any legally existing development, except for multi-family developments, located within a
single-family, commercial, professional office, hospital, mixed-use, or downtown zone
may be platted as a PUD subdivision plat only if the development meets the minimum
requirements of this Chapter.
14-20-605 COMMERCIAL SUBDIVISION PLAT
Any legally existing, non-residential development may be subdivided in conformance with the
requirements of the zone in which it is located. A lot within a development in a Commercial Zone
(C), or within a Professional Office Zone (PO), may meet the minimum public street frontage
requirement through a cross-access easement or dedicated common area, if all of the following
criteria are met:
20 - 14
Chapter 20 Subdivisions Ord 2020.01.docx
A. Any proposed lot, and any cross-access easement or dedicated common area providing
the minimum required frontage for said lot, shall be located within the same plat or within
an existing, recorded plat from another phase of the same development. Furthermore,
the proposed easement or access shall be recorded on the plat, shall specifically state
that it is for the benefit of said lot, and shall be acknowledged by all signatories.
B. The cross-access easement or dedicated common area shall be at least twenty-four feet
wide, free of obstructions, and shall meet all the requirements of this Title regarding
vehicle and pedestrian access.
C. No cross-access agreement over or with a property outside of a development or
subdivision can satisfy the minimum frontage requirements of this Title.
D. Each lot within a meets and bounds subdivision shall be required to have the minimum
frontage along a public street.
21 - 1
Chapter 21 Group Homes and Other Facilities Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 21
GROUP HOMES AND OTHER FACILITIES
14-21-101 PURPOSE
14-21-102 USES AND LIMITATIONS
14-21-103 DEFINITIONS
14-21-104 RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR ELDERLY PERSONS
14-21-105 RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY
14-21-106 NONRESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITIES
14-21-107 DESIGN STANDARDS
14-21-101 PURPOSE
The purposes of this Chapter are to:
A. Comply with Title 10, Chapter 9a, Sections 516 to 520, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as
amended; and
B. Avoid discrimination in housing against persons with disabilities as provided in the Utah
Fair Housing Act and the Federal Fair Housing Act as interpreted by the courts having
jurisdiction over the City of Bountiful.
14-21-102 USES AND LIMITATIONS
The provisions and requirements of this Chapter shall not entitle or authorize a particular use on
any property or parcel of land. Only such uses and facilities as are specifically authorized in
each individual zone as a permitted or conditional use shall be allowed. All other uses and
facilities are prohibited.
14-21-103 DEFINITIONS
Each of the following terms has a specific meaning. See Title 14, Chapter 3 (Definitions).
“ADULT DAYCARE FACILITY”
“ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY”
“BOARDER”
“BOARDING HOUSE”
“BUILDING, PUBLIC”
“DISABILITY”
“DOMESTIC STAFF”
“ELDERLY PERSON”
“FAMILY”
“HOSPITAL”
“MAJOR LIFE ACTIVITIES”
“NONRESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITY”
“NURSING HOME”
“PROTECTIVE HOUSING FACILITY”
“REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION”
“RECORD OF IMPAIRMENT”
21 - 2
Chapter 21 Group Homes and Other Facilities Ord 2020.01.docx
“REGARDED AS HAVING AN IMPAIRMENT”
“REHABILITATION/TREATMENT FACILITY”
“RELATED”
“RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR ELDERLY PERSONS”
“RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY”
“RESIDENTS, RESIDENTIAL FACILITY”
“RETIREMENT HOME”
“SHELTER FOR THE HOMELESS”
“SHELTERED WORKSHOP”
“TRADE OR VOCATIONAL SCHOOL”
“TRANSITIONAL HOUSING FACILITY”
14-21-104 RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR ELDERLY PERSONS
A. The following requirements shall apply to a residential facility for elderly persons:
1. The facility shall comply with building, safety, land use, and health codes or land
use codes applicable to a similar dwelling in the zone in which the facility will be
located.
2. Minimum site development standards shall be the same as those for a dwelling
unit in the zone in which the facility is located.
3. In a residential single-family zone, not more than three (3) unrelated persons
shall occupy a residential facility for elderly persons established in a dwelling
unit.
4. In a residential single-family zone, a residential facility for elderly persons shall
not be established in a non-conforming two-family or non-conforming multi-family
structure unless it is first converted to a conforming single-family dwelling
structure.
5. In a residential multi-family zone, a residential facility for elderly persons shall not
be located within a two-family or multi-family structure unless the entire structure
is used for the facility.
6. In a Residential Multi-family zone, not more than three (3) unrelated persons per
permitted dwelling unit shall occupy a facility for elderly persons, based on the
existing density standards for the zone in which it is located, and up to a
maximum of twelve (12) persons.
7. The facility shall be capable of being used as a residential facility for elderly
persons without structural or landscaping alterations that would change the
structure's residential character.
8. A residential facility for elderly persons occupied by more than five (5) such
persons shall not be located within three-fourths (3/4) mile from any of the
following facilities, measured in a straight line between the nearest property lines
of each facility:
a. A residential facility for elderly persons;
21 - 3
Chapter 21 Group Homes and Other Facilities Ord 2020.01.docx
b. A residential facility for persons with a disability;
c. A protective housing facility;
d. A transitional housing facility;
e. An assisted living facility;
f. A rehabilitation/treatment facility; or
g. A nonresidential treatment facility.
9. A person being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse shall not be placed in a
residential facility for elderly persons.
10. Placement in a residential facility for elderly persons shall be on a strictly
voluntary basis and not a part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or
treatment in a correctional facility.
11. A permit for a residential facility for elderly persons is nontransferable and
terminates if the structure:
a. Is devoted to a use other than a residential facility for elderly persons, or
b. Fails to comply with the requirements set forth in this Section.
14-21-105 RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY
A. Notwithstanding any contrary provision in this Title, this section shall govern any facility,
residence, or other circumstance that meets the definition of a residential facility for a
person with a disability as set forth in this Title.
B. The following requirements shall apply to a residential facility for persons with a
disability.
1. The facility shall comply with building, safety, land use, and health codes or
ordinances applicable to a similar dwelling, the Americans with Disabilities Act,
applicable state core standards and licensing requirements, and any standards
set forth in a contract with a state agency.
2. Minimum site development standards shall be the same as those for a dwelling
unit in the zone in which the facility is located.
3. In a Residential Single-Family (R) Zone, not more than three (3) unrelated
persons shall occupy a residential facility for persons with a disability established
in a dwelling unit.
4. In a residential single-family zone, a residential facility for persons with a
disability shall not be established in a non-conforming two-family or nonconforming
multi-family dwelling structure unless it is first converted to a
conforming single-family dwelling structure.
21 - 4
Chapter 21 Group Homes and Other Facilities Ord 2020.01.docx
5. In a residential multi-family zone, a residential facility for persons with a disability
shall not be located within a two-family or multi-family structure unless the entire
structure is used for the facility.
6. In a Residential Multi-family zone, not more than three (3) unrelated persons per
permitted dwelling unit shall occupy a facility for persons with a disability, based
on the existing density standards for the zone in which it is located, and up to a
maximum of twelve (12) persons.
7. The facility shall not be made available to a person who has demonstrated by
prior or current behavior, actions, and/or criminal incidents or convictions, that
the person's tenancy would:
a. Be a direct threat to the health or safety of other persons; or
b. Result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.
8. Prior to occupancy of the facility, the person or entity licensed or certified by the
Department of Human Services and/or the Department of Health to establish and
operate the facility shall:
a. Provide a certified copy of such license or certification to the City
Recorder;
b. Certify, in a sworn affidavit submitted with the application for a business
license, that the facility complies with the Americans with Disabilities Act;
and
c. Certify, in a sworn affidavit submitted with the application for a business
license, that no person will be placed or remain in the facility who has
demonstrated by prior or current behavior, actions, and/or criminal
incidents or convictions, that such person's tenancy would be a direct
threat to the health or safety of other persons, or result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others. Such affidavit shall be
supplemented and updated with an application for renewal of the
business license.
9. A permit for a residential facility for persons with a disability is nontransferable
and shall terminate if:
a. The structure is devoted to a use other than a residential facility for
persons with a disability;
b. The structure fails to comply with the requirements set forth in this
Section; or
c. The license or certification issued by the Department of Human Services,
Department of Health or any other applicable agency, terminates or is
revoked.
21 - 5
Chapter 21 Group Homes and Other Facilities Ord 2020.01.docx
10. A residential facility for persons with a disability that is a substance abuse facility
and is located within five hundred feet (500') of a school, shall provide, in
accordance with rules established by the Department of Human Services under
Title 62A, Chapter 2, Licensure of Programs and Facilities:
a. A security plan satisfactory to local law enforcement authorities;
b. Twenty four (24) hour supervision for residents; and
c. Other twenty four (24) hour security measures.
11. A residential facility for persons with a disability shall not be located within one
thousand feet (1,000') from another such facility, measured in a straight line
between the nearest property lines of each facility.
C. None of the foregoing conditions shall be interpreted to limit any reasonable
accommodation necessary to allow the establishment or occupancy of a residential
facility for persons with a disability. A request for a reasonable accommodation shall be
made in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 14-2-107, ADA and FFHA
Accommodations, of this Title.
14-21-106 NONRESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITIES
A. Nonresidential treatment facilities shall not be built within the City of Bountiful except
when specifically allowed as a permitted or conditional use in a zone established under
this Title. Each such facility shall conform to the following requirements:
1. The facility shall comply with applicable building, safety, land use, and health
codes or ordinances, the Americans with Disabilities Act, applicable state core
standards and licensing requirements, and any standards set forth in a contract
with a state agency.
2. The following site development standards and parking standards shall be
applicable:
a. Each facility shall be subject to minimum site development standards
applicable to a business in the zone in which the facility will be located;
and
b. The minimum number of parking spaces required shall be the same as
the number required for a professional office use building with similar
size, occupancy, and density in the same zone.
3. Prior to occupancy of the facility, the person or entity licensed or certified by the
Department of Human Services or the Department of Health to establish and
operate the facility shall:
a. Provide a certified copy of such license to the City Recorder; and
b. Certify, in a sworn affidavit submitted with application for a business
license, compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
21 - 6
Chapter 21 Group Homes and Other Facilities Ord 2020.01.docx
4. A permit for a nonresidential treatment facility is nontransferable and shall
terminate if:
a. The facility is devoted to a use other than a nonresidential treatment
facility; or
b. The license or certification issued by the Department of Human Services,
Department of Health, or any other applicable agency, terminates or is
revoked, or the facility fails to comply with the conditions set forth in this
Section.
5. A nonresidential treatment facility shall not be located within seven hundred feet
(700') from any of the following facilities, measured in a straight line between the
nearest property lines of each facility:
a. A residential facility for persons with a disability;
b. A residential facility for elderly persons occupied by more than five (5)
such persons;
c. A protective housing facility;
d. A transitional housing facility;
e. An assisted living facility;
f. A rehabilitation/treatment facility;
g. A nonresidential treatment facility, or
h. An elementary school.
6. A nonresidential treatment facility shall not be made available to a person who
has demonstrated by prior or current behavior, actions, and/or criminal incidents
or convictions, that the person's tenancy would:
a. Be a direct threat to the health or safety of other persons; or
b. Result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.
7. To the extent similar requirements to any contained in this Section are contained
in a specific zone in which any facility referred to herein may be located, the
more restrictive provisions shall apply, and the requirements stated herein shall
be considered to be in addition to presently existing Land Use Codes, subject to
the conflicts resolution provisions of this Subsection 7.
14-21-107 DESIGN STANDARDS
A. The design standards set forth in this Section shall apply to a residential facility for
elderly persons, a protective housing facility, a rehabilitation/treatment facility, a
transitional housing facility, and a nonresidential treatment facility.
21 - 7
Chapter 21 Group Homes and Other Facilities Ord 2020.01.docx
B. Any newly constructed or remodeled facility located in a residential zone, or immediately
abutting a residential zone, shall comply with the following design standards:
1. Setbacks shall be as required by the residential zone in which the facility is
located, or if the facility is in a commercial zone abutting a residential zone, the
setbacks shall be the same as those of the abutting residential zone.
2. Required or accessory parking areas shall be located either in the rear yard area
of the lot, or behind the main building or garage.
3. Notwithstanding the height restrictions of the residential zone in which a facility is
located, a new building or additional building shall not exceed one hundred ten
percent (110%) of the average height of the closest dwellings on both sides of
the proposed structure.
4. In order for new construction to reflect the design and character of the existing
neighborhood the following standards shall be met:
a. The roof design of the proposed structure or remodel shall be a pitched
roof of the same slope as the most common roof slope of the dwellings on
the same side of the block on which the building is proposed; and
b. At least fifty percent (50%) of the exterior materials shall be of brick or
stone, and the remainder shall be of typical residential materials such as
stucco, vinyl siding, or cementious fiber board. The use of these materials
shall be applied in such a manner as to blend in with the neighborhood
where the building is located and shall not draw undue attention to the
building because of the materials, their color and combination being
uncharacteristic of the other buildings in the neighborhood.
22 - 1
Chapter 22 Chickens in Single-Family Residential Zones Ord 2020.01.docx
CHAPTER 22
CHICKENS IN SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES
14-22-101 OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE
A. The keeping and maintenance of residential chickens is allowed within the City only as
provided in this Title.
B. Any chicken kept as provided by this Title shall not be deemed a household pet.
C. A City license is required for the keeping of chickens allowed by this Title.
1. A license shall be a one-time application and shall be signed by the property
owner.
2. A license does not run with the land.
3. There shall be a one-time license fee of five dollars ($5.00).
4. Application for, and acceptance of a license is prima facia evidence that a person
agrees to abide by all the conditions and regulations of this Title.
5. A license may be revoked for any violation of this Title.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any chicken in a manner contrary to the
provisions of this Title. Any such violation shall be a class B misdemeanor.
E. A chicken shall be kept strictly for familial gain from the production and consumption of
eggs, and there shall be no sale or income resulting from the keeping of a chicken.
F. Up to eight (8) hens may be kept on a residential lot in accordance with the following:
1. A chicken shall only be kept on a property containing a single-family detached
dwelling unit.
2. A chicken shall be kept in a coop or enclosed area at all times.
3. No chicken shall be permitted to roam outside a coop or enclosed area.
4. A coop shall be covered, ventilated, and rodent- and predator-resistant.
5. A coop shall not be constructed of scrap or dilapidated materials.
6. The exterior of any coop shall be painted or treated with a similar product.
7. It is unlawful to keep a rooster or crowing hen.
8. Any coop or enclosure shall be located in the rear yard of the main dwelling.
22 - 2
Chapter 22 Chickens in Single-Family Residential Zones Ord 2020.01.docx
9. Any coop or enclosure shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from any primary
residential dwelling on an adjoining property, and at least five (5) feet from any
property line.
10. Any time a heating device is employed in a pen or coop, such pen or coop must
be separated at least ten (10) feet from any dwelling structure.
11. Any coop and any roaming area shall be maintained in a neat and sanitary
condition and shall be cleaned as necessary to prevent a detectable odor at the
property line.
12. Chicken feed shall be stored and dispensed in a rodent-proof and predator-proof
container.
13. No growth or vegetation other than sod grass is permitted within five (5) feet of
any coop.
14. The area within five (5) feet of the perimeter of any coop shall be unobstructed,
except that the rear of a coop may be attached to another structure.
15. A chicken may not be kept, and a coop may not be constructed, on any property
that is in violation of a City Code or where the owner or resident is being
prosecuted for a violation.
G. Any chicken that is outside of an approved coop or enclosed area may be confiscated by
any agent of the City.
14-22-102 BEES
The keeping and maintenance of bees is allowed within the City only as provided in Section 8-4-
104 of the Bountiful City Code.
23 - 1
Chapter 23 Open Space Zone Ord 2017-04.docx
CHAPTER 23
OPEN SPACE DISTRICT – OS
14-23-101 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
To establish areas in open and generally underdeveloped lands where only developments
compatible with open space character would be permitted in order to preserve, maintain and
protect open space resources; and to encourage development of a comprehensive network of
permanent, multifunctional publicly and privately owned open spaces in the City. Regulations of
this district are prohibitive and designed to protect these open spaces from encroachment of
residential, commercial and industrial uses.
14-23-102 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, AND PROHIBITED USES:
Subject to the provisions and restrictions of this Title, the following principal uses and structures,
and no others, are allowed either as a permitted use (P) or by Conditional Use Permit (C) in the
Open Space zone. Some uses may be expressly prohibited (N) in this zone. Any use not listed
herein is also expressly prohibited.
Table 14-23-102a
Use
Municipal Facility P
Public or Private Cemetery C
Public or Private Utility Facility P
Public Recreational Facility (including for example parks,
trailheads, trails, golf course, gun range)
P
Telecommunication Facility not on City Property C
Telecommunication Facility on City property P
Utility Lines and Rights-of-Way P
14-23-103 YARD AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
A. Minimum width of any side yard for main or accessory buildings shall be ten feet (10')
and the total width of the two (2) required side yards shall be not less than twenty five
feet (25'). On corner lots, the side yard facing a street shall be not less than twenty feet
(20') for any building.
B. Minimum depth of the front yard for all buildings shall be twenty five feet (25'). All
accessory buildings shall be located at the rear of and at least six feet (6') from the main
building.
23 - 2
Chapter 23 Open Space Zone Ord 2017-04.docx
C. Minimum rear yard for all main buildings shall be twenty five feet (25'), and for all
accessory buildings ten feet (10').